UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2395)

.. .. ... .. .,. ,.. . ... ..... ... .. .,. .. ...

Adoption of the agenda , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . I . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , .
The situation in the Middle East:
((I) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162)
(/I) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l53 16)
(~9) Letter dated I6 September 1982 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/15392) ..,,,.....I.....,...,.........I...................

S/PV.23%

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly SupplpmPnts
of the Officinl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions rrnd
Decisions oJ’ 11~ Seclrr-ity Corrncil., The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2395th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
Pw.ritic~~~:

Mr. Masahiro

NISIBORI

(Japan).

17 September

1982, at 6 p.m.

Israel has asked to be excused today for the observI invite the representative of the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a
place at the Council table: I invite the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, India, Kuwait. Pakistan and the
Syrian Arab Republic to take the places reserved fat
them at the side of the Council chamber.

ance of his holiday.

PIYJ.YOIII:The representatives of the following States:
China, France,
Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama. Poland,
Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/23951

I.

Adoption

2.

The sitilation
in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 15 162);
(/I) Letter dated 28 Julv 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15316);
(1’) Letter
dated 16 September 1982 from the
Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the
United
Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15392)

of the agenda

Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council

3. Mr, NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): We are meeting this
evening in the dark shadow of the traumatic events
that have engulfed the celebrated capital of Lebanon,
the city of Beirut, which has fallen victim to Israeli
occupation. In fact, it is at present living under curfew.
I propose to submit a revised draft resolution [S//5.?Y4/
RN-.I] that I hope will give some solace to the agony
of the inhabitants of the capital of Lebanon. I do hope
that the draft resolution will meet with the consensus
endorsement of members of the Council and that steps
will be taken to see to it that the ob.jectives and purposes of this draft are carried out,
4. I should now like to read out the revised draft
resolution.

(S/15316);

Letter dated 16 September 1982 from the Perlnanent Represelrtative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 15392)
The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with decisions
at previous meetings [2374rA, 237Sth, 2377th,
23RSth, 2389tlr
rr~~i 2304th tnwtin~gs~, I invite the
representutive of Lebanon to take a place at the Council table. I am informed that the representative
of
titken

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/lS394/Rev.t,
which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by the representative of Jordan. They also have before them
document S/15396, which contains the text of a letter
dated 17 September from the representative of Tunisia
to the President of the Council.

“Hrrl*ing wnsidcwd

General of 15 September

the report of the SecretaryI982 [S//.V82/.4clrl. /I,

’ ‘I’i~itdlJmnin,:~ the murder of Bashir Gemayel,
the constitutionally
elected President-elect
of Lebanon. and every effort to disrupt by violence the
restoration of a strong, stable government in Lebanon,

“Hm*ing fi.rronzcl to the statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon [235141/zmcc~til7,$],

Council for the month of September. I know that you]
great diplomatic skill. together with your great courtesy. are an excellent earnest for the work of the
Council which will be under your direction.

“Trrkir?g tlotc of the determination
of Lebanon to
ensure the withdrawal of all non-Lebanese forces
from Lebanon.

8. May I also highly praise your predecessor.
Mr. Noel Dorr. the representative of Irelnnd. who
guided the work of the Council during the month of
August with exemplary patience and competence.

b.

I.
Rcr![‘;!;fi,nz.s its resolutions SO8 ( 1982). 509
(1982) and 5 16 ( 1982) in all their components:

“2. C’0,7&mns the recent Israeli incursions into
Beirut in violation of the cease-fire agreements and
of Security Council resolutions:

9. I should also like to extend a welcome and express
my good wishes for SLICC~SSto Sir John Thomson. 0111
new colleague from the United Kingdom. who hiis
.just assumed his functions here.

“3. L)c~tr~7~.s an immediate return to the positions occupied by Israel before IS September 1982,
as ;\ first step towards the full implementation
of
Security Council resolutions:

10. In the serious circumstances which once agoin
prevail in Lebanon. France wishes to associate itself
with the efforts of the legitimate Government of Lehanon in dealing with the present crisis. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of France has .just visited Beirut.
at the request of the President of the French Republic.
to assure the legitimate authorities of Lebanon. who
have once again been put sorely to the test, of the
solidarity and support of France. That WAS the sense
of the message addressed by Mr, Franc;ois Mitterrand
to Mr. Elias Sarkis in the hours immediately following
the villainous assassination of the President-elect of
Lebanon. We are profoundly affected by his death.
which happened at a particularly sensitive time fur a
country which had courageously embarked on the
path of reunification.

“4. Co//.v rt~ni/? for the strict respect of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity,
unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority
of the Government
of Lebanon
through the Lebanese Army throughout Lebanon:
“5_ . Rrq[f;r/77.r its resolutions 5 12 (1982) and 513
(1982). which call for respect for the rights of the
civilian populations
without any discrimination,
and repudiates all acts of violence against those
populations:

“6. Strppo~+t.r the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to implement
resolution 5 I6 (1982). concerning the deployment of United Nations observers to monitor the situation in and around Beirut.
and requests all the parties concerned to co-operate
fully in the application of that resolution:

II.
Mr, Cheysson has received from the Lebanese
authorities their assurance that the constitutionit
process has already been initiated in order to make it
possible for a new president to be elected as soon its
possible. France is very pleased at this and hopes thllt
the way will thus remain open to bringing about
national reconciliation, an essential prerequisite for reestablishment of the full authority of the Lebanese
State, something which France earnestly wishes.

“7. Dcc*id~~.vto remain seized of the question
and asks the Secretary-General
to keep the Security Council informed of developments
as soon
as possible and not later than within twenty-four
hours.”

12. The Minister. who was received by President
Elias Sarkis, was unable. as he had expected, to meet
the President of the Lebanese ~Council. Mr. Chafik
Al-Wazzan. because of the advance of the Israeli
troops towards west Beirut.

-5 . That is the text of the revised draft resolution.
Because of the urgency and gravity of the situation
at present prevailing in Reirut, I urge that this draft
resolution be put to the vote and that any further statements or comments be made thereafter.

13. That advance, which the Secretary-Generaf described in paragraph 6 (a’) of his report of 15 SePtember [.S’//S382/Add. / 1, and the bombings which
accompanied the ttdvance, are viewed by US xi it
deliberate and unwarranted violation ofthe Habib Plandrawn up last August, It is worth recalling that that
plan. which the United States. France and Italy Cooperated in drawing LIP. was widely welcomed by the
internntiomil
community.

6. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of Jordan
has stated that it would be preferable for the other
speakers to make their statements after the vote. but
there are already several speakers. I would request
the indulgence of the representative of Jordan to permit
those speakers who wish to do so to make their statcments before the vote.
7. Mr. de La BARRE; de NANTEUIL
(France)
(inf(J~p,ct(rtion j*c>m Fwnc~lr): First of all, on behalf of
my delegation, may I extend to you, Sir. my congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the

14. The guarantees provided by the Habib Plan, in
return for the evacuation of the armed forces, has been
seriously compromised by Israel’s unilateral action.
2

15. The French Government. for its part. denounces
and condemns this action. It expects the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli troops to the positions occupied
before IS September, which would be a first step
towards the subsequent withdrawal of Israeli troops
from the positions they occupy around Beirut. That
should facilitate expeditious negotiation of the conditions for evacuation of all foreign armed forces from
Lebanon. in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council.

the disaster of a war of aggression and thereby furthet
exacerbating the situation in Lebanon.
22. At present. the situation in Lebanon and the
entire Middle East situation are at a critical juncture.
The PLO and the AI& States have made positive
efforts for a *just and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East problem. The PLO, having regard for the
overall situation. has evacuated from B&rut its hendquarters and armed forces. The Twelfth Arab Summit
Conference. held at Fez in November 1981 and September 1982, put forward a constructive and realistic
eight-point
plan [.vc~c~.S/lSSlO, f!/?!i~J.rl. All this has
received the affirmation
and support of the international community.

16. In this connection.
the French Government
woufd like to recall the weight it attaches to the immediate implementation
of the resolutions of the Council
axis-6-19sobservers of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Beirut. Their immediate deployment in sufficient numbers should make it possibJe for
LIS to evaluate the threat facing the civilinn populations :md the extent to which the agreements reached
have been respected, as well as the possibility of
taking other steps, if need be. France would like here
and now to express its determination
to lend its full
support to any decision that might be taken.

23. However. the Israeli authorities still stubbornly
persist in their position of aggression and expansion.
Not only have the Israeli troops that carried out an
incursion into Lebanon not pulled back a single step
but they have repeatedly provoked conflicts in the
eastern and central parts of Lebanon. The Israeli
authorities have not only totally rejected the Arab
plan adopted at the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference
hut have also fabricated all kinds of pretexts fos the
continued presence of their aggressor troops in Lebanon. Begin has gone as far as openly declaring that
the Israeli troops would not pull out of Beirut until all
the Palestinian armed forces have withdrawn from
Tripoli and the Bekaa valley and the Syrian troops
from Lebanon.

17. It is for these reasons that my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted by
Jolditn.
18. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) fintP/p,‘cltrrtio/? ./i-o/n
C‘/rinr>.scJ): We are very pleased to see you. Sir, the
outstanding
representative of Japan, a friendly neighbour separated from 11s by a body of water, presiding
overthe Council this month. The Government and
people of China are eagerly awaiting the up-coming
official visit to our country of the Prime Minister of
your country, Mr. Zenko Suzuki. We hope and believe
that his important visit will be a powerful impetus to
co-operation
between our two countries in various

24. It is necessary to point out here that whether
or not the Paleslinian and Syrian forces remain in Lebanon has nothing to do with Israeli withdrawal from
Lebanon. By confusing the two completely different
questions, the Israeli authorities clearly aim at having
their forces entrenched in Lebanon and prolonging
the tension there, a situation that would fiicilicate its
control of that country.

domains.
19.
I am also convinced that, as a seasoned diplomat
with rich diplomatic
experience, you will certainly
be able to lend the Council to a smooth fulfilment of its
tasks for this month.

25. The acts and deeds of the Israeli authorities
clearly demonstrate that it is sheer hypocrisy for them
to assert that they respect Lebanon’s sovereignty and
that they have no intention of occupying Lebanese
territory.

20.

I also wish to take this opportunity to thank the
of the Council for August, Mr. Dorr. His
admirable
wisdom and ability enabled the Council to
tackle successfully the important and, at the same time,
very arduous tasks of the Council in August. At the
inmc time. 1 wish to welcome to the Council the new
‘epresentative
of the United Kingdom,
Sir John
rhornson.
We look for-ward to the best possible coIperntion
with him.
President

26. The incursion of Israeli troops into west Beirut
is another gross trampling
underfoot and violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and territorial
integrity.
The Chinese Government and people strongly condemn this new crime of aggression of the Israeli authorities. We firmly support the appeal made by the Lebanese Prime Minister for Israeli troop withdrawal. The
Israeli authorities must turn over a new leaf, implement the relevant resolutions of the Council, abide by
the norms of international
law. immediately
cease
their aggression against Lebanon and immediately
and unconditionally
withdraw all their aggressor troops
from Lebanon.

:I.
The Chinese delegation was very indignant to
fear- that the Israeli aggressor troops, taking advantage
tf the occasion of the untimely death of the Presidentlect of Lebanon, Bashir Gemayel. and in violation
gain of the cease-fire agreement, carried out a massive
Icursion
into west Beirut and attacked Muslim militia,
lunging
the people of west Beirut once again into

27. Sir John THOMSON
(United
Kingdom):
Mr. President. I am gratefut for the greetings to this
3

Isl,;leli withdI-:lw:~l
I5 September.

important
so kindly

world institution
which you and others have
extended to mc. As ;I newcomer
to the Council. I am delighted. Sir, to he hturting under your presidency. You ;u’c both the representative
of :I cOlIntrY
with which the United Kingdom en-joys very close and
friendly
relations and ;I distinguished
and skilful colleague whom I had had the pleasure of knowing long
before I came here. Under your wise and gentle guidance, I look forward-to
use a golfing metaphor which
I believe is not inappropriate-to
playing straight down
the fail-ways of the Council.

to the positions

it occupied

llci;ti:

34. It is incumbent
on all involved
in the tragic hilu~:tion in Lebwmn
to obscure
the grc:\test
restrain1 ;rEai
exercise prudence
at this time of tension.
A sati&:tory situation
c;m be achieved
only when IsriIel \bith*
draws its forces, as called fr)l- hy the Council in 1’t’s13lution 509 (1082). and when
all other
foreign
troop*.
except any authoriced
by the L,ohancsc
Govt‘t’nmrn!.
also withdraw.
The representative
of Lchanon
\&.I
yesterday
that “Lebanon
should
he left to the l,&unese . and the Lcba~~ese ulonc”
13(14//r ~~l~~*fi!r:“.
prrrc/. IZI. Wc agree and hold that this is the gcl.11
towards which the Council
should work.

28. I should also like to pay a special tribute to YOUI
predecessor.
the representative
of Ireland,
who,
I know.
conducted
the Council’s
proceedings
last
month with his well-known
skill, conscientiousness
and good humour.

33. We liked the moderate
and sensible
speech hi
the representative
of Lebanon.
irnd the clear. conci*c’
and constructive
draft resolution
bused on it \\,hiih
was put forward
by the represent:\tive
of Jut&n
[S/15304].
We could hnvc voted in ~~IVOU~of thilt hft
resolution,
but we can also accept the amendment\
which have been proposed.
Accordingly,
we shall VC~I~
in favour of the text as it now stands ~.Y/lS.?c)3/f<~r,I~.

29. My Government
is dismayed
by this latest
recurrence
of violence and tension in Lebanon.
We
had hoped that, after the magnificent
success of
MI.. Habib’s efforts in negotiating
an agreement
between the parties and the exemplary
achievement
of
the multinational
force from the United States. France
and Italy. we would now be moving towards the restoration of peace in that country and the re-establishmat of the Lebanese Government’s
authority throughout its territory.

36. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda):
The
delegation
of
Uganda is very pleased to SIX you. Sir. presiding o\‘er
the Council during the month of September.
We h:tic
worked
closely
with you in the Council
for :tlmc)%t
two years now, and we are confident
that. with yutlr
well-known
qualities
of political
wisdom
iind dIpIt)matic skill, you will steer the Council
successfilll:
through this difficult
period.

30. This hope of peaceful
recovery
has been violently interrupted,
first by the shocking assassination
of Lebanon’s
President-elect,
Mr. Bashir Gemayel.
and subsequently
by Israel’s military thrust into west
Beirut and the resumption
of conflict there.

37. I wish to pay a very special and well-dcscrvcJ
tribute to my friend,
Mr. Noel Dorr, of Ireland. \rh~
was President
of the Council
for the month of Augufl
Mr. Dot-r’s
resourcefulness,
imagination,
pnticncl
nnd sense of fairness
have tdready made a significanl
impact on the work of the Council.

31. My Government
deplores
the murder of a man
who since his election had committed
himself to the
search for peace between all communities
in Lebanon.
It is R tragic event for the country.
We should like to
extend our condolences
to his family and the families
of the other victims. We hope that all Lebanese leaders
will continue
to work for reconciliation
and nation:~l
reconstruction.

38. I should
like also to take this opportunity
tc?
extend 11 very warm welcome
to Sir John Thomson.
the new representative
of the United
Kingdom.
wtl
look forw;u.d to working
very closely with him and 11)
benefiting
from his extensive
and distinguished
cxpCrience.

32. We trust that there will be no foreign interference
with this internal and necessary process. We strongly
support.
too, the Lebanese
Government’s
initiative
to restore its own iluthority
in west and east Beirut
and are naturally opposed to any action which l.enders
this more difficult,

39. The Council has been meeting since yesterday at
the request of Lebanon,
following
Israel’s invasion
and occupation
of west Beirut.
an act clearly in vi&
tion of the cease-fire
agreements
;lnd the resolutions
of the Council.

13. Instead of the restraint which we had hoped for
from all parties. we have seen Isruel’!, forces move
deep into west Beirut, causing further
conflict and
destruction.
We are greatly concerned
by this Israeli
move. We note the Lebanese
Government’s
public
re.iection of Israel’s claim that it is acting to prevent
fighting and secure pence. Israel hns no right to arrogate to itself the power of intervention
in the capital
and territory
of a neighbouring
State. Israel has no
right to take the law into its own hands in someone
else’s country.
We support the call for an immediate

40. My delegation
condemns
the assnssin:~tion of
MI-. Bashir Gemayel,
the President-elect
of Lebanofla
But we condemn even more strongly Israel’s cynicism
in seizing upon thnt tragedy HIS;I pmext for occupyifl!
west Beirut,
thereby aggr:iv:\ting
the suffering of Ihe
Lebanese
people and shattering
the fragile peace thitl
was SlOWly, if painfully.
emerging
in Beirut.
4

4 I. The Council will recall that. when Israel launched
its invasion of Lebanon on 6 June, among the reasons
it gave for that move were the attempted assassination of the Israeli ambassador in London. alleged
violation of the cease-fire by the PLO and PLO military presence in Lebanon. In response to that sort of
argument,
Professor Stanley Hoffman of Harvard
University
said the following in an cuticle which
appeared in Thr NPII* York Ti/nc.s on I6 June:

in wide circles in the Christian world, both Catholic
and Protestant. In normal times this would be
almost impossible. . . . But at times of confusion
or revolution or civil war things take on another
ilspect. Perhaps . , . now is the time to bring about
the creation of a Christian State in WI’ neighbourhood. Without our initiative and our vigorous aid
this will not be done. It seems to me that this is the
central duty, or at least one of the central duties, of
our foreign policy. . . . We must concentrate all 0111
efforts on this issue. . . . This is a historical opportunity. Missing it will be unpardonable.”

“The Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon had actually observed the cease-fire with Israel
obtained last summer by the United States. It was
not in its interest to provoke an Israeli onslaught.
The PLO did not resume hostilities until after the
heavy Israeli attack, for which the assassination
attempt on Ambassador Shlomo Argov in London
--an odious act that no evidence links to the PLOserved as a pretext.”

46. That was 1954 and therein lies the impetus fat
Israeli activities in Lebanon to this day. We cannot
stand idly by and watch Israel implement with impunity its strategy for a weak and divided Lebanon. We
support the desire of the people of Lebanon for :I
strong and united country, a Lebanon able to detcrmine its own destiny in complete freedom and independence. For that reason. my delegation will support
draft resolution S/ IS394/Rev. I.

42. The present Israeli action in Beirut therefore
follows a now-familiar pattern of pretexts invariably
followed by massive military action. There is no doubt
that Israel has seized on the tragic death of Presidentelect Bashir Gemayel as a mere pretext to move into
west Beirut in the same way that it used the attempted
assassination of Ambassador Shlomo Argov in London
as a mere pretext for launching a full-scale invasion of
Lebanon.

47. The only contribution
that Israel can make
towards the restoration of law and order in Lebanon
is to withdraw its troops immediately
from Beirut and
the entire territory of Lebanon.
48. In conclusion, my delegation regrets the impending departure
of our friend and colleague,
MI-. Ghassan Tuini. of Lebanon. Over the last two
years, I have come to know Mr. Tubni well and to
respect him deeply, He has done so much during his
time at the United Nations to sensitize the Council
in particulsr and the international community at large
to the agony of his country. It is a matter of deep
regret that the Council has not been able to do more
in response to Mr, Tukni’s constant and passioni\te
pleas on behalf of the Lebanese people. On this OCCUsion. the best wish I can extend to Mr. TuCni is the
strong hope and prayer that his country should now
be allowed to enter ;I new era of tranquillity.
:I period
of national healing and reconstruction. This is my wish
for Mr. TuCni and for Lebanon.

43.
I remember that during the months of June, July
itnd August, Israel had invoked the presence of PLO
fighters
in Beirut as the reason for the destruction
and carnage it visited upon the capital of Lebanon.
Today,
well after the successful evacuation of PLO
fighters from Beirut, Israel continues to inflict destruction and human suffering on the people of Beirut.
44.
The Israeli claim of restoring law and order in
Beirut
is preposterous and unacceptable. It is all the
more ironic because it is Israel that has contributed
SC) much to the present chaos and suffering in Lebanon. In any case. it is inadmissible that Israel should
arrogate
to itself the right to police the internal affairs
of Lebanon in spite of the explicit wishes of the Government
and people of Lebanon, as expressed so
clearly
and movingly yesterday in this very chamber
by the representative of Lebanon, Mr. TuOni.

49. The PRESIDENT:
The
representative
of the Palestine
tion, on whom I now call.

45.
The truth is that Israel has long harboured an
elaborate
and sinister design on Lebanon. Plenty of
evidence
is available on the nature and strategy of
that design. but I shall refer to only one example to
iIliIstrate
the point. In February 1954, David BenGill-ion
wrote to the then Prime Minister of Israel.
Moshe
Sharett, expounding on that design as follows:

next speaker is the
Liberation
Organiza-

SO. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): While the Council has been passing time deliberating and arguing, the Israelis huvc taken the following action:
“Israeli troops have stormed west Beirut. Israeli
troops have mounted a wide-scale arrest campaign.
Hundreds of Palestinians and f,ebanese have been
seen bound. blindfolded and taken off to an unknown
destination.
Israeli troops have entered the Palestine Liberation
Orgnnization
Research
Centre
-a
centre of culture and education, a centre full
of documents, manuscripts, maps and plans on the

“It is clear that Lebanon is the weakest link in
the Arab League. The other minorities in the Arab
States are alI Muslim, except for the Copts. . . . The
cr-eation of a Christian State is therefore a natural
;tct: it has historical roots and it will find support
5

history and economy and the society of Palestine.
Israeli troops have imposed a curfew on west
Beirut. The curfew has been used so that Israeli
troops could storm houses and buildings to facilitate
their arrest campaign.”
51. Later we received
serious information:

the following

much more

sive authority of the Government
of Lebanon
through the Lebanese Army throughout Lebanon.”
56. If I hear no obiection, I shall put the draft rcsulution. as olnlly revised, to the vote.
57. I put to the vote the draft resolution contnincd
in document S/lS394/Rev. I, as orally revised by the
representative of Jordan.

“A very dangerous situation
is developing.
Reports indicate that the militiamen of Saad Haddad
had entered the Palestinian refugee camps of Sabre
and Shatila. This very dangerous development
could result in :I mass massacre of Palestinian
civilians still remaining in those camps.”
52. Furthermore,
.iust before we entered this chamber, reports said that those persons arrested were
taken to the Citi Sportive: but much more dangerous,
damaging and inhumane, corpses were found at the
Ouzai Beach, presumably of some of those who had
been arrested.
53. At last, the Council is about to adopt a resolution demanding
Israel’s immediate
withdrawal--although it does not say “withdrawal”;
but we maintain
that it is-to the positions previously occupied. But
the question is: should Israel fail to comply. as has
been its policy in rejecting Council resolutions and
decisions, will the Council invoke its powers, the
powers vested in it by the Charter of the United Nations. and adopt effective ways and means to see to
it that justice is done, that the lives of civilians are
guaranteed
and that Israel withdraws totally and
unconditionally
from Lebanon? Or will one member-the
~1sua1 permanent member-again
obstruct
and undermine the role and efficacy of the Council‘?
We have only to wait 24 more hours before judgement
can bc passed.
54. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding
that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution submitted by Jordan, contained in
document S/IS394/Rev. I. BS orally revised by the
representative of Jordan. I am afraid that some representatives might have missed the oral revision: therefore I shall read it out,
55. The representative of Jordan made the following
oral revision to operative paragl-aph 4: replace the
words “and the Lebanese :%rmed forces throughout
Lebanon” , at the end of the pilrilgraph, with “through
the Lebanese Army throughout Lebanon”.
Operative
paragraph 4 wauid then read:
ZJ,
‘:(‘rr//.r oa~lrrin for the strict respect of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity.
unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclu-

58. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) fintr~/p/~cJfatiorl fkJ/n Rl,.v.sirnl): Today the
Security Council has adopted a resolution which map
seem to be a first step on the correct road-on the
road to ending Israeli aggression, on the road to
ensuring tin unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli forci
from all the territory of Lebanon, as provided for i
the basic Council resolution SO9 (1982).
59. However, in order to ensure that type of breill
through, it is important to have not only ;I Count
resolution, but also a sincere willingness on the P;II
of aI1 Council members who vote in favour of it I
implement that resolution. This is especially relevar
to those Council resolutions that were adopted UKU
imously, resolutions such as SO9 (1982) and today’
resolution.
60. States members of the Security Council Ini!
of course have a divergence of opinions at variou
stages of the discussion, but when they reach uni!
nimity on any given resolution, that would seem tc
be the very minimum they should and cannot fail h
implement. It is that elementary basis of activity bl
the Council that should be axiomatic. If a State mereI1
votes formally in favour of any given resolution bu
does not go along with the actual implementation 0
that resolution, then many questions can arise.
61. For ex:lmple, was that State sincere when il
voted in favour of that resolution, or did it merely wish
to use its vote as a fig-leaf? That is not a rhetorical
question: it is not ;I theoretical problem. It is the very
essence of what we shall encounter 24 hours from
now if Israel does not withdraw its forces from We51
Beirut. The elementary obligation of the Council is
to achieve the implementation
of its resolutions3 esPecially those resolutions that are adopted unanimouslYa
62. That is the basic premise
gation.

of the Soviet dele-
