TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

III
MEETING: 2 MAY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

....................,.........

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .‘. . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8 146) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l420)

S/PV. 1420

NOTE
Symbols of U&ted Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of suck a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of @heOfficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 2 May 1968, at 8 p.m.
Resident: Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

4. I now wish, after full consultation with all members of
the Council, to read to the Council a draft resolution which
has been the subject of our consultation through the latter
part of the day:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

“The Security Council,
“Noting the Secretary-General’s reports of 26 April
(S/8561) and 2 May 1968 (S/8567),

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l420)

“‘Recalling resolution 250 (1968) of 27 April 1968,

1. Adoption of the agenda

“Deeply deplores the holding by Israel of the military
parade in Jerusalem on 2 May 1968 in disregard of the
unanimous decision adopted by the Council on 27 April
1968.”

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 ApriI 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b/ Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8 146).

5. I shall now ask the Council to vote on that draft
resolution.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.1

Adoption of the agenda

6. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Israel.

Zi7zeagenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
[al Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report
of the Secretary-General
under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/81 46)

7. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Jerusalem parade is over.
The ceremony did not violate any principle of international
law. It created no new situation. It left the position in the
area unchanged. It endangered no lives. It injured nobody.
8. The parade was a parade of thanksgiving and deliverance of a people still in the throes of a twenty-year war of
Arab aggression.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the present discussion.

9. The Government and people of Israel pray that next
year this day will be celebrated in peace and understanding
and fraternity with our neighbours.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr, Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security CounciI table.

10. As for the resolution adopted by the Security Council,
it brings back memories of words used by the Hebrew poet,
Yehuda Ha-Levy, who lived in Spain under Arab rule. He
wrote in his “Hymn to Jerusalem”:

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it.

“Wrongs borne for Thy sake are an honour.”

3. I have to report to the Council that prolonged
consultations have taken place in an endeavour to find the
maximum agreement amongst members of the Council, and
I apoIogIze to members of th.e Council who have been
consequently delayed; but I would assure them, as indeed
they well know, that the consultations have been persistently pursued and have been continuous.

11. The PRESIDENT:
Jordan.

I call on the representative of

12. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): Since the Security Council
has very promptly adopted a unanimous decision deeply
1 Seeresolution251 (1968).
1

deploring Israel’s defiance of its will and decision and
Israel’s contemptuous attitude towards its unanimous
resolution, I take it that consideration of the first part of
the item on the agenda has been concluded and that the
Council will now turn to the second part of the item. I am
referring to the continued violations by the Israeli authorities of the two General Assembly resolutions, 2253 (ES-V)
and 2254 (ES-V), adopted by 99 votes in favour, with the
understandable abstention of the Israeli authorities and the
unfortunate abstention of the United States,
13. In order for the Council, while discussing the situation
in Jerusalem, to have information from a competent source,
I think it would be very helpful if it issued an invitation to
His Worship the Mayor of Jerusalem, Mr. Rauhi El-Khatib,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I
therefore, formally request that an invitation be issued to
Mr. El-Khgtib, t$ elected Mayor of Jerusalem, to appear
before the Council in order to supply information which I
am sure will help it in its deliberations. I have already sent

you, Mr. President, a letter for this PUrpOSe
in accordan@
with rule 39 of the provisional rulesof procedure.
14. The PRESIDENT: I have received the letter to wit&
the representativeof Jordan has referred and shall at tie
beginningof our next meeting deal with the applicatioti
which he hasput to me.
15. There are no further nameson my list of speakersfer
this evening and, after consultation with membersof ok
Council, I understandthat it is the generalwish that yc
should resumeour consideration of the item before ~6
tomorrow at 3 p.m.
16. As there is no objection, we shallproceedaccording$j
and meet tomorrow at 3 p.m., when I shall deal with ti
application which the representative of Jordan has put 10
me and shall call on the representativeswho have alreah
notified me that they wish to speaktomorrow.
The meetingrose at 8.20 p.m.

2
Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent
in other currencies)

35490-September

1972~2,100
