S/PV.7269

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7269th meeting

Friday, 19 September 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland  . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. Bishop
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Asselborn
Mrs. Ogwu
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

14-54147 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1454147*

Ukraine

S/PV.7269

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

“encouraged to see that the MH-17 investigation
is proceeding with the productive collaboration of
accredited international representatives”.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
ministers present at today’s meeting. Their participation
is an affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Canada, Germany, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: This past Wednesday marked two
months since the horrific crash of MH-17, when 298
people died in the midst of a conflict that they had
nothing to do with. That day remains fresh in our
minds. Today, in line with resolution 2166 (2014), I
will update the Council on developments related to the
investigation of the crash since Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernandez-Taranco last briefed the Council on
this issue, on 18 August.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, let me begin by
recognizing the pivotal role played by the Netherlands
in leading the investigation. Australia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, the Russian
Federation, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United
States, the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) and the European Aviation Safety Agency are
also contributing substantially to the investigation.
As ICAO Council President Olumuyiwa Benard Aliu
stated on 9 September, we are

2/25

19/09/2014

On 9 September, the Dutch Safety Board
submitted its preliminary report on the MH-17 accident
investigation to the International Civil Aviation
Organization. The United Nations is confident
that the Dutch-led international investigation has
been conducted in accordance with annex 13 to the
Convention on International Civil Aviation, on Aircraft
Accident and Incident Investigation.
The report contains the first factual findings
based on various sources, including the cockpit voice
recorder and the flight data recorder, air traffic control
data, and radar and satellite images. While the report is
preliminary, it does assert that MH-17 broke apart over
Ukraine due to penetration by a large number of “highenergy objects from outside of the aircraft”. The report
notes that the aircraft was in “airworthy condition”,
with no indication that the plane had any technical or
operational issues. The crew was properly licensed and
no human error had been reported. Finally, no distress
messages had been received.
As for the repatriation of the victims, 225 have
now been identified and the process of identifying
further remains is still ongoing. We understand that
the international investigators will again endeavour
to access the crash site, both for repatriation of any
further remains and to continue gathering physical
evidence toward the completion of the technical report.
While the ceasefire in south-eastern Ukraine is largely
holding thus far, contributing to a marked de-escalation
on the ground, the conditions are still not conducive
for investigators to have full and unfettered access to
the site.
The Secretary-General once again calls on all those
with influence on the situation to exert it immediately,
so as to create a propitious security environment for
investigators. Winter will soon arrive in Ukraine, at
which time it will become almost impossible to retrieve
further remains and to collect further evidence. As
stated in the news release of 9 September,
“ICAO will continue to provide its full support
to the Netherlands, in conjunction with its
international team, while we await the conclusions
and recommendations which will eventually be
contained in the Final Report”.

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

In accordance with paragraph 3.1 of annex 13 to
the Convention on International Civil Aviation, and as
clearly indicated in the preliminary report of the Dutch
Safety Board, the sole objective of this investigation
into the crash of MH-17 is the “prevention of similar
accidents and incidents”. What could underscore
the need for such prevention more than the fact that,
according to radar data, three other commercial
aircrafts were in the same control area as MH-17 when
it was hit?
On 29 July, ICAO convened a special Task Force
on Risks to Civil Aviation arising from Conflict
Zones — TF RCZ — which has met twice to date. The
TF RCZ will be meeting again in December for its
next round of talks. One of the tasks recommended by
the TF RCZ is to “reach out to other United Nations
bodies to identify means to collect information on risk
assessments”. ICAO will also be convening a high-level
safety conference with all of its 191 member States in
February 2015.
Let us honour the victims and console their families
by never letting something like this happen again.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Timmermans (Netherlands): On 17 July,
the downing of flight MH-17 caused the death of 298
innocent people. Their lives ended abruptly in midair
above Ukrainian territory — 298 innocent people from
11 countries and four continents. Our thoughts and
prayers are with those who lost their loved ones. Four
days later, I had the honour to address the Council (see
S/PV.7221). That day, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2166 (2014). We remain grateful for that, and
we appreciate today’s opportunity to brief the Council
on where we are two months and two days after this
unspeakable tragedy.
We remain fully committed to completing the
repatriation of human remains and personal belongings
and to facilitating the investigation into the cause of the
crash. We will continue to devote ourselves to ensuring
justice for the victims and their loved ones. We will not
rest until those responsible for this heinous crime are
held accountable.
Let me here recall paragraph three of the
memorandum of understanding between the Netherlands
and Ukraine in which we agree that:

S/PV.7269

“The Netherlands will coordinate the
investigation into the circumstances of the
accident, and will be responsible for the conduct
of the investigation in line with the provisions of
Chapter 5 of Annex 13 to the Chicago Convention.
The Netherlands will ensure the participation of
other parties concerned, in particular Ukraine
as the State of Occurrence, Malaysia as the State
of Registry, the United States of America as the
State of Manufacture and the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO). The Netherlands
will communicate the report and findings to the
concerned States. Ukraine will use every means
available to facilitate the investigation.”
I want to thank the countries that have actively
supported the implementation of resolution 2166 (2014).
It has been a privilege working with them, and I salute
the high level of professionalism, especially the human
nature of the efforts being made — so much humanity.
We are particularly appreciative of the tireless efforts
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe on the ground under very, very difficult
conditions. We have tremendous respect for the work
done by the rescue workers, initially by very brave
people from Ukraine, later by a joint team of Malaysian,
Australian and Dutch forensic experts.
Regrettably, rescue and investigation operations at
the site had to be suspended on 6 August because of
the deteriorating security situation. We are determined
to finish that work as soon as the security situation
allows us to do so. I urge all relevant parties to ensure
immediate and safe access to the site. We count on all
of them to make full implementation of resolution 2166
(2014) possible.
For the Netherlands, the first priority was and is
to bring home the remains of the victims and their
personal belongings. At present, 225 of the 298 victims
have been identified in the ongoing identification
process. That excruciatingly difficult work is being
carried out by experts from 11 different countries. They
deserve our deepest respect. Most of the remains have
been recovered, but we have the duty to make sure that
all remains and belongings are brought home. We will
continue to cooperate intensively with all countries
and international organizations involved to make this
happen.
As stipulated in resolution 2166 (2014), a thorough
investigation into the cause of the crash is under way.

14-541473/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

In accordance with the agreement signed with Ukraine,
the independent Dutch Safety Board has assumed the
lead in this investigation, in close cooperation with
other countries involved, as well as with the United
Nations and ICAO. It has set up the investigation in full
accordance with international law and regulations, in
particular Annex 13 to the Convention on International
Civilian Aviation, which prescribes rules that need to
be followed. In accordance with those requirements
the following countries have contributed to the
international investigation team: Australia, France,
Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Russia, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom and the United States. ICAO
and the European Aviation Safety Agency have also
contributed to the investigation.
The Safety Board is committed to transparency and
will take all relevant information into account. I want to
underline the independent nature of the Board. Neither
the Dutch Government nor any other Government
has any control over, or influence on, its work and its
conclusions and recommendations. My Government is
committed to the truth and nothing but the truth. The
full independence of the Safety Board is the best way
to ensure that.
In accordance with paragraph 7.1 of annex 13 of
the Convention on International Civil Aviation, a
preliminary report was presented by the Safety Board
on 9 September. The preliminary report provides an
overview of the initial provisional facts. The report
has been sent to ICAO for consideration. ICAO
President Aliu remarked that ICAO is encouraged to
see that the MH-17 investigation is proceeding with
the productive collaboration of accredited international
representatives. ICAO will continue to provide its full
support to the Netherlands, in conjunction with its
international team, while it awaits the conclusions and
recommendations that will be contained in the final
report on the accident.
For the final report, also required by annex 13
of the Convention, further consideration of available
data, including those deduced from the remains of the
victims, is needed. As the preliminary report states,
although additional investigations at the crash site itself
would be preferable, it is possible to conduct an effective
investigation based on other available sources and to
produce a final report. The final report is expected to
be published next summer.

4/25

19/09/2014

The Netherlands remains fully committed to
bringing those responsible for that heinous act to justice.
The Netherlands Public Prosecution Service has started
the largest criminal investigation in Dutch history. The
Public Prosecution Service has set up close cooperation
with the national investigation and prosecution
authorities of all other countries affected by the
tragedy. We all share the same goal. Those responsible
need to be brought to justice. My Government has been
informed by the Public Prosecution Services that the
investigation is complex, but that progress is being
made.
For all three dimensions of the crash of
MH-17 — recovery, investigation and accountability — it
remains of the utmost importance to gain safe access
to the site as soon as possible. We have deployed
personnel in Ukraine so they can move to the crash
site as soon as the security situation is stable enough.
We have an ongoing dialogue about this with Malaysia
and Australia. We are conscious of the responsibility
we have taken upon ourselves. We will do whatever is
needed to live up to that responsibility. We will not let
the Council down.
Let me conclude with the same words I used the last
time I addressed the Council. My country will not rest
until all facts are known and justice is served.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, I thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s meeting, which was initiated by
the delegation of the Russian Federation. I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing and
express our particular gratitude to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, a country that has
undertaken the leadership role in the investigation of
the tragic incident that took place in Ukraine on 17 July.
It seems to me that in the Minister’s statement, his
words of gratitude to the local citizens were particularly
important. On 17 July, they found themselves without
warning involved in a tragic situation. We recall that
over the following days, there was much criticism of the
local citizens and rebels; later, it came to light that they
had in fact carried out very useful work, as recognized
on 6 August by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands.
On 21 July, the Council adopted resolution 2166
(2014) in support of a full, thorough and independent

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7269

international investigation into the crash of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 in Ukraine that resulted in the
deaths of 298 people. The scale of the disaster, its political
implications and consequences, and the resolution’s
provisions regarding the role of the United Nations
and the Security Council in political arrangements
for the investigation indicate that the Council must
continue to monitor the issue. Resolution 2166 (2014)
sets out the modalities for conducting a comprehensive,
thorough and independent international investigation.
The document stipulates United Nations participation,
which is particularly important to ensuring a genuine,
impartial, international process and the necessary
degree of transparency in the organization of the
investigation.

convincing information about the crash circumstances.
There is no reference at all to resolution 2166 (2014). The
promised transparency is lacking. The investigation, it
seems, has been entrusted to a small group of countries.
There have been delays and deferrals of the process.
The data on the dispatchers’ voice recorders were
transferred only in late August. Many questions have
arisen regarding compliance with ICAO standards. The
report contains no information on the work carried out
by the Ukrainian military, on the voice recordings of the
armed forces with the dispatchers, or on the deployment
of the Ukrainian anti-aircraft system on the day of
the catastrophe, and it is totally silent concerning the
possible presence of fighter jets in the vicinity of the
flight path of Flight MH-17.

We believe that the Council has an important role to
play in resolving a number of thorny issues set forth in
the resolution, without which an investigation in southeastern Ukraine cannot be conducted. These include
halting all military activities of all sides in the area of
the crash site, halting all activities that could threaten
the integrity of the crash site, providing swift and
safe access by international staff to the crash site, and
supporting the role of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) to ensure that the relevant
investigation is guided by the principles of international
civil aviation and ICAO rules and standards.

We are also concerned about a certain indifference
conveyed in the report regarding the issue of lack of
access to the crash site. Yet it is a priority issue involving
relevant tasks — indeed, urgent tasks. The debris could
be of key importance in establishing the circumstances
surrounding the crash of Flight MH-17; unfortunately,
much important expertise on that and other aspects has
not been forthcoming. After the pause on 6 August in
the work of the international experts at the crash site,
no journalists or OSCE observers have visited the site.
It is not clear what is stopping the team from going to
Donetsk now, given the ceasefire.

In resolution 2166 (2014), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to recommend
possible ways that the United Nations could assist
the investigation and report to the Council as events
unfolded. It is unfortunate that to date we have seen
no sign of the recommendations or any attempt by
the Secretariat to demonstrate any initiative aimed at
assisting the international investigation. We consider it
important that the Secretary-General conduct a review
and assessment of the state of affairs regarding the
aforementioned issues and report on them to the Council,
including with respect to the drafting and adoption of
additional measures to assist the investigation. It it may
be necessary to consider establishing a post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the matter
and authorizing a relevant mission, in cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), to be sent to the crash site.

We are not questioning the sovereignty of the State
where the event occurred — Ukraine — to arrange the
investigation of the crash that took place in its air space
and to address the issue of confidentiality regarding
the investigation. However, pursuant to resolution
2166 (2014), the arrangement should ensure the
authentically international nature of the organization
of and participation in the investigation. Experts are
needed from various countries to participate in the
group of international experts — including Russian
nationals and representatives of the Interstate Aviation
Committee — to work together as a unified team with
fair and equal access to all materials necessary to carry
out the investigation.

Of particular relevance to United Nations
participation is the current state of affairs of the
investigation. The preliminary report of the Dutch
Safety Board is minimally informative and contains no

We must shed light on the truth regarding the
incident that took place in Ukrainian air space on
17 July; it is therefore imperative to shed light not
only on the root causes and the perpetrators, but also
on the political circumstances that led to the disaster
itself. The tragedy has been manipulated by a number
of countries to exacerbate international tensions.
Immediately following the incident, even before

14-541475/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

receiving any reliable information, public statements
were made, in which full blame was attributed to the
militants. Our country was held responsibility for the
perpetration of serious international violations. Let us
not forget that those actions were the grounds for the
cycle of sanctions against Russia. We believe that to be
an act of information warfare, blatant interference into
the investigation of the accident and a political attempt
to predetermine the results of the investigation.
The Russian Federation was the first and, in fact,
only country to immediately and openly provide all
available and impartial information related to the crash.
The Russian Defence Ministry and the Federal Air
Transport Agency not only released information but
also presented a list of questions that must be answered
for an objective picture of what happened. Many of
those issues were put to the Ukrainian side.
Unfortunately, most of those questions, including
the most important, have not been answered objectively.
We are convinced that an unbiased and impartial
investigation will be needed to clarify all those
concerns. On many occasions, we heard from a number
of States that they allegedly had verified information
about what happened, including satellite images of the
area where the 17 July crash occurred. We call on them
to disclose that information.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that Russia
continues to insist on the holding of a transparent and
objective international investigation in full compliance
with all requirements and standards of the International
Civil Aviation Organization in order to establish the
truth. We believe that that goal can be achieved only
with United Nations assistance and involvement in the
investigation, in line with resolution 2166 (2014). The
preliminary report on the causes of the crash does not
address our concerns but, in fact, gives rise to new
questions that the Russian side is ready to discuss with
its foreign partners in a constructive way.
The list of questions is something that we intend to
send to the commission of inquiry and to the SecretaryGeneral. We will distribute it as an official Security
Council document.
Ms. Bishop (Australia): I thank Mr. Feltman and
Foreign Minister Timmermans for their briefings. I
extend Australia’s deep gratitude for the professionalism
and empathy that the Netherlands has shown in
responding to this terrible incident. I particularly thank
Minister Timmermans for his personal commitment

6/25

19/09/2014

and compassion and Malaysian Foreign Minister
Anifah Aman for his vital contribution to the recovery
efforts. We welcome their presence here today.
Almost two months ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2166 (2014) (see
S/PV.7221). Its vote that day reflected the outrage of the
international community in response to the shooting
down of a commercial aircraft in commercial airspace
over eastern Ukraine, killing all 298 passengers and
crew. Resolution 2166 (2014) voiced our collective
condemnation of that horrific act and our determination
to hold those responsible to account. The resolution
expresses full support for a thorough and independent
international investigation into the atrocity, in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
We demanded that armed groups in control of the crash
site refrain from any actions that may compromise the
integrity of the site and provide safe, secure, full and
unrestricted access to the appropriate investigating
authorities. At that time, I called on Russia to use its
influence over those armed groups in control of the
crash site to allow full and safe access for the recovery
of remains and personal belongings and investigation
efforts.
Within days of the downing, in accordance with
the provisions of the Convention on International Civil
Aviation, Ukraine agreed to a Dutch-led investigation
that would meet the International Civil Aviation
Organization’s guidelines, namely, an independent
investigation with broad international participation,
drawing upon experts from Australia, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Russia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom and the United States, as well as the European
Aviation Safety Agency and the International Civil
Aviation Organization.
Ukraine moved quickly to provide support for
recovery efforts at the crash site despite the ongoing
conflict, with the actions of armed separatists
restricting and, at times, preventing access to the site.
Due to Ukraine’s efforts to comply with its obligations
under resolution 2166 (2014), Dutch, Australian and
Malaysian experts were able to spend six days in
late July searching the crash site. Our experts did a
remarkable job, carrying out their demanding forensic
work in the midst of a conflict zone.
That international team, supported by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), was able to access areas of the crash site

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

that had not previously been searched and to recover
remains and a substantial number of personal effects
belonging to those on board Flight MH-17. In the
end, the security conditions became too dangerous to
continue and the external destabilization of eastern
Ukraine intensified. However, those efforts resulted
in the collection of invaluable evidence to support an
effective investigation.
I acknowledge the efforts of the Dutch Government
in coordinating the dignified repatriation of the victims
of Flight MH-17 to Eindhoven Air Base. That gave
some comfort to the grieving families. I commend the
Dutch Government’s strong leadership of the criminal
investigation. The authorities in the Netherlands have
worked painstakingly to identify the victims. As of
today, 19 September, 225 victims have now been
identified by the identification commission in The
Hague, including a number of Australians. Substantial
progress has been made, but the identification process
has been slow given the circumstances of the crash.
That is no consolation to the families and friends from
around the world, including from Australia, who are
grieving the loss of their loved ones and are yet to bring
them home.
Australia welcomes the release on 9 September of
the preliminary report of the Dutch Safety Board. The
first official account of the tragedy was prepared in
strict accordance with the International Civil Aviation
Organization guidelines. The report draws on data
from the black boxes, satellite imagery and photos from
the crash site. Its findings are based on an objective
analysis of the available evidence. That is vital for
a transparent and accountable investigation. It is a
welcome step forward in achieving the full, thorough
and independent international investigation demanded
by resolution 2166 (2014).
In accordance with annex 13 to the Convention on
International Civil Aviation, the preliminary report
does not attribute blame or liability for the incident. That
is the role of the multinational criminal investigation
currently under way, led by the Dutch Public Prosecution
Service. Lest there be any misunderstanding, I reiterate
that that is the domain of the criminal investigation.
The Australian Government’s initial assessment
was that Flight MH-17 had been shot down by a
surface-to-air missile. The preliminary report has not
stated any conclusions but the aircraft damage shown
in the report is certainly consistent with our view. We

S/PV.7269

continue to demand that international investigators be
allowed to return safely to the crash site of Flight MH17, consistent with resolution 2166 (2014). Australia is
committed to returning to the site, once it is safe to
do so, in the company of our Dutch and Malaysian
partners.
We are deeply concerned by reports that OSCE
observers were gravely endangered during the course
of a recently agreed monitoring mission. The observers
were shelled en route to the site and later threatened
with violence by armed groups. Such incidents show
that it is still unsafe to return to the site. Let me be
clear. The security situation around the site and in
much of eastern Ukraine has deteriorated because
of Russian support to armed separatist groups. That
support continues. It must cease.
In adopting resolution 2166 (2014), the Council
demanded unanimously that those responsible for
the atrocity be held to account. The international
community and, above all, the victims’ families, expect
that this will happen, and this must happen.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
presentation. I thank my friend and colleague Franciscus
Timmermans, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, for the information he provided. I salute
his commitment and that of Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia, and Mr. Anifah Aman,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
In adopting resolution 2166 (2014), the Security
Council condemned the destruction of the Malaysia
Airlines aircraft in Ukraine, which resulted, as we
know, in the tragic death of 298 people. The Council
expressed deep sympathy and condolences to the
families of the victims of that disaster. It is clear that
the absolute priority was the repatriation of remains
and identification of victims. It is essential to continue
that work to enable the families and friends of all the
victims to know with certainty the fate of their loved
ones.
In resolution 2166 (2014), the Security Council
called for a comprehensive, thorough and independent
international investigation into the accident in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
The conduct of that investigation has been delegated
by Ukraine to the Netherlands. We have full
confidence in the investigation by the Dutch Safety
Board, in cooperation with international experts of

14-541477/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

the International Civil Aviation Organization and in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Chicago
Convention. We welcome the serious and independent
work of by the Board that led to the publication, on
9 September 2014, of an interim report containing the
first results of the investigation.
We regret that illegal armed groups have hindered
access to the crash site in the days following the
tragedy. That has wasted valuable time and made the
investigation more difficult. We also regret that the
work of the investigators on the site was suspended on
6 August due to the deteriorating security situation.
Armed groups that control the site of the accident and
the surrounding area must permit the investigation to
resume without delay, giving full, safe and unhindered
access to investigators. That is a key provision of
resolution 2166 (2014). It is encouraging to see that
Russia is also insistently demanding the same thing,
as the representative of the Russian Federation has just
stated, and that it too is thus working in that direction.
Those who shot down Flight MH-17, those
responsible for this heinous act, will be held accountable.
Indeed, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights highlighted on 28 July the fact that this
act could constitute a war crime. We welcome the work
by the courts of the affected countries that have opened
criminal investigations. All Member States must be
fully involved in the efforts to establish responsibility
for the tragedy. We owe it to the victims and their
families, for justice to be done, as was just energetically
highlighted by Frans Timmermans.
Let me conclude by emphasizing the urgency of
ending the conflict in Ukraine. Its tally in terms of lives
lost is overwhelming. More than 3,000 people have died
in eastern Ukraine since the conflict began. Repeated
attacks against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine by pro-Russian separatists and their external
supporters claim new victims every day.
The conclusion of a fragile ceasefire on 5 September
was a step in the right direction. Under the auspices
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, talks are ongoing within the trilateral
contact group, but we must now redouble our efforts.
We are encouraged by the concrete steps taken by the
President and Government of Ukraine to implement
the commitments undertaken in Minsk. It is high time
that the illegal armed groups to respect their own and

8/25

19/09/2014

withdraw from the territory of Ukraine, as was agreed
in Minsk.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing.
We commend the collaborative work of the Dutchled international team of air safety investigators. They
have been very successful in rendering the preliminary
report on the downing of Flight MH-17 in spite of
the formidable challenges of a difficult security
environment. We believe that further investigation
into the crash will provide even greater insight into the
sequence of events leading to the accident and offer
a more conclusive outcome. That is essential for the
elimination of doubt and conjecture, and in our view,
will provide the basis for accountability and justice
in consonance with the provisions of resolution 2166
(2014).
More significantly, we encourage the parties to
be unrelenting in the search for a mutually acceptable
solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine. With President
Poroshenko’s concession of self-rule and amnesty to
the separatists, we are optimistic that the conditions
on the ground will improve sufficiently to enable a
thorough, transparent and unimpeded investigation.
What is required now is restraint and perseverance by
all parties concerned to advance the process to a logical
conclusion. That is what the international community
owes to the memory of the victims of the ill-fated
flight MH-17.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing and acknowledge the
presence in the Security Council this morning of the
Foreign Ministers of the Netherlands, Australia and
Luxembourg.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Dutch Safety
Board’s preliminary report of 9 September and would
like once again to send our deepest condolences to the
friends and families of those who died on Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. Last month, I had to honour to
lay a wreath on behalf of all Security Council members
at the memorial site in Schiphol airport in honour of the
298 victims of the tragedy.
We commend the Dutch Safety Board for having
produced a report that is thorough, professional and
based firmly on the facts. While it is a preliminary report
with a limited mandate, the conclusions drawn from the
evidence available to the investigators are clear. The

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

report rules out any operational or technical causes for
the crash. The damage discovered on the wreckage of
Flight MH-17 is consistent with the damage that would
be expected from a large number of high-energy objects
penetrating the aircraft from the outside. From that we
can draw only one conclusion: Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, a civilian airliner carrying 283 passengers and
15 crew, was hit by a blast fragmentation warhead,
which is typically fitted to surface-to-air missiles.
Neither the preliminary report nor the final report
will seek to attribute culpability. But we know that
seconds before Flight MH-17 dropped out of contact,
a surface-to-air missile launch was detected from a
separatist-controlled area in south-eastern Ukraine.
We also know from an intercepted conversation that a
known separatist leader was overheard claiming that a
separatist faction had shot down an aircraft at the time
of MH-17’s disappearance. Another separatist leader
claimed on Twitter to have shot down an aircraft around
the same time. We have seen on social media, shortly
after the crash, an SA-11 missile system missing at
least one missile travelling back towards Russia, and
we also know that separatist fighters trained, equipped
and armed by Russia shot down more than a dozen
Ukrainian aircraft in the months before the tragedy of
MH-17.
I, and others, have spoken before in the Council
about Russia’s supply of significant quantities of
advanced weapons, including tanks, armoured
personnel carriers and artillery to separatist groups in
Ukraine. And there is evidence that Russia has been
providing training to separatist fighters at a facility
in south-western Russia, including training on how
to use air defence systems. The Russian Federation
bears significant responsibility for the violence and
instability in south-eastern Ukraine — responsibility
that, at the very least, means Russia has questions to
answer about the tragic downing of MH-17.
Assertions promoted heavily in domestic Russian
media that Ukraine had some degree of culpability in
bringing down MH-17 simply do not stand up. They
are sham arguments that attempt to distort the facts.
We have heard contradictory stories that MH-17 was
brought down by a Ukrainian Su-25 fighter jet, either
by missile or by gunfire, or that it shadowed MH-17,
using its crew and passengers as human shields. But
the damage found on the wreckage of MH-17 is not
consistent with the behaviour of an air-to-air missile,
nor does it relate to a gun attack. Radar evidence shows

S/PV.7269

only three commercial aircraft in the vicinity of MH-17
before the occurrence which led to its breakup. There
was no Su-25 visible on any Ukrainian radar data, and
international investigators regard that data as accurate
and reliable. That Russian version of events is pure
fiction.
Russian allegations of the malign intentions of
Ukrainian air traffic control and insinuations that
air traffic control records were subsequently being
withheld also do not add up. There is no evidence of any
unusual activity in the management of flights in that
area at the time, and the preliminary report contains
a full transcript of the conversations between MH-17
and Ukrainian air traffic control. The transcripts of the
Ukrainian side have been fully confirmed by data that
was traced back from the black box.
We have also heard Russian suggestions that the
Dutch Safety Board report is not fully independent
or impartial and has ignored the opinion of Russian
investigators. That also is untrue. The Board is a
fully independent organization. As we have heard this
morning, it was assisted in its investigation by experts
from 12 aviation agencies, including experts from
Russia, and it has been advised by the International
Civil Aviation Organization to ensure that its report
complied fully with international standards and
recommended practices.
The Dutch Safety Board has set out particular areas
in the report that require further analysis if this important
investigation is to make progress. That will require full
and safe access to the crash site, as demanded by the
Council in resolution 2166 (2014). That is also needed
for the separate criminal investigation, which will
determine culpability and ensure accountability. Firing
on OSCE monitors, such as occurred last weekend
near the crash site, does not create the conditions for a
resumption of the investigation into how MH-17 came
down and who was responsible.
If the Russian Federation shares the wish of the
international community to see progress on both the
Dutch Safety Board final report and resolution 2166
(2014), then we call on them to ensure that the separatists
allow safe full access to the crash site immediately.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing and we appreciate
the work that the Secretary-General continues to do
to shed light on the facts surrounding the downing of

14-541479/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17. We are also grateful
for the work carried out by the Dutch Safety Board,
as well as the valuable contributions of all countries
who have provided human and technical support for the
investigation.
Two months after the downing of the aeroplane,
my delegation reaffirms the unequivocal message of
resolution 2166 (2014) on the need for a full, thorough
and independent international investigation to be carried
out in accordance with international law. Chile notes
that the provisions of the Security Council are starting
to pay off with the issuance of this preliminary report.
Along with highlighting its findings, we urge the Board
to proceed to gather more background information to
allow it establish the truth of what happened on 17 July.
In particular, we need to know what kind of projectile
hit the Malaysian Airlines aeroplane and what are its
characteristics to make it possible to trace the object
and determine, definitively, who are responsible for
that heinous attack on civilians. We also hope that the
Council will remain seized of this matter.
We appreciate that the legislative measures adopted
by Ukraine, within the framework of dialogue with the
separatist groups in the east and the ceasefire, do not
include an amnesty for those responsible for the MH-17
disaster. The family members of the victims have the
right to know the truth. Once again, we urge all States,
in accordance with their obligations under international
law and relevant Security Council resolutions, to
cooperate actively with the relevant authorities.
Finally, we call upon the parties involved in the
conflict in Ukraine to allow unrestricted access and
ensure safety for as long as is needed by the investigators
at the disaster site so that they can continue with and
further develop their investigation. We hope that the
ceasefire between the Government of Ukraine and the
armed groups that control the area where the disaster
occurred will provide the conditions necessary for the
continuation of the investigation.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to wholeheartedly thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for his valuable briefing on the
preliminary report on the crash of MH-17. We would
also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Franciscus
Timmermans, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, at this meeting and thank him for his
valuable briefing.

10/25

19/09/2014

Jordan would like to express its appreciation to
the Dutch authorities for their efforts in investigating
the MH-17 crash in eastern Ukraine and in drafting
the preliminary report on the incident. The technical
findings make clear that the aircraft was struck from the
outside by a missile and that further investigations must
be carried out to know who is responsible for launching
the missile and whether or not the launching was
deliberate. Many other questions must be answered. We
therefore stress the need to continue the investigations
in order to arrive at a definitive understanding and to
prepare the final report.
In that regard, we call on all parties to cooperate
and to allow unfettered access to the crash site so
that the investigation may be completed and the
parties responsible for the crash may be identified,
brought to justice at the international leve and held
accountable for their criminal act. This issue should
be given priority because any complacency will result
in direct consequences for the safety and security of
civil aviation and would encourage targeting flights in
different parts of the world. The investigation is a legal
matter and should not be viewed or addressed as a way
to achieve political advantages by any party.
Jordan welcomes the ceasefire agreed at a meeting
of the contact group in Minsk on 5 September, and in
particular its provisions on the importance of continued
national dialogue over the release of all prisoners,
the withdrawal of illegitimate armed groups and the
disarming of those groups. In that context, we urge all
armed groups to respect the conditions and provisions of
the ceasefire to end to the violence and show credibility
in the implementation of its provisions. We would
also like to stress Ukraine’s right to its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and stability.
We would like to stress once again the importance
of a political and diplomatic solution to the crisis. We do
not believe that a military solution is the means to realize
peace and security. Rather, it would lead to destruction,
division, social disintegration and an exacerbation of
the humanitarian, economic and political situation in
the Ukraine. Guaranteeing the rights of all the citizens
of Ukraine, including the rights of minorities, is the
only way to bring about an honourable exit from the
crisis.
We call on the Ukrainian Government to develop
sustainable solutions that respond to the legitimate
demands of all groups. We call on all parties to assist

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

Ukraine in implementing political, legal and social
reforms and to work on enacting a sustainable ceasefire
so that we can agree to and arrive at a sustainable
solution.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing. I also thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Mr. Timmermans,
for his briefing and his participation in our work.
Two months have passed since the tragedy of
Flight MH-17. The memory of the victims and their
shattered futures does not go away. Today I reiterate the
solidarity of France with the relatives of the passengers
in their ongoing ordeal. We join in their grief and we
offer them our full support. In the face of that disaster,
the international community had requested that
everything be done to shed light on the circumstances
of the tragedy. Through resolution 2166 (2014), the
Security Council has stressed the importance of quickly
conducting the investigation into the circumstances
of that abominable act. It was a first step towards
the elucidation of the tragedy, towards establishing
accountability and the need for justice.
According to the Chicago Convention on
International Civil Aviation, it is up to Ukraine,
together with the support of all those affected by
the disaster and, in particular, experts from the
International Civil Aviation Organization, to conduct
the work of the international investigation. The
Ukrainian Government has diligently discharged that
responsibility. As early as 24 July, it had entered into
a memorandum of understanding with the Government
of the Netherlands entrusting the Dutch Safety Board
with task of conducting the investigation. Ukraine then
hosted in Kyiv a group of international experts who
offered their assistance.
We commend the Dutch Safety Board for the
quality of their experts’ work. Their professionalism
in collecting information and their impartiality are
exemplary. We now eagerly await the publication of the
final report. Confident in the process and the results it
will produce, we fully support the investigation and we
urge all parties to cooperate fully with investigators.
The findings of the preliminary report are serious.
The investigating commission has excluded the
hypothesis of a technical error, saying that the disruption
of the aircraft is the result of contact with “a large
number of high-energy objects”. It thus clearly points to
the hypothesis that the destruction of Flight MH-17 was

S/PV.7269

by a surface-to-air missile, confirming the worst fears
that had already been expressed to the Council. A
surface-to-air missile pointed at a civilian airliner? From
that, we should draw all conclusions about those who
handled that weapon system and those who gave the
order to fire, but also those who allowed such weapons
to be used by criminals.
Resolution 2166 (2014) also required that everything
be done to enable the work of investigators. All the
parties and all the States in the region should guarantee
immediate and unhindered access to the disaster site,
the remains of the victims and material items useful for
the investigation. We are sadly off the mark. Separatists
have not cooperated with the Ukrainian authorities in
the searches. The safe, immediate and full access to
investigators was not granted. That is not only a violation
of the resolution 2166 (2014), but also of what had been
decided between the Contact Group — Ukraine, Russia
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe — and the separatist representatives
themselves. As proof, we cite the security detachments
from the Netherlands, Australia and Malaysia that were
to be deployed to the crash site to secure it but which
were unable to be deployed because of obstacles put
in place by the separatists. That lack of cooperation is
more powerful and evocative than any propagandistic
speech of separatists and their supporters.
This tragedy, as we have said, occurred against a
backdrop of chaos, but that chaos did not appear all
by itself. By the time the plane was shot down, the
violent fighting in eastern Ukraine had intensified.
The separatists, who had been thoughtlessly armed,
were bringing about terror and desolation. Now, all
those responsible for abuses will be held accountable.
And let there be no mistake. Questioning the quality of
work done by the investigators and the findings of the
preliminary report would be a return to methods that we
hoped were long gone — denying the obvious, twisting
the facts — old tricks that no longer fool anyone. Such
manipulations move us away from the worthy debate
we want to have today.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the ceasefire
applied since Friday, 5 September should be respected.
We remain vigilant. But the silence of weapons is only
the prerequisite for the implementation of the settlement
plan for the Ukrainian crisis. To achieve a long-term
solution, the discussions in the Contact Group should
continue. The resolution of the conflict can only be
achieved by stopping shipments of weapons to the

14-5414711/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

separatists by Russia, the establishment of a lasting
and verified ceasefire, the control of the border and the
pursuit of political dialogue. Russia has a responsibility
in that regard that it cannot avoid. It is essential to move
quickly on those various issues.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing. We
also welcome the Foreign Ministers of the Netherlands,
Australia, Luxembourg and Malaysia to the Security
Council.
By adopting resolution 2166 (2014) on the tragic
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, the Security
Council asserted with one voice that we must ensure
that the tragedy is fully investigated. In that regard,
the Republic of Korea welcomes the preliminary report
of the international investigation team. We especially
appreciate the Government of the Netherlands, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and all the
independent international experts who have worked
on the investigation. We have full confidence in those
experts’ credibility and independence in carrying out
their duties.
We take this opportunity once again to call
attention to the importance of establishing the solid
facts and bringing those responsible to justice. In order
to shed full light on the tragic event, the investigation
team must gain safe access to the crash site once
again and complete its work. We further hope that the
horrible incident leads to collective efforts to reinforce
the current regime for the safety and security of civil
aviation.
With the important elections scheduled in October,
we would like to reiterate that an inclusive political
process is the essential foundation for a stable and
democratic future for all Ukrainian people. In that
regard, we welcome the progressive steps made by the
Ukrainian Government in implementing the provisions
of the Minsk protocol. Notably, the draft law that grants
special status to the eastern region is an important step
towards a more inclusive political process, which we
hope can provide a sound basis for the de-escalation of
tensions.
In conclusion, we are encouraged by ongoing
diplomatic efforts towards the stabilization of
Ukraine, in particular those of the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the European Union and other bilateral partners. We

12/25

19/09/2014

encourage all parties to continue such efforts to seek a
peaceful political solution.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the situation in Ukraine and the preliminary
report published by the Dutch Safety Board on the
tragic incident of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
We also extend our thanks to and acknowledge the
leadership of the Netherlands through Foreign Minister
Franciscus Timmermans, whom we welcome to the
Security Council.
Argentina supported and co-sponsored resolution
2166 (2014) adopted on 21 July, in which the Security
Council, highlighting the need for a full, thorough and
independent international investigation into the incident,
recognized the efforts to undertake an international
investigation of the incident. In that context, we
welcome the briefing on the preliminary report on the
investigation of the incident coordinated by the Dutch
Safety Board, in which experts from the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the European Aviation
Safety Agency and concerned Member States took
part. We take note of the preliminary conclusions and
await the presentation of the final report with interest.
We hope those conclusions will enable us to determine
unequivocally and objectively what led to the downing
of the plane. It is also important that the possibility that
there is criminal responsibility for this be clarified,
and if that should be the case, that those responsible
be held accountable for their actions to the full extent
of the law. In order to ensure that the investigation can
continue to progress, safe, full and unhindered access
to the site of the crash must be guaranteed.
The downing of Flight MH-17 took place against
a backdrop of fighting between Ukraine and armed
groups, and it is believable that if the circumstances had
been different, the story would also have been different.
Argentina is very concerned about the deterioration of
the security and human rights situations in eastern and
southern Ukraine, and about the effects of renewed
violence on the civilian population. We emphasize
the importance of finding a peaceful solution to the
difficult situation Ukraine is dealing with through
dialogue and negotiation. For that reason we take a
positive view of the memorandum of understanding
between Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

However, we must acknowledge that we are
concerned about the fragility of the ceasefire that has
been achieved so far. Given the difficulty in reaching
the agreement, we insist that there can be no peaceful
solution to Ukraine’s difficult situation through any
unilateral acts, and we therefore call on all parties to
implement the measures agreed on in the memorandum.
The only possible settlement can be one reached
through dialogue and negotiation, with due respect for
Ukraine’s autonomy in handling its domestic affairs and
avoiding any confrontational rhetoric or intervention in
a State’s internal affairs, whether political, military or
economic. The parties must respect human rights and
international humanitarian law without exceptions, and
must guarantee due accountability for any violations or
abuse of them.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing. I welcome the presence of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Australia,
Luxembourg and Malaysia at this meeting. I would also
like to thank the international team for its work and
expertise on the Dutch investigation.
We take note of the fact that the information in
the report is preliminary and that the information and
results may be subject to change if additional evidence
emerges. First, we welcome the work being done in
searching for and identifying the bodies of the victims,
and hope that the work is concluding so that the bodies
may be returned to the families for dignified burial.
However, we also note that the report indicates that the
damage to the airliner suggests that it was penetrated
from the outside by a large number of high-energy
objects. In that regard, we urge that the investigation
continue so that those responsible can be identified and
the victims compensated. It is time for justice to be
done. Since our last meeting on this matter (S/PV.7253),
in August, we note that the parties have made efforts to
ensure security at the crash site and the integrity of the
area, so that investigations pursuant to resolution 2166
(2014) can continue.
The progress made in this area contrasts with the
political and security situation in Ukraine, particularly
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the east. In spite
of President Poroshenko’s peace plan of 16 September,
which included a ceasefire, we are informed that the
ceasefire is continually being violated on the ground,
with hundreds of civilian and military every day.
We welcome the spirit of compromise shown by the

S/PV.7269

Ukrainian Government in the Verkhovna Rada’s vote
on 16 September on a special statute giving the Donetsk
and Luhansk region more autonomy and independence,
as well as a conditional amnesty for combatants in the
eastern part of the country.
In conclusion, we urge the parties to the conflict
to act with restraint in order to seek a political solution
to the crisis, which should be achieved through direct,
inclusive dialogue that respects the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of a unified Ukraine, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Murmokaité (Lithuania): In August, many
of us on the Council had an opportunity to visit the
memorial at Schiphol International Airport dedicated to
the victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. No one
can forget the haunting, powerful emotions expressed
of love, loss and longing for those who perished, as
Under-Secretary-General Feltman said, in somebody
else’s war. I would like to take this opportunity to once
again express my country’s heartfelt condolences to
the families in the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia,
Indonesia, the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium,
the Philippines, New Zealand and Canada who lost
their loved ones in the downing of MH-17. As the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands said,
“we owe it to the victims’ next of kin to do
everything in our power ... to achieve clarity about
the circumstances of this tragedy, and to bring
those responsible to justice”.
Resolution 2166 (2014), adopted by the Council
in response to the tragedy, demands a full, thorough
and independent international investigation. It also
demands that those responsible for the incident be
held to account. We must ensure that the resolution is
fully implemented. There can be no impunity for the
perpetrators of this horrific crime.
Lithuania welcomes the preliminary findings of
the independent investigation under the leadership of
the Dutch Safety Board, with the participation of a
dozen countries and agencies. The International Civil
Aviation Organization was consulted to ensure that
the investigation strictly complied with international
standards and practices. As we know, the purpose of
the investigation is to establish the facts, with the goal
of ensuring the prevention of such accidents in future.
It was not meant to assign blame or liability to any
party, and it is still ongoing. We fully agree that any
attempt to interfere with, influence or put pressure

14-5414713/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

on the investigation are inappropriate and totally
unacceptable. The international experts must be able
to carry out their work free of political pressures or
attempts to sway the results of the investigation.
We find it incomprehensible that there should be
claims of a lack of transparency or of selectivity and
bias in the investigation. The democratically elected
Governments of the countries affected have a special
responsibility to their citizens and the victims’ families
to establish the truth. We have full confidence in their
assessment of the investigation and their determination
to proceed until justice is done. The Foreign Minister
of the Netherlands and the representative of Australia
could not have been clearer on this matter.
We reiterate our concern about the lack of access
to the crash site, which is in the hands of pro-Russian
insurgents. Time is running out. These illegal armed
groups bear full responsibility for the successful
completion of this investigation, and for providing
full, unhindered, immediate access to the evidence and
remains that are still in the field.
While Russia is trying to cast doubt on the integrity
of the investigation, the creeping invasion of Ukraine
continues. Nearly 400 incidents of violation by the
insurgents of the ceasefire regime have been registered
since it came into effect. How could investigators
return to the site? Reports of lawlessness, extrajudicial
executions and systematic human rights violations in
the rebel-held areas abound. Russian aid convoys come
and go as they please across a sovereign country’s
borders. We have become so inured to such violations of
Ukraine’s borders, sovereignty and territorial integrity
that they barely make it into the news. Russian soldiers
fight against Ukraine on Ukraine’s soil, while those who
investigate their deaths are attacked and intimidated.
Their mothers deny the truth about the circumstances
of their death.
The situation of Crimean Tartars, for whom Crimea
is the only place they can call their homeland, continues
to deteriorate. They are being increasingly prosecuted,
their homes raided, documents seized, their leaders
banned from returning home, their Mejlis impounded,
offices closed down, property confiscated. While
Ukraine’s Government is offering amnesty to the rebels
and extensive autonomy to its eastern regions, selfproclaimed leaders of the illegal armed groups insist on
fighting to the end.

14/25

19/09/2014

Those are only some of the inconvenient truths that
should be gleaned through the smokescreen of Russia’s
concerns about the investigation.
An undeclared war against the sovereign State of
Ukraine is at the root of the tragedy of Flight MH-17.
The ultimate responsibility for the tragic loss of
nearly 300 passenger lives as well as for the massive
destruction, death and displacement of the population
in eastern Ukraine lies with those who, driven by the
dangerous ambition to redraw the borders of modern
Europe, continue to fuel that war in spite of the ceasefire
and the various agreements achieved.
The people of Ukraine, whose unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity are non-negotiable, have the
right to determine their future without any foreign
interference. The people of Ukraine have made their
choice, and Russia’s continued aggression will only
reinforce that choice.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing.
The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 in
eastern Ukraine on 17 July is a tragedy that caused
298 deaths. China has taken note of the preliminary
report of the investigation issued by the Dutch Safety
Board on 9 September. China hopes that, through
an independent, just, objective and transparent
international investigation, the truth can be established
and justice served for victims and their loved ones at
an early date. China calls upon the parties concerned
to offer cooperation and coordination with the
investigation in accordance with the relevant Council
resolution and provide objective, authentic and
verifiable evidence in order to ensure that the result
of the investigation is credible and able to withstand
any scrutiny. International specialized agencies, such
as International Civil Aviation Organization, should
continue their pivotal role in the investigation.
Objectively speaking, the continuous improvement
in the situation in Ukraine is conducive to the smooth
conduct of the international investigation of the
incident. China welcomes the recent signing between
the Government of Ukraine and the militias in the
east of the Minsk ceasefire agreement, which is in
conformity with the fundamental, long-term interests
of the Ukrainian people.

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

China has also taken note of the bill recently
adopted by the Ukrainian Parliament that grants special
status to the eastern part of Ukraine. China hopes that
in the next phase the parties concerned will continue
their constructive efforts to ensure the effective
implementation of the Minsk ceasefire agreement. In
the meantime, inclusive dialogue should be initiated
as soon as possible in order to find a balanced, lasting
and comprehensive political settlement that takes into
consideration the common interests of various ethnic
groups and regions in Ukraine.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this emergency
meeting. I also wish to thank Mr. Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on the preliminary report of the Dutch Safety Board
on the investigation into the crash of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17.
We welcome the statement delivered by His
Excellency Mr. Frans Timmermans, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and
we acknowledge the important leadership of his country
in the investigation. We also acknowledge the presence
among us of Her Excellency Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia, and His Excellency
Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs of Luxembourg.
We have taken note of the preliminary findings of
the investigation. We consider them to be an important
step towards the implementation of resolution 2166
(2014). According to the report, damage observed in the
forward section of the aircraft appears to indicate that
it was penetrated by large, high-energy objects from
outside the aircraft. There is now little doubt that it was
indeed shot down.
We deplore the fact that, two months after the
crash, all the remains of the victims were not recovered.
However, we commend the investigators on the ground
for identifying most of the victims. We hope that all the
countries concerned will continue to cooperate with the
investigation to ensure that all victims are recovered,
identified and brought home for proper burial.
Although the purpose of this report was not to
apportion blame or liability in respect of any party, it
is important that criminal investigations be carried out
expeditiously to establish the perpetrators. As we look
forward to the final findings of the investigation, it is
important to remind ourselves that what the families of

S/PV.7269

the 298 victims expect from the investigators and from
the international community as a whole is to name the
perpetrators and hold them accountable, in line with
paragraph 11 of resolution 2166 (2014). In that regard,
we welcome the launch of a criminal investigation by
the Netherlands Public Prosecution Service in close
cooperation with the investigation and prosecution
authorities of the affected countries.
I want to welcome the signing, on 5 September,
of the Minsk protocol agreement, under the auspices
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), and the ceasefire in eastern Ukraine.
We regret, however, the continued reports of ceasefire
violations by the warring parties. Other than security,
human rights and humanitarian consequences,
the fighting continues to hamper the work of the
investigations team, and nothing can guarantee that all
the necessary evidence will be found more than two
months after the crash.
In the same vein, we deplore the fact that, due to
resumption of the fighting, the lives of OSCE monitors
were put in danger as they were caught in crossfire and
threatened by armed separatists. We therefore reiterate
our call to the parties concerned to cease hostilities in
conformity with the agreement and in accordance with
paragraph 7 of resolution 2166 (2014), by which the
Council demands that all military activities, including
by armed groups, immediately cease in the immediate
areas surrounding the crash site to allow for the security
and safety of the international investigation.
To conclude, Rwanda once again urges the
armed separatists to lay down their arms, respect
the independence, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine and engage constructively with
the Ukrainian Government, which, with the proposed
amnesty and self-governance bill to separatist-held
areas, has demonstrated goodwill to finding a political
settlement to this crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
informative briefing. I also thank Ministers Timmermans,
Bishop and Asselborn for being here and signalling the
importance of this issue with their presence.
First, on behalf of the United States, let us once
again convey our condolences to the loved ones of the

14-5414715/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. We do not
presume to grasp the depth of their grief, but we mourn
the lives of those they lost.
We convene today for an update on the investigation
into a crime that abruptly ended too many lives. The
purpose of the investigation is to determine the truth
about what brought down that plane.
For any investigation to be credible, we all agree
that it must be thorough, impartial and professional.
Ukraine and the whole international community turned
to the Dutch Safety Board because we believed it was
more than capable of meeting those standards. The
Board’s preliminary findings reflect its independence
and its expertise. Those findings, submitted to the
Security Council on 9 September, include the following.
First, the aircraft was brought down by “a large
number of high-energy objects that penetrated the
aircraft from the outside.” Secondly, there were no
engine warnings, aircraft system warnings or distress
messages detected. Thirdly, the damage to the aircraft
is “not consistent with any known failure mode of the
aircraft, its engines or systems.” Fourthly, the only
planes identified in the report that were in the vicinity
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 were commercial
aircraft.
Based on those preliminary findings one can rule
out that Flight MH-17 was brought down by a bomb on
board. It was not. Russian claims that the flight was
brought down by a Ukrainian fighter jet are also not
supported by evidence in the report. Moreover, ground
photography is consistent with the expected damage
from a surface-to-air missile, but does not correspond
with the damage that a short-range air-to-air missile
from a smaller warhead would produce.

19/09/2014

made clear that its real intention is not to learn about
the investigation, but to discredit it. Russia is seeking
to play the role of forensic aviation investigator, but
cannot do so in an impartial and objective manner.
Russian-backed separatists denied access to the crash
site for days after Flight MH-17 was downed. Russianbacked separatists then restricted access after initially
letting outside officials in. That is not consistent with
an objective and transparent investigation.
The representative of the Russian Federation today
complained about the timeliness of the voice recordings
being processed. Yet telephone conversations
intercepted by the Ukrainian Government indicate that
the commander of a pro-Russian separatist unit told
local state emergency service employees that Moscow
wanted to find the black boxes, and he enlisted the
support of those local officials to help recover the
boxes. That is not consistent with the desire to ensure
the sanctity of the recordings, which today the Russian
representative professes a desire to protect.
The Russian representative says that the report
does not contain “convincing information.” In order
to be convinced of facts one must acknowledge them.
In order to be convinced of truth one must allow it to
surface. One can be convinced if one confronts the
facts as they are established and proven, not as one
may wish they were. It is time to allow facts, however
inconvenient, to be uncovered, and it is time to stop
all attempts to undermine the credibility of a thorough,
impartial and independent investigation that the
international community has no reason to doubt.

Those facts are important because they contradict
the fiction that has been propagated by Russia. The
Dutch Safety Board’s findings are consistent, however,
with evidence gathered by a group of countries,
including the United States, pointing to the fact that
Flight MH-17 was shot down by a surface-to-air missile
fired from territory controlled by Russian-backed
separatists.

Russia does not have the track record to play the
credible investigator here. Russia has repeatedly misled
the Council, its own people and the world about its
support for illegal armed groups and its own military
incursions into Ukraine. Just read the records of the
previous 24 Security Council meetings on Russia’s
actions in Ukraine. Read Russia’s denials that it was
arming and training separatists in Crimea, and later
its denials that it had deployed troops to Crimea.
Read Russia’s denials that it was arming and training
separatists in eastern Ukraine, and later its denials that
it had deployed troops to eastern Ukraine.

Russia called for today’s meeting under the pretence
of being briefed on the status of the investigation. The
representative of the Russian Federation today has
appealed for what he calls “an objective and transparent
investigation.” But in its intervention today Russia

The Dutch Safety Board has been delegated the
authority by Ukraine, in line with the International
Civil Aviation Authority standards, to investigate
this crash. If Russia has evidence that it believes can
help identify who shot down Flight MH-17 it has

16/25

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

a responsibility to share that information with the
independent investigators. Too many lives have been
lost, and this conflict has gone on for too long. It is
time for Russia to bring its intervention to an end. That
is why we fully support the ceasefire and agreements
signed in Minsk, which aim to de-escalate the conflict
that has taken approximately 3,000 lives. We fully
support a negotiated political solution to this crisis, as
we have asserted since Russia’s incitements created the
conflict.
We welcome reports that Russia is decreasing its
troop levels in eastern Ukraine, even if Russia continues
to deny that its troops were there in the first place. We
also welcome Russia’s recent statements expressing
support for the ceasefire. However, we cannot lose sight
of the fact that the crisis in eastern Ukraine, just like
the occupation and annexation of Crimea before it, was
manufactured by Moscow. No country should support
carving off pieces of sovereign Ukraine and handing
them to the aggressors. The territorial integrity of
Ukraine is non-negotiable.
Ukraine has demonstrated remarkably good faith in
meeting its commitments. This week, notwithstanding
the aggression against the State by the separatists
and by Russian forces, Ukraine’s Parliament passed
legislation granting certain districts in eastern Ukraine
special status, which includes greater self-governance,
economic control and Russian-language rights. Now it
is Russia’s turn. Russia must immediately withdraw all
of its forces and equipment from Ukraine, including
Crimea, and cease all forms of support and training for
separatist groups. Russia and the separatists it backs
must release all of their hostages and prisoners. Russia
must finally close its borders to the flow of soldiers,
separatists, tanks, artillery and other machinery
of war. It must grant Ukraine control over its own
border. Russia and the groups it backs must create an
environment that allows the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe to fulfil its monitoring and
verification mandate.
There is one very important imperative we must
remember, which brings us back as to why we convened
today — truth. Two hundred and ninety-eight innocent
people were killed on 17 July. The international
community has identified an independent investigative
body to uncover the truth about what happened to Flight
MH-17. Today we join the chorus of Member States in
reiterating our full support for the Dutch Safety Board’s

S/PV.7269

investigation, and we reject Russia’s efforts to disparage
it or to hinder its progress.
The next step is the pursuit of justice, and when
those responsible for this horrific crime are eventually
identified, they will be punished.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Dato Sri Anifah Aman, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.
Mr. Aman (Malaysia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting and for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I also
wish to convey my appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the latest
developments in Ukraine.
I recognize my colleagues, Her Excellency
Ms. Julie Bishop of Australia, His Excellency Mr. Jean
Asselborn of Luxembourg and His Excellency Mr. Frans
Timmermans of the Netherlands. I wish to thank
Ms. Bishop for her tireless efforts in seeking justice for
the victims and closure for their families. I also wish
to also thank Mr. Timmermans for the comprehensive
briefing and for the Netherlands leadership in this
international investigation.
Over the past few months, we and our Governments
have worked very closely in various areas, including on
the recovery and repatriation of the remains of victims
as well as the ongoing investigation on the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. I hope that, over
the coming days, we will continue such cooperation in
order to ultimately bring closure to this tragic incident.
I wish to take this opportunity to convey my
deepest and heartfelt sympathy and condolences to the
families and loved ones of those who lost their lives on
board that ill-fated plane.
The downing of Flight MH-17 starkly highlights the
tragic consequences when a situation deteriorates into
violent armed conflict. In that connection, Malaysia
welcomes the announcement of the ceasefire agreement
between the parties concerned on 5 September,
including those in eastern Ukraine, where Flight MHI7 was downed and where its wreckage still lies, more
than two months later.
As highlighted in Under-Secretary-General
Feltman’s briefing earlier, the situation on the ground
remains fragile. In that regard, Malaysia urges all parties

14-5414717/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

to exercise maximum restraint to prevent a further
escalation of the conflict. Malaysia also reiterates the
call on all parties to respect the ceasefire agreement
and spare no effort to work towards a sustainable peace.
In Malaysia’s view, a sustained ceasefire, particularly
in eastern Ukraine, is crucial so as to enable a full,
thorough and independent international investigation
into the incident, as demanded by the Council in
resolution 2166 (2014).
In the immediate aftermath of the downing of
Flight MH-I7, Malaysia was very clear on its priorities.
Primarily, those were to secure assurances on, first, the
recovery of the remains of the victims; secondly, the
recovery of the flight data and cockpit voice recorders;
and, thirdly, safe access by international investigators
to the crash site. In seeking to achieve those objectives,
Malaysia reached out to all the parties concerned. For
Malaysia, the humanitarian and human element was of
first and foremost concern.
Consequently, an understanding was reached on
the three priorities I just mentioned. Thus far, the first
two assurances have been implemented. Unfortunately,
coordinated and unfettered access to the crash site by
the international team of air safety investigators has not
yet been possible, due to the ongoing fighting in and
around the crash site.
With regard to the ongoing efforts to identify the
remains of the victims, as stated by the Netherlands
Foreign Minister earlier, to date 225 out of a total of
298 victims have been identified. Of the 43 Malaysian
victims, 40 have been identified and 35 of them have
been repatriated to Malaysia.
On that note, I wish to extend the heartfelt
appreciation of the people and the Government of
Malaysia to the Dutch authorities for making that
possible. As we speak, forensic experts are relentlessly
undertaking the painstaking work of identifying the
remaining victims, with a view to reuniting them with
their loved ones as soon as possible.
Malaysia welcomes the preliminary report of the
independent international investigation team led by the
Dutch Safety Board, which was released just last week.
Among other things, the report confirms that the aircraft
was flying in unrestricted airspace, was following the
route and flying at the altitude prescribed by the air
traffic control authorities. The report also confirms that
the aircraft was in an airworthy condition at departure.
There were no indications of any technical problems or

18/25

19/09/2014

actions by the crew that could have contributed to the
crash. The report also concludes that the aircraft was hit
by a large number of high-energy objects that pierced
it from the outside, causing the aircraft to disintegrate
in the air.
The findings of the report notwithstanding, crucial
questions remain unanswered, including the following.
Who was responsible for the downing of the aircraft?
What exactly happened when communications between
Flight MH-17 and the air traffic controllers stopped
abruptly at 13.20 hours on 17 July?
In the light of such lingering questions, last
week Malaysia dispatched a high-level delegation,
led by its Defence Minister, to Ukraine, Russia and
the Netherlands to further explore the possibility of
affording the international investigation team safe and
unfettered access to the crash site. Malaysia wishes
to inform the Council that it has secured renewed
commitment and assurances from the Governments of
Ukraine and Russia to assist in facilitating safe passage
to the wreckage area. We hope that such assurances will
be translated into concrete action as soon as possible.
Time is of the essence. The approaching winter
could severely hamper recovery and investigation
efforts. Malaysia will not rest until justice is done. It
would be totally unacceptable for the families and loved
ones of the victims to experience the unimaginable
pain of losing their loved ones, only to learn that the
perpetrators might not be held to account due to our
inaction. The international community owes it to the
victims’ families and loved ones to ensure that those
responsible for this heinous crime be swiftly brought
to justice. We need to cooperate fully to establish
accountability for the perpetrators of this crime. I
strongly reiterate the importance of transparency,
impartiality and thoroughness in the conduct of the
investigation to ensure that the truth prevails.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to participate in the
discussion of such an important issue for my country.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Frans Timmermans, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, for their
briefings.

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

Two days ago marked two months since a terrible
tragedy in the Ukrainian sky took the lives of about
300 people. Nothing can heal the pain of that terrible
loss. No words of condolence can soothe the families
and friends of the victims of the tragedy. Our duty is
to find the perpetrators of the crime and to hold them
accountable, for the sake of justice, and to ensure that
such tragedies will not happen in future.
From the very first day of the tragedy, Ukraine
has demonstrated its openness and commitment to
transparent, inclusive international cooperation in
order to establish the true cause of the crash. Following
the adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), which Ukraine
co-sponsored, and given the fact that the vast majority
of the victims were citizens of the Netherlands, we
transferred the right to investigate the air crash to the
Dutch Safety Board. By so doing we contributed to
ensuring a fair, objective and impartial investigation.
The Dutch Safety Board is being assisted by experts from
Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Russia, the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the European Aviation
Safety Agency and other parties concerned.
In addition, the relevant Ukrainian authorities have
been providing necessary support to the international
mission in order to safeguard the investigation
established by an agreement between Ukraine and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to facilitate the recovery
of the remains of the victims and to conduct an
investigation as called for by resolution 2166 (2014).
Contrary to what the Russian representative said
today about the late submission of materials and about
the negotiations between the Board and air traffic
control centres in Ukraine, I should remind the Council
that a week after the crash, on 23 July, an international
group of experts was provided electronic and paper
records of negotiations between the flight crew and staff
from the Lviv, Kyiv and Dnipropetrovsk control centres
involved in the air traffic control of the aircraft, as well
as various types of radar materials. Most probably, that
was mentioned by Ambassador Churkin at the end of
August. With regard to the additional request made
by the Netherlands, we provided additional materials
involving the recordings of conversations between the
flight crew and Ukrainian air traffic controllers.
Ukraine remains committed to resolution 2166
(2014), calling for full respect for the ceasefire and for
ensuring the security and safety of the international

S/PV.7269

investigation in the immediate area surrounding the
crash site. However, the illegal armed groups that
control the crash site have been jeopardizing the
efforts of the investigators. Before the international
investigators arrived at the crash site for the first time,
Russian-controlled militants had already been at work
at the site — as it were, to clear it of evidence. They
were not interested in revealing the truth, which could
obviously be harmful to them and to those who support
them.
The preliminary report of the Dutch Safety Board
establishes that external factors caused the accident
of Flight MH-17. That adds to our conviction that
Flight MH-17 was shot down by a surface-to-air missile.
In the very first days after the crash, we submitted
evidence we had collected that it was a Russian missile
launched by Russian mercenaries.
The Russian Federation continues to send powerful
air defence systems to support militants in the east of
Ukraine. Those facts are repeatedly recorded not only
by Ukrainian intelligence, but also by intelligence
agencies of other countries. A recent fact is that militants
received from Russia a Pantsir armoured rocket
launcher that is capable of hitting targets at an altitude
of 15 kilometres. We must therefore reiterate that the
tragedy of Flight MH-17 would not have happened if
militants had not acquired access to sophisticated
Russian weapons, such as air-defence systems capable
of hitting targets at high altitudes.
Unfortunately, the tragedy of Flight MH-17 has
not taught Russia a good lesson. Moscow continues to
deny that it is arming terrorists with heavy weaponry.
All attempts by Russia to shift the responsibility for
that terrible attack onto someone else do not withstand
criticism. The Russian leadership persists in repeating
the necessity of stopping the bloodshed, while it
continues to contribute to the escalation of the conflict
by supporting terrorists, sending in mercenaries and
regular troops, violating Ukraine-Russia border and
shutting Ukrainian troops out of their territory.
None of the provisions of the Minsk protocol of
5 September have been implemented by Russia. On a
daily basis, we have been recording numerous ceasefire
violations by Russian troops and the Moscow-controlled
militants. In total, they have broken the ceasefire and
shelled Ukrainian miltary and civilians 480 times since
the truce started. As a result, 22 Ukrainian military
personnel have been killed and 138 wounded. Russia

14-5414719/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

continues its military build-up along the border with
Ukraine, as well as in temporarily occupied Crimea.
The Russian artillery and mortar shelling of the
territory of Ukraine, which, inter alia, was confirmed
by monitors from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, have become a daily threat to
Ukrainian servicemen and civilians on the ground.
We therefore urge both Russia and the Russiancontrolled militants to comply with their commitments,
including those undertaken in accordance with the
Minsk protocol to ensure the success of the international
mission to the crash site and the safety and security
of international civil aviation flights. We expect that
the final results of the investigation, the impartiality
of which is beyond any doubt, will make it possible to
affirm the real cause of the catastrophe and to establish
the perpetrators of that brutal terrorist act in order to
bring them to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada welcomes the preliminary report released on
9 September by the Dutch Safety Board and commends
the investigation team, whose work has been exemplary
despite the difficulties that they encountered in pursuing
their important task. The report was prepared despite
the initial efforts of the Russian-backed insurgents in
control of the area to hinder the work of the investigation
and despite the limited access to the crash site due to
the violence caused by the insurgents.
(spoke in English)
As we now know, the investigation has found no
evidence of problems with the aircraft or with the crew
before the tragedy. Its findings are consistent with what
we and others have asserted since the tragedy on 17 July,
namely, that the flight was destroyed by an anti-aircraft
missile following an increased flow of heavy weaponry,
including rocket launchers, from Russia into insurgentcontrolled areas in Ukraine.
The tragedy is but one of many examples of the cost
of Russia’s reckless behaviour in Ukraine, where more
than 3,000 people have died since Russian-sponsored
violence erupted in April. Its actions there undermine
the most basic norms of international conduct. They
pose a grave threat not only to the security of eastern
Europe but also to the rules-based international system.

20/25

19/09/2014

The Russian Federation can end the ongoing
tragedy in Ukraine. We support the ceasefire agreement
reached on 5 September and commend the Government
of Ukraine for acting on its commitments to secure
lasting peace. Russia and the insurgents must begin
acting in good faith and do the same. The task of the
Flight MH-17 investigation team is not yet complete.
We look forward to its final report, as well as to
the outcome of the work also under way within the
International Civil Aviation Organization. The need
for answers and justice and respect for the victims and
their grieving friends and family members from all the
countries affected, including Canada, should unite all
Member States in support of those efforts.
In July, we joined others in sponsoring resolution
2166 (2014). Today, we call once again on Russia and
the insurgents to allow access to the crash site. We
reiterate the need for those responsible for the tragedy
to be brought to justice. As we continue to mourn the
victims, Canada stands ready to contribute further to
the investigation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Foreign Minister Frans Timmermans and
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for their
insightful briefings.
More than two months have passed since the
downing of Flight MH-17. A total of 298 lives, including
four German citizens, were tragically lost. We grief
with those who have lost loved ones and extend our
deepest condolences to our friends in the Netherlands,
Malaysia, Australia and all the other countries that are
mourning the loss of their citizens.
Although two months have passed, the downing
of Flight MH-17 will not be forgotten. By adopting
resolution 2166 (2014), the Council has reacted and sent
out a clear signal, namely, that we must establish the
facts. We want to know who is responsible. We must
bring them to justice.
We commend the Netherlands for taking the lead
in a thorough and inclusive international investigation
into the downing of Flight MH-17. The preliminary
report clearly affirms that the plane did not crash as a
result of technical or human failure. However, too many
questions remain unanswered. It is outrageous that
the investigations on the ground and the repatriation

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7269

of human remains are still being hampered by armed
separatist groups. That is a clear violation of resolution
2166 (2014) and an insult to the victims and the
Council. All parties with influence on the ground must
do everything possible to allow for a quick return of the
experts to the crash site.

Almost two months ago, in this very Chamber, all
of us were mourning and paying tribute to the innocent
victims of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 (see
S/PV.7221). We grieved with the families and friends
who had lost loved ones, and supported them in their
pain.

We hope that the provisions of the Minsk protocol of
5 September, especially the mutually agreed ceasefire,
will also improve the situation at the crash site. That
agreement offers the best opportunity we have to end
the bloodshed, to embark on a political process and
to bring about a political solution to the conflict. Its
crucial elements are the following.

Today, the sorrow remains and the bereaved are
anxious to seek solace. The international community
owes them justice, and we need to reassure the victims’
families that we still stand with them. The Security
Council in particular needs to continue its support
for and strong commitment to the implementation of
resolution 2166 (2014), working together with all the
relevant actors.

First, the Russian-Ukrainian border must be secured.
We call on Russia to end fully and unconditionally its
military activities on or directed against Ukrainian
territory, to halt the continuing flow of weapons and
fighters across the border and to take a constructive role
in stabilizing Ukraine. Secondly, we call for the full
reintegration of eastern Ukraine into Ukraine’s State
structures, while empowering local self-government
under Ukrainian law. Thirdly, we urge full respect
for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
that regard, I reiterate our condemnation of the illegal
annexation of Crimea, which we will not recognize.
Germany has committed itself to supporting
Ukraine in such difficult times. We will continue to
work closely with our partners in the European Union,
the Group of Seven (G-7) and the United Nations, as
well as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, which has played a key role in helping to
de-escalate the crisis. It is our deep conviction that
the crisis can be solved only politically, in accordance
with international law and in full respect for Ukraine’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence. It
is the responsibility of all members of the Council to
uphold those principles.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first convey my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Madam President, for
having convened this important meeting. I also wish to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
for his briefing and to acknowledge the presence of the
Foreign Ministers of Australia, Luxembourg, Malaysia
and the Netherlands.

Indonesia welcomes the preliminary report on the
tragedy of Flight MH-17 conducted by the Dutch Safety
Board, together with other investigation teams. We
support the objective of the investigation to examine the
cause of the accident and to prevent similar incidents.
We also take note of the findings that, at the time of
the incident, Flight MH-17 was flying in unrestricted
airspace above the restricted area mentioned by the
aviation authority and that the aircraft was in an
airworthy condition at departure, with no technical
malfunctions.
While there has been little progress in the
coordinated access to the wreckage site by the
international team of air safety investigators, we support
the intention of the Dutch Safety Board to conduct a
further investigation of the site should the possibility
arise. Indonesia stands ready to continue to render
our assistance through our National Transportation
Safety Committee for the ongoing investigation. In
that context, we wish to underscore the importance
of a thorough and comprehensive investigation with a
strong emphasis on transparency and impartiality.
We are cognizant of the fact that the report is
preliminary. However, it is based on the initial findings
that “the aircraft was penetrated by a large number of
high-energy objects from outside”. Evidently, more work
needs to be undertaken. It is important to emphasize
that the investigation must include unrestricted access
to the immediate site and ensure the safety and security
of the investigation team. Therefore, we request that
a detailed and thorough investigation of the crash of
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH-17 continue. At the same
time, we also reiterate our strong demand that those
responsible for the incident be held accountable.

14-5414721/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As we initiated today’s meeting, and as a
number of assertions have been made concerning, in
one way or another, with the content of our statement
and the Russian position, I would like to make a few
remarks.
First, in some statements, there were affirmations
that Russia, in its statement in today’s meeting, sought
somehow to call into question the investigations
conducted by the Dutch Safety Board, and that is
absolutely not true. However, the Council will agree
that it is somewhat strange that the Board has published
a preliminary report in which there is not even one
reference to resolution 2166 (2014). In the report, the
Board, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs noted, very
accurately, professionally and correctly formulated the
targets of its work so as to prevent the recurrence of
such an incident in the future, and that is quite right.
However, let us be honest. We are not experts, but I
think that everyone here today knows what is necessary
to ensure that such a tragedy does not happen again.
Flights should not be sent into conflict areas, and
civilian aircraft should not be targeted.
However, as our German colleague rightly
stated, there are many pending questions, and these
questions, we believe, lie in the area between the Dutch
investigation and resolution 2166 (2014). We are not
proposing abolishing the Board or creating a new one.
The first thing we are going to do is send our questions
to the Board. Then we shall continue to work with it,
with the broader participation of international bodies
such as the International Civil Aviation Organization,
which is mentioned in resolution 2166 (2014), and draw
on all the resources that the United Nations has to
offer. The need for cooperation is also mentioned in the
resolution.
Now, some rather strange bits of information were
cited that I must comment on. Our Ukrainian colleague,
for example, said that rebels at the crash site attempted
to somehow hide evidence, and the United States
representative surprisingly quoted something a rebel
had allegedly said to the effect that Moscow wanted the
black boxes. If Moscow had wanted those black boxes,
why did they end up London? If my colleagues are going
to be so literary in their expressions, I would ask them

22/25

19/09/2014

to follow the chronology. Two or three days after the
crash, the black boxes were transferred entirely intact
to the Malaysians present at the crash site, and the
Malaysians then provided them to London. Now, how
could Moscow receive those black boxes from London,
when the report states that they were indeed intact? We
should in fact thank the rebels that the black boxes were
kept intact and transferred to the experts who are now
working with them.
The United States also accused Russia of blocking
access to the crash site for 10 days. That is not true. The
Australian delegation, I think, can underscore that this
is not the case, because as soon as resolution 2166 (2014)
was adopted, the question of the security of the area
arose. Telephone calls were made between the President
of Russia and the Prime Ministers of the Netherlands and
Australia. During those phone calls, we discussed the
possibility of adopting yet another Council resolution
that would ensure a presence at the crash site that would
guarantee the security of the investigations. Moreover,
with our Australian colleagues, we even presented a
draft text on that issue. I recall that we asked them if
they might care like to author the draft resolution and
did not insist that it be our draft, but stated that if they
wanted something, there it was. We offered to adopt it
that very day. However, Australia and the Netherlands
took a different decision, as was their right. They
decided to start negotiations with the Ukrainian side.
Why did those talks go on for 10 days? That is their
right and a question of their relations with Ukraine,
but Russia was ready to do everything in its power to
ensure that international investigators came promptly
to the crash site.
Certain questions have been raised regarding
security. Once again, the rebels have somehow been
blamed for everything. The rebels controlled the area
of the crash site. Why was there gunfire at the site?
The most important security issue was ensuring that
the Kyiv authorities did not attempt to seize that area
in violation of resolution 2166 (2014). Moreover, Russia
twice attempted to stop such incursions into the crash
site so that the investigation might proceed normally.
On 28 July, when Kyiv threatened to seize the area of
the crash site, we proposed a draft press statement for
the Security Council calling for the implementation
of resolution 2166 (2014), and for some reason three
Security Council members blocked it. On 7 August,
when the Ukrainian Government had declared that it
would bypass the ceasefire regime, and that its decision

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

S/PV.7269

had been approved by the investigating countries,
we again convened a Council meeting and called for
compliance with the resolution. For some reason,
Council members could not agree once again. So if
security has not been upheld, Russia is not to blame.
The sponsors of the Kyiv Government and their military
actions are the ones to blame.

Ukrainian armed forces. We do not know. Perhaps,
under the Board’s standard working regulations, they
cannot be in contact with military officers but only
with civilian representatives. In that case, the Security
Council might do something to broaden the scope of the
work and ensure that they are in contact with those who
can respond to those questions.

Regarding the shots fired on the monitors of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
on 14 September, for some reason people said that
the rebels were responsible. That is not right. There
were two shots, coming from the north, which was
the position of the Ukrainian armed forces, and one of
those shots happened at a border crossing point that was
controlled by rebels. The rebels would not have been
shooting at themselves, would they?

Furthermore, with regard to the exclusion of the
type of aircraft in the preliminary report, I recall that
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe who saw the remains in the very
first days said that even an amateur could understand
that the aircraft had been shot down by an air-to-air
system. I am no specialist, but that is what the evidence
indicated.

Another issue has been raised that I do not think
is appropriate for the Security Council, since we are
not here to discuss various versions of what happened.
However, as some colleagues have allowed themselves
to get into such analyses, I must respond. Our United
Kingdom colleague, for example, said that a Buk missile
system with three missiles instead of four was seen, as
he affirmed, moving towards Russia, and that it was that
system that shot down the Malaysian aircraft. Indeed,
such images were distributed by the Kyiv authorities
and made their way around the world. But why would
one believe that the Buk missile system was heading
for Russia? The most important thing here is that it was
clear from those images that the launch system was
heading west, towards an area controlled by the rebels.
The Kyiv authorities were therefore incriminating
themselves by claiming that the Malaysian aircraft was
shot down by that system. That would have meant that
they had launched the missile.
Once again, Russian officials have accused no one.
We shared our information. We asked questions and
asked for clarifications, but we did not accuse anyone,
and we said that there should be investigations. Some
colleagues were hasty in saying that the investigations
had shown that the aeroplane was shot down by a rocket.
We do not see anything about that in the preliminary
report. It speaks of three civilian aircraft in the area of
the Malaysian aeroplane, but we do not see any evidence
stating that there was no military aircraft.
With regard to the information provided by our
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, we wonder if there has
been any contact at all between the Board and the

Now if we want to talk about the versions put
forward recently in the German Parliament, an answer
to the question posed by a Deputy of Parliament was put
forth. The answer was based on information provided
by NATO, which had said that it could have been a
different anti-aircraft rocket system that is not used by
the Russian army but is used by the Ukrainian army.
Once again, the Security Council is not the place for
members to be putting forward various hypotheses. It is
a place to assist with the investigations and clarify the
questions to which we want answers. I repeat, we will
send our questions to the Dutch Safety Board and hope
that they will be addressed credibly and transparently
and that the questions will be distributed as a Security
Council document.
Let the entire world work collectively to ensure
that this tragic incident is fully clarified without any
insinuations, intimations or references to evidence
that has not been brought forth. If members are not
sharing information, what they are providing is not
an eyewitness account, but rather fiction. That is not
suitable evidence for the investigation.
The President: I would now like to make a further
statement in my national capacity.
I have only one response to the representative from
the Russian Federation. Russia is fighting in Ukraine.
Russia has provided artillery and surface-to-air missiles
to separatists in Ukraine. It has trained separatists on
those surface-to-air missiles. It has moved troops into
Ukraine. Russia has no standing to offer advice on
this investigation, and it has no credibility before the
Council in its professions, as its story has shifted for
months.

14-5414723/25

S/PV.7269

Ukraine

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): While you hold the presidency, Madam
President, you do not have the right to pass judgment
on the status of the Russian Federation in the Security
Council. The second part of your statement only shows
that you are attempting to dilute the circumstances.
Let me put it this way. Even if everything you just said
is right, that has nothing to do with the investigation
into the downed flight. So let us not get into various
political issues and insinuations beyond the scope of
the investigation, because we might have different
opinions in that regard. Let us concentrate on the
required investigation.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): When we found out that
it was Russia that took the initiative to convene today’s
Security Council meeting, we asked ourselves why.
Having heard the same old rhetoric from the Russian
side today, which denies any involvement in the crime
and blames everyone but itself, I cannot help but
remember the old saying that a guilty mind is never at
ease.
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I think
that the fact that the representative of the Russian
Federation has come to the Council on multiple
occasions and said things that have subsequently
proved to be untrue is relevant when we are discussing
his attitude towards this investigation. I will not repeat
all the things that my colleague from the United States
said in her initial statement, but all the statements
that Ambassador Churkin has made in the Council
about the fact that there were no additional Russian
forces in Crimea just before the military annexation
of Crimea, that there was no supply of weapons into
eastern Ukraine, that there was no training of eastern
Ukrainian separatists in Russia and that there were no
Russian troops in Ukraine have been demonstrated to
have been false statements.

24/25

19/09/2014

However, let me just return to the subject of today’s
discussion, which is the investigation. Ambassador
Churkin said to the press on 10 September, “I have
to conclude that a real international investigation did
not take place”. If that is not trying to undermine this
independent credible investigation, I do not know what
is.
The President: The representative of the Lithuania
has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): As I was listening to
the representatives of the countries affected, what struck
me basically was that every single country affected that
has lost its citizens and whose people are waiting for
justice and closure has expressed its full support for the
Netherlands-led investigation. Not a single country has
raised doubts about that investigation or claimed that
its integrity is flawed. Therefore, I find it extremely
surprising that countries that have very direct stakes
in the investigation are satisfied with its course, while
somebody who has no stake in the investigation or
seemingly no stake in the investigation is spreading
doubts and openly questioning the credibility and
integrity of the investigation. That probably says
something about their true motives, but I will not
speculate on those motives. I think we have to be very
careful, honestly speaking, about how we proceed with
the debate.
Behind the investigation, we have real people, real
names. We have those who have lost their dear ones.
They want clarity, they want closure. They want justice.
Obfuscations and claims that the investigation is flawed
and that there has to be another investigation and that
there has to be assistance hurts those people and puts
them in doubt. That is not what we, as the Council, can
allow. We should not add additional grief to those who
already lost their dear ones.
Therefore, I think that any speculation on the
process and on the credibility of the investigation and
attempts to raise additional questions and establish
additional structures, which will encumber the process,
is, as our German colleague said when speaking about
something else, “a slap in the face”. It is damaging to
the memory of the people and to the course of justice.
And justice, I think, is what we all want in this case.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.

14-54147

19/09/2014

Ukraine

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would just like to respond to the statement
made just now by the representative of Lithuania and
then to the representative of the United Kingdom.
I do not really understand why the representative of
Lithuania is raising the question. Why would Russia not
convene the meeting? She blamed us for this incident,
but then when we have questions about the course of the
investigations, she says that this is somehow insulting
to the memory of the victims. That is, indeed, some
kind of extreme cynicism. The best way to pay due
tribute to the memory of the victims is by answering
all the questions by undertaking an investigation in
accordance with resolution 2166 (2014).
With regard to the statement made by our English
colleague, one of his great approaches is not to dispute
what we say in the Council, but to interpretat what I said
or might have said in the press somewhere. However, let
us carefully look at what was said in the Council.
As to my somehow not having spoken truthfully,
take all the records of our meetings and highlight the
areas where I did not speak truthfully and show them
to me. I am talking about transcriptions, because what
my colleague has said about my statements was totally
inaccurate.
The President: The Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Australia has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now call on her.
Ms. Bishop (Australia): Russia called for a
transparent and accountable investigation. Russia is
participating in it now. The Under-Secretary-General
said that the United Nations was confident that the
investigation was being conducted in accordance with
International Civil Aviation Organization guidelines.
Those are the very guidelines that the international
community has carefully established to ensure an
objective investigation.
I point out that resolution 2166 (2014) does not
create the investigation; it supports the need for an
investigation, for an investigation is automatically
required under the Chicago Convention. Through
resolution 2166 (2014), the Council supports that
independent international investigation. We demanded

S/PV.7269

integrity. We wanted access to the site — unrestricted,
full access to the site — and a cessation of violence.
It is in Russia’s power to call off the separatists so
that we have access to the site. Let us get on with it.
Give the independent investigators access to the site.
The Netherlands, Malaysia and Australia stand ready to
return to the site, give comfort to the grieving families
and allow the investigation to continue. It is established,
it is independent — the United Nations says it is — the
other countries involved have given support, so we call
on Russia to enable the investigation to continue by
ensuring that the ceasefire is maintained and that we
can have secure, safe access to the site.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we are coming to the end of the
meeting and finally we are ending on a positive note. I
am very happy to hear the Foreign Minister of Australia
say that experts are ready to go back to the crash site.
That is indeed what we have called for in our statement
today.
But the Minister should understand that
Russia — and I have already said this — has attempted
to do everything possible to ensure security. But if the
Kyiv forces are shelling the area, then we say that we,
as the Security Council, should tell them not to do that.
But some Council members say, “No, we cannot call
upon the Kyiv authorities not to shell”. Well, then, how
is Russia is going to ensure security in that case? How
can it?
I cited a specific example of how two times we
proposed that the Security Council call upon the
Ukrainian armed forces, when they said they wanted to
go into the area of the crash site, not to do so. But the
Council did not want to. Russia is doing everything it can
and drawing on the contacts it has with representatives
in the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

14-5414725/25
