A /68/PV.97

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

97th plenary meeting

Friday, 13 June 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Picco (Monaco),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 119 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/841)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.50)
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I know we are competing with the NetherlandsSpain football game, but I commend the great sacrifice
that all of us in this Hall are making under difficult
circumstances and welcome everyone here to a game of
a different kind.
I would like to thank Ambassador Halit Çevik,
the Permanent Representative of Turkey, and his team
for facilitating the work on the fourth biennial review
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I would also like to to express my deep regret
for the terrible events that have occurred recently in
Iraq, including the forced entry into and kidnapping
of hostages from the Turkish Consulate, including
families and many civilians who were working there,
as well as the incidents in power plants and other acts of
terrorism. We sincerely hope that the hostages will be
able to return safely to their countries and families as
soon as possible. Saudi Arabia also deplores the recent
terrorist attacks in Pakistan that resulted in more than
30 deaths as well as large numbers of injured. These

tragic events should increase our unity in the fight
against international terrorism.
My country supports the principles outlined by the
Permanent Representative of Egypt in his statement
delivered on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (see A/68/PV.94).
We believe that terrorism is one of the most
dangerous challenges facing us today, and that
combating it is no longer a national issue but one for
the entire international community. While my country
has suffered from terrorism, it has also taken many
measures that are essential to overcoming this scourge.
Nationally, regionally and internationally, we have
examined and implemented the relevant resolutions
and decisions of international law aimed at preventing
the financing of terrorist attacks and protecting
those who perpetrate them. We have responded to
every international entity’s calls to combat terrorism,
implemented all the resolutions designed to achieve that
end and acceded to every terrorism-related convention.
In order to fight this scourge, accession to those
conventions must be accompanied by genuine action.
The report of the Secretary-General on United
Nations activities in implementing the Strategy
(A/68/841) touches on many important issues,
especially in paragraphs 10 to 19, which depict a
phenomenon that has continued to grow despite all our
efforts. The most dangerous of these remain individual
terrorists, and foreign fighters who are well organized
could also be added to this list. That is why my country
has spearheaded efforts to address this issue from a

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-43026 (E)

*1443026*

A/68/PV.97

legal perspective and to implement measures to punish
those who travel to other countries to participate in
terrorist attacks in whatever region, without forgetting
those who incite such acts, even if they are far from the
countries where they take place.
The Saudi authorities have undertaken many
anti-terrorism measures. The Mohammed bin Nayef
Centre for Counseling and Care focuses on providing
information countering extremist ideologies, an
example that could be replicated in other countries.
This is an issue that should be dealt with holistically
and not just from a security perspective. It can help
us to respond to the need to respect human rights at
the international and regional level. My country is
working in every international forum, and especially
through its chairmanship of the Advisory Board of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, in support of
which we have pledged $100 million in addition to the
$10 million originally promised. We are convinced of
the increasing importance of the Centre’s role in the
United Nations system. It has been welcomed by many
countries and is beginning to come into its own in
strengthening capacities for combating terrorism. The
Advisory Board offers the political support and advice
countries need in order to meet the goals outlined. We
therefore call on all States to support the Centre, not
only financially but also through human resources,
training and by providing the means to enable it to
serve every country in the world.
My country has supported many international
initiatives, such as those of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum, of which we are a member and to whose efforts
we contribute. We commend other United Nations
efforts, such as those of the subsidiary committees
of the Security Council, in combating terrorism,
including the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), and others. Ms. Kimberly Prost,
the Ombudsperson, plays a very significant role in this
area, and, as we have seen recently, it is vital that the
Ombudsperson’s role as mediator become a permanent
position.
The regrettable events that we saw last year and
the tragedies we have seen recently clearly show that
concentrating on a security-based solution, without
taking other dimensions into account, will not solve the
problem of terrorism. On the contrary, the phenomenon
could seem to be vanquished but then reappear later
with greater reach. We must combat terrorism in a
comprehensive manner. In that regard, I would refer to

2/13

13/06/2014

one human rights report that states that the international
community must be certain that it is not creating more
dangerous terrorists than those already being combated.
The rule of law, development, education, dialogue
and combating occupation, as the most effective tools
for rooting out terrorism, are therefore of paramount
importance.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has condemned
terrorism. It has also insisted on the importance
of distinguishing between terrorism and the right
of peoples to self-determination and their fight for
sovereignty and against foreign occupation. Terrorism,
no matter what form or manifestation it takes, including
State-sponsored terrorism against unarmed innocents,
is to be condemned. Many United Nations resolutions
have noted that reality. There is a clear distinction
between terrorism, which is a criminal act and one of
the illegitimate faces of war, on the one hand, and the
fight against occupation and foreign domination, on
the other. The latter is a legitimate fight based on the
right of peoples to self-determination — a right that
is enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and the principles contained therein.
Today, more than ever, we need to agree upon a
definition of terrorism. We must take serious measures
to adopt a universal convention to combat terrorism,
coordinate and unify the efforts of the United Nations,
and bring together those entities that work to combat
terrorism to optimize their use of financial resources
and to protect innocent civilians. We must not forget
that the worst form of terrorism is when States act
against their own citizens and commit war crimes, acts
of humiliation and other offenses against their people
in order to instil fear in them. The use of barrel bombs,
toxic gas and chemical weapons against civilians is
a form of terrorism practised by a State in violation
of international commitments and counter-terrorism
conventions.
Such acts of aggression continue to this day. Those
criminal activities have spawned the ever-widening
proliferation and expansion of enclaves for terrorists
and mercenaries. My delegation has insisted more than
once on the seriousness of that major cause of terrorism;
it is perhaps the main cause of the proliferation of
terrorism, not just in our region, but in the entire world.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Allow me to take the floor in this important
debate on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. At the outset, we would like to thank the
14-43026

13/06/2014

Secretary-General for the excellent report submitted
for our consideration (A/68/841). I would also like
to thank the Permanent Representative of Turkey for
successfully facilitating the consultations on draft
resolution A/68/L.50, which will be adopted at the end
of our deliberations.
Cameroon reiterates its vigorous condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whether it
be the taking of hostages, acts of piracy or attacks on
persons or property. We note with profound concern that
terrorism continues to seriously threaten international
peace and security. To wage a substantial and effective
fight against terrorism and transborder crime,
Cameroon believes that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy should be implemented
in a consensual, integrated and balanced manner. It
is important that the Charter of the United Nations
and international law be respected, in particular the
principles of national sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
Cameroon is firmly committed to the fight against
the scourge through national measures and regional and
international cooperation. In that context, our President,
Mr. Paul Biya, recently played an active role in the Paris
summit on security in Nigeria on 17 May, during which
he solemnly declared war against the Boko Haram sect,
which is characterized by its incitement to terrorism
motivated by extremism and intolerance.
Our Government has acted with great efficiency
and firmness for the release of French, Italian and
Canadian hostages taken by Boko Haram in the north of
our country. We have taken measures and joined forces
with neighbouring countries, including Nigeria, and
the international community to combat that terrorist
sect. Further, our country was represented yesterday,
12 June, at another high-level summit on security in
Nigeria, held in London. Cameroon hosted the fiftyninth regular session of the Council of Ministers of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, held 5 December 2013
in Yaoundé, on the stakes, challenges and opportunities
involved in cross-border management.
In the fight against piracy and in favour of
maritime safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea,
Cameroon was chosen to be the home of the Gulf of
Guinea Inter-Regional Coordination Centre, created
at a summit of the Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Gulf of Guinea Commission in June 2013 in

A/68/PV.97

Yaoundé, which will become operational very soon. I
would underline that during that meeting the Heads of
State and Government adopted important resolutions
on the strategy for fighting terrorism, piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, namely, a political
declaration, a memorandum of understanding and a
code of conduct. Cameroon emphasizes how important
it is for the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate, as well as other partners, to
help Member States, upon their request, with a view to
fighting terrorism in an efficient manner.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 48/5, of 13 October 1993,
I now call on the observer for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Wuchte (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe): Today is the fourth time
that the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) has been given an opportunity to
present its efforts in supporting the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in this forum. The invitation to participate
in the General Assembly’s biennial review is yet
another confirmation of the importance and depth of
the partnership between our two organizations. More
than that, the OSCE’s presence today is evidence
that regional organizations maintain a well-defined
role and a well-received mandate in supporting their
participating States in activities to translate the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism into action.
At the outset, let me reiterate the message that I
conveyed to the General Assembly almost two years ago
(see A/66/PV.120) that the OSCE Transnational Threats
Department remains committed to and a reliable partner
in working on the integration of the programmatic
priorities that support the process of implementing the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Strategy among our
57 participating States and 11 partners for cooperation.
Although the primary obligation rests with States, we
have every reason to believe that the variety of OSCE
expertise and the wide scope of its capacity-building on
anti-terrorism, border security, cyber security, human
rights, policing and many other areas significantly
contribute to the success of the global counter-terrorism
efforts at the regional level.
To make those efforts more efficient, systematic
and sustainable, following the 2012 United Nations
review, the OSCE participating States adopted
the OSCE Consolidated Framework for the Fight

14-430263/13

A/68/PV.97

against Terrorism at the end of 2012 in Dublin. That
unique document clearly highlights the operational
principles and identifies the strategic focus of future
OSCE counter-terrorism activities. Drawing on the
Consolidated Framework’s priorities in support of the
United Nations, our activities have been organized to
promote the implementation of the international legal
framework against terrorism, to strengthen travel
document security, to counter the violent extremism
and radicalization that lead to terrorism, to counter
the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes and to
help build public-private partnerships. Moreover, the
framework provides us the vision to consider the new
and emerging trends that we have undertaken this year
with the Swiss chairmanship of the OSCE.
The OSCE participating States have committed
to placing particular emphasis on the strategic
area of promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the context of counterterrorism measures — which will be further illustrated
in these remarks — through the work of the OSCE
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR), consistent with and in support of pillar IV of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
in embodying the commitment to measures to ensure
respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as
the fundamental basis of the fight against terrorism.
Perhaps most importantly, the Consolidated
Framework for the Fight against Terrorism highlights
the need to further coordinate our efforts internally and
to cooperate externally with the relevant stakeholders to
counter terrorism. Internally, our Transnational Threats
Department acts as the focal point of coordination in
the secretariat to ensure all elements of our strategy are
included. Externally, the OSCE pays particular attention
to cooperation with the stakeholders of the international
community, recognizing the leading role of the United
Nations. In other words, we value our close relationship
with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) and its associated entities, as well as today’s
opportunity to highlight areas where we see even
greater collaboration.
The essence of the effective support and tailored
assistance offered by the OSCE to its participating
States lies in the combination of actions by the OSCE
secretariat, its institutions, such as ODIHR, and the
16 field operations that serve as an ear to the ground,
aimed at facilitating communication and strengthening
cooperation with the host countries on the strategic

4/13

13/06/2014

priorities identified by the Consolidated Framework.
Some examples are the following.
The OSCE has successfully supported its
participating States in their implementation of the
universal anti-terrorism instruments, of which there
are currently 19. We have a strategic partnership and
joint action plan with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to ensure that our support
is coordinated and complementary. The UNODC
Terrorism Prevention Branch and our experts share
many ideas and activities throughout the OSCE region.
The high ratification rate allows the OSCE to be one
of the first organizations to focus on streamlining
and reinforcing preventive measures that are related
to the international legal framework against terrorism
but not specified in it. Such efforts focus on, for
example, promoting cooperation and strengthening the
control mechanisms of legally used explosives and its
precursors and facilitating the exchange of information
at an early stage so as to counter preparatory acts of
terrorism.
As the lead on anti-terrorism issues within the
OSCE, I would like to share significant activities
that are in line with the four pillars of the UN Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General, contained in document
A/68/841 of 14 April, and consistent with other elements
of the CTITF matrix of counter-terrorism projects and
activities.
Cooperation with the United Nations and the
participation of the various other experts at the 2014
annual OSCE-wide Counter-Terrorism Conference,
organized recently in Interlaken, Switzerland, under
the Swiss OSCE chairmanship, are a good practical
example of sharing information and experience. Such
OSCE conferences have become an important annual
cross-dimensional discussion forum on current counterterrorism issues and have benefited from the close
OSCE-United Nations cooperation with the CTITF.
They have included remarks by the Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and sessions supported by national
experts, as well as partners, such as the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the European Union (EU),
the Council of Europe and INTERPOL.
Summarizing the results of the debates, the Swiss
chairmanship presented its conclusions. The specific
recommendations focused on the financing of terrorism,
namely, kidnapping for ransom; ensuring legality,
14-43026

13/06/2014

A/68/PV.97

transparency and accountability in counter-terrorism;
and responding to the phenomenon of individuals
taking part in violent hostilities within or outside the
OSCE area, that is, foreign fighters. We expect to work
closely with our United Nations colleagues on the next
steps, especially in the light of the United Nations
efforts in all those areas.

plan to organize three national workshops in South-East
Europe and Central Asia intended for criminal justice
practitioners. In order to ensure a coherent approach,
Member States can rest assured that the training
workshops will be closely coordinated with other
relevant international organizations. A first contact on
such training has already been established with CTED.

Furthermore, one of the areas also highlighted
in Interlaken and elsewhere in the OSCE’s work
is protecting the public from terrorism as a major,
highly scrutinized and challenging task that requires
a more systematic approach. That is why, in the field
of countering the violent extremism and radicalization
that lead to terrorism, we have launched, jointly with the
OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights and the Transnational Threats Department’s
Strategic Police Matters Unit, a guidebook entitled
Preventing Terrorism and Countering Violent Extremism
and Radicalization that Lead to Terrorism: a Community
Policing Approach. It is primarily intended for
policymakers and senior police professionals but may
also be useful to civil society groups with an interest in
such issues, in particular community leaders. We are in
close contact with CTED on possible ways to promote
that approach.

Besides the aforementioned programmatic work,
since 2012 the OSCE has been invited to take part in the
Global Counterterrorism Forum’s Working Groups on
Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law and on Countering
Violent Extremism, due to their relevance to the work
of the OSCE in the field of countering terrorism.

Another initiative that we are pursuing jointly with
the Global Counterterrorism Forum is to advance the
role of women in countering the violent extremism
and radicalization that lead to terrorism. Last month,
we held a workshop in Istanbul with civil society
stakeholders to identify good practices and lessons
learned in supporting their efforts to empower women
to contribute in different capacities. We will hold a
follow-up workshop for Government experts in Vienna
in October. On the basis of both those events, we expect
the Global Counterterrorism Forum to draft a good
policy practice document on gender mainstreaming in
countering violent extremism. We see that initiative
as supporting the spirit of United Nations Security
Council resolution 2129 (2013), which reaffirms the
Council’s intention to increase its attention to women,
peace and security issues in all relevant thematic areas
of work on its agenda, including threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts.
Besides the joint endeavour between the OSCE and
the Global Counterterrorism Forum I mentioned earlier,
strengthening the rule of law compliant criminal justice
responses is another area of such collaboration. In that
regard, the OSCE and Global Counterterrorism Forum

Next, in the field of travel document security, let
me also mention that the OSCE has continued to assist
its participating States throughout the OSCE region in
preventing terrorist movements across borders while
strengthening border management. Key to these efforts
is the fact that the documents, related issuing processes
and border inspection tools meet international standards
and specifications as set out by the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO). Cooperation between
OSCE and ICAO is strong, and both organizations
work together on various capacity-building activities.
It is worth noting that OSCE travel document security
activities complement United Nations efforts focusing
on the implementation of the Security Council
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We are also
supporting relevant United Nations structures with
planning regional counter-terrorism activities related
to border control and security in Central Asia.
Over the past several years, cybersecurity has
emerged as an increasing concern to OSCE participating
States. In the field of countering the use of the Internet
for terrorist purposes, we organized, from 2012 to
2013, four online expert forum discussions to stimulate
information exchange on the latest trends and debates
related to terrorist use of the Internet. In addition,
we have in parallel facilitated and organized a series
of national seminars, which have aimed to facilitate
discussions among the public, authorities, experts
and civil society at the national level for promoting a
comprehensive understanding of the threat. Since 2005,
we have regularly coordinated with the CTITF, CTED
and UNODC in those efforts, and we stand ready to
continue and, if possible, deepen that cooperation with
United Nations counterparts in the area of cybersecurity.
Importantly, the OSCE recognizes that security
goes beyond political and military issues and fully

14-430265/13

A/68/PV.97

13/06/2014

encompasses the security of the individual human
being. The OSCE regards the respect for human rights
and the rule of law as an integral element of security.
We will not succeed in combating and ultimately
overcoming terrorism if the means to do so are not in
conformity with human rights standards.

involvement of a wide range of Government and private
business experts from OSCE participating States and
international organizations such as the European Union
and NATO. We were pleased to see that there was a
side-event on infrastructure earlier this week by the
United Nations.

ODIHR, as mentioned earlier, assists OSCE
participating States in strengthening the implementation
of their human rights obligations and commitments
through monitoring and capacity-building activities. In
particular, through its Human Rights and Anti-Terrorism
Programme, ODIHR, as mentioned earlier, assists
OSCE participating States in strengthening the
implementation of their human rights obligations
and commitments through monitoring and capacitybuilding activities. In particular through its human
rights and anti-terrorism programme, ODIHR assists
participating States in developing and implementing
human rights-compliant anti-terrorism policies and
practices.

Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.

Some specific examples in support of pillar IV of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
include the development of training curricula for police
officers on countering terrorism and protecting human
rights, which aims to adopt an operational approach
linking the analysis of potential human rights concerns
with the daily work and actions of the police involved in
counter-terrorism activities; producing, in collaboration
with the Strategic Police Matters Unit, a practical
manual for law enforcement officers on human rights
in counter-terrorism investigations; training senior
border officials on the protection of human rights
when countering terrorism at borders, in collaboration
with the OSCE Border Management Staff College in
Dushanbe; issuing a legal opinion at the request of
the Government of Tunisia on Tunisian anti-terrorism
legislation in December 2013, with recommendations
aimed at enhancing compliance with international
human rights standards; and lastly, conducting a human
rights assessment of the situation of detainees at the
Guantanamo Bay detention camp. That is in line with
ODIHR’s objective to support participating States in
meeting their commitments to respect human rights in
the fight against terrorism.
I would now like to highlight a few more examples
of other multidimensional approaches. We have
produced a good-practices guide on non-nuclear
critical energy infrastructure protection from terrorist
attacks. That guidebook has been developed with the

6/13

Additionally, together with our Office of the
Coordinator of OSCE Economic and Environmental
Activities, we are active in the field of suppressing
money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
We have a project that will include civil society and
CTED on non-profit organizations, which is soon to
hold its first event. Another independent institution
of the OSCE is the Office of the Representative on
Freedom of the Media, which plays an active role in
assisting participating States in recognizing the need
for free media and free expression as an essential
counterbalance to terrorist activity.
I would like to conclude by making three points.
First, I would like to restate my appreciation for
the organization of this highly important review and
for giving regional organizations such as the OSCE an
opportunity to speak and to update Member States on
what we are doing in support of the global efforts of the
United Nations in preventing and countering terrorism.
I strongly believe that such opportunities to take pause
and review progress can only be seen as beneficial and
encouraging further joint efforts.
Secondly, I want to reiterate that the OSCE stands
ready to remain a substantive contributor for enhancing
capacity at the national, subregional and regional levels
to prevent and combat terrorism and for providing a
framework for multi-stakeholder dialogue, awarenessraising, exchange of expertise and networking while
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in the OSCE area. To that end, the
OSCE would welcome opportunities to participate in
relevant CTITF working groups as appropriate and
receive regular updates on the activities undertaken
by the different entities of the CTITF to thus ensure
continued coordination and collaboration.
Thirdly and last, I trust that in two years, during
the fifth biennial review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we will be even more
confident and efficient in transforming a number of the

14-43026

13/06/2014

positive words expressed today into action making our
world significantly safer and more secure.
The Acting President (spoke in French): In
accordance with resolution 44/6, I now give the floor to
the observer of the Council of Europe.
Mr. Koedjikov (Council of Europe): Allow me
to join, on behalf of the Council of Europe, all those
who have condemned the terrorist act in Mosul and
expressed their solidarity with Turkey and the Turkish
people.
It is an honour for me to address the Assembly and
to be able to reiterate our commitment to support the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
landmark holistic, coherent and universal framework
for international action against terrorism.
In 1945, the peoples of the United Nations
determined to reaffirm their faith in fundamental
human rights, the dignity and worth of the human
person and the equal rights of men and women and of
nations large and small. Four years later, in 1949 the
Council of Europe was set up to safeguard respect
for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. The
dream of our founding fathers was of one continent
sharing the same spiritual and moral values, which are
the common heritage of the European peoples and the
true source of individual freedom, political liberty and
the rule of law — principles that form the basis of all
genuine democracy.
Terrorism is the antithesis of those values. Back in
1978, the Council of Europe was the first international
organization to determine that the prevention and
suppression of terrorism are indispensable to the
maintenance of the democratic structure of Member
States. From the outset, the Council of Europe
treated terrorist acts as serious — but nevertheless
common — crimes. Historically, the first counterterrorism measures agreed by the Council of Europe
sought to limit the offences that could be seen as political
and therefore be used as a reason to refuse to extradite
or prosecute terrorists. Yesterday, the representative of
Turkey (see A/68/PV.94) underlined the importance of
the universal principle of aut dedere aut judicare, or
“extradite or prosecute” .
The 2005 Council of Europe Convention on
the Prevention of Terrorism broadened the scope of
the criminal offences that could lead to terrorism.
The review mechanism for the Convention is now
functioning, the implementation of article 6 on

A/68/PV.97

recruitment for terrorism is ready, and the assessment
of article 7 on training for terrorism is under way. I am
grateful to the representative of the Russian Federation
for his comments on the potential of the Convention to
address new terrorism challenges (see A/68/PV.94).
To promote international cooperation in criminal
matters, the Convention modified the existing Council of
Europe extradition and mutual assistance arrangements,
notably by excluding the political exception clause. To
date, there are some 33 such instruments and amending
protocols and we have a dedicated expert body working
to facilitate their practical implementation.
The Council of Europe is active in countering the
financing of terrorism, where we have an advanced
convention and an efficient regional Financial Action
Task Force-style monitoring body, the Committee
of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money
Laundering Measures and the Financing of Terrorism
(MONEYVAL). That is the convention to which
Georgia recently became party, as mentioned by the
representative of Georgia (see A/68/PV.95) in his
intervention.
Human beings should not fall victim to terrorism.
Human rights should not fall victim to terrorism.
Terrorists seek to promote a political agenda not
through the democratic process, but through spreading
fear. Therefore, to neglect democratic values in favour
of expediency in suppressing terrorism would mean
to give the victory to the terrorists. It is also likely to
produce more terrorist recruits than it may stop. The
response to terrorism must be respectful of the human
rights of all those involved and must remain at all times
strictly within the boundaries of the rule of law.
The 2002 Council of Europe Guidelines on Human
Rights and the Fight against Terrorism introduced
measures looking far ahead into the future, such as
those on the prohibition of arbitrariness, on the need of
lawfulness in anti-terrorist measures, on the absolute
prohibition of torture or on the rules for the collection
and processing of personal data by any competent
authority in the field of State security.
The European Court of Human Rights has developed
a body of case law relevant to terrorism. The main tenet
of its jurisprudence is that strong national security and
protection of the population against terrorism are fully
compatible with maintaining the democratic safeguards
and respect for human rights. The Council of Europe
Committee of Experts on Terrorism (CODEXTER) is

14-430267/13

A/68/PV.97

preparing a database of the relevant case law of the
Court, which will be available in the near future.
In a broader sense, everything that the Council
of Europe does to promote human rights, democracy
and the rule of law addresses the conditions conducive
to terrorism. The Council of Europe has endorsed, at
the highest level of Heads of State and Government,
intercultural and interreligious dialogue as a means
to ensure that the diversity of European cultures is
a source of mutual enrichment, not of conflict. The
2005 Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
Member States of the Council of Europe also committed
to a new dialogue between Europe and its neighbouring
regions — the southern Mediterranean, the Middle East
and Central Asia.
The European Commission against Racism and
Intolerance is a human rights body of the Council of
Europe, composed of independent experts, which
monitors the problems of racism, xenophobia,
intolerance and discrimination, prepares reports and
issues recommendations to member States. The Council
of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection
of National Minorities has a monitoring system under
which an advisory committee analyses legislation and
practice and provides country-specific opinions and
recommendations to improve minority protection. The
Council of Europe has adopted a Charter on Education
for Democratic Citizenship and Human Rights
Education. The Charter reflects the growing awareness
that education is the first line of defence against the rise
of intolerance, which can lead to violence, extremism
and terrorism.
A 2011 Council of Europe report, entitled “Living
together: Combining diversity and freedom in the
21st-century Europe”, concluded that
“a better common life in twenty-first-century
Europe depends relatively little on compulsion,
and much more on convincing people of different
cultures and beliefs that they actually need to live
together, and on finding ways to make that easier”.
Over the years, the Council of Europe has developed
its comprehensive triad of setting legal standards
based on common values, monitoring how they are put
into practice and cooperating with member States to
assist them in building their capacity to honour their
commitment to respect and fulfil the standards.
As a regional organization with 47 member States,
the Council of Europe contributes to the realization at
8/13

13/06/2014

the regional level of the pillars of the Global Strategy.
We enjoy particularly close cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which includes an annual coordination meeting
on terrorism issues, as well as with the European
Union, where we have an over-arching memorandum
of understanding. We regularly contribute, within
our geographical and resource constraints, to the
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED).
The representative of Serbia, who spoke
earlier today (see A/68/PV.96), mentioned a CTED
visit to his country. On that occasion, two of my
colleagues — one from the Terrorism Division and
the other from MONEYVAL — participated in the
CTED delegation. The visit drew heavily on the results
of an ongoing project against money-laundering and
terrorist financing that we had at that time in Serbia,
which was a €2.2 million, three-year-long Council of
Europe-European Union joint project. I believe that is
a good example of how international organizations and
actors can join forces and work hand in hand towards the
same goal. We, of course, cooperate with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), and
I would like to particularly commend CTITF for its
contribution to the report (A/68/841) of the SecretaryGeneral and in particular for the matrix of projects and
events.
The Council of Europe is rapidly developing its
cooperation with the new, dynamic and very productive
platform: the Global Counterterrorism Forum. I would
like to highlight a good practice by the Forum, namely,
sending out to its members and partners regular
updates, including information on upcoming activities.
In that cooperation, the Council of Europe shares with
others our experience and lessons learned and we learn
from others. To give one example, in May 2013, the
Council of Europe hosted in Strasbourg a conference
on special investigation techniques, co-organized with
CTED, OSCE and the League of Arab States. The
conference gave an impetus to CODEXTER, which
is now undertaking to review a Council of Europe
recommendation on that topic in order to take into
account the latest technological developments.
The Heads of State and Government of the Council
of Europe, at their Summit in Warsaw, confirmed
forcefully “that terrorism is unjustifiable under
any circumstances and in any culture”. Today, the

14-43026

13/06/2014

paragraph 1 of the very substantial text (A/68/L.50) that
will shortly become a General Assembly resolution,
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes. Those words were probably the most often
reiterated text of the draft resolution in statements
made yesterday and today from this rostrum.
I would like to conclude by echoing the words of
the representative of China: let us join hands and fight
this scourge.
The Acting President: I should now like to consult
members with a view to giving the floor to Mr. Taleb
Rifai, Secretary-General of the United Nations World
Tourism Organization.
If there is no objection, may I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly, without setting a
precedent, to invite Mr. Rifai, to make a statement at
this meeting?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Rifai.
Mr. Rifai (United Nations World Tourism
Organization): I am honoured to have the opportunity,
on the behalf of the United Nations World Tourism
Organization, to address the Assembly as it meets for
the fourth biennial review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Travel and tourism have become today a central
global phenomenon. In 2013, 1.087 billion international
tourists travelled the world in one year, representing
one in seven of the world’s population making an
international trip every year. That is in addition to the
6 billion tourist trips registered domestically within
national boundaries every year. By 2030, the United
Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
forecasts that 1.8 billion international tourists will
travel in a single year. That is indeed very far from the
mere 25 million people who travelled internationally
back in 1950. In that connection, today the travel and
tourism industry creates one in every 11 jobs all over the
world, generating $1.4 trillion in direct export earnings
and representing 9 per cent of the world’s total gross
domestic product and 30 per cent of its total export of
services.
This is indeed the age of travel, but that is precisely
why it is important for me to be here in this Hall this

A/68/PV.97

afternoon. The infrastructure of travel and tourism
today, both human and physical, is a very vulnerable
and tempting target for terrorist attacks, and the
terrorists know that very well. They know they can
inflict economic and political damage by attacking
travellers and tourism infrastructure. We have been
reminded of that only recently by examples such as
the airport in Karachi or the mall in Nairobi, Kenya. It
is therefore vital to focus ever more on travel security
measures and strategies that protect both visitors and
host communities.
The UNWTO, as the United Nations specialized
agency responsible for promoting sustainable and
universally accessible tourism, is fully engaged in
the international efforts aimed at maintaining tourism
security. We are partnering with the United Nations
system in order to respond effectively to Member States’
calls for travel security and the modernization of border
management systems, facilities and institutions at the
national, regional and international levels, since they
are all critical to ensuring that people can continue to
travel and to do so safely. The UNWTO is also a unique
United Nations agency, encompassing as it does more
than 400 non-governmental affiliate members from the
tourism sector across various elements of the tourism
value chain. That enables us to facilitate links with the
relevant players in the private sector in order to better
assess and mitigate risks related to tourism.
Developing tourism responsibly means addressing
security issues at a very early stage, not just from the
perspective of resilience and sustainability but also,
importantly, from that of care, responsibility and respect
for human security and dignity. It is on that basis that
the UNWTO has been working with the United Nations
system, particularly the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (CTITF), of which we are very much a member,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Civil Aviation Organization, among many
other agencies.
In that context, I would like to highlight a few points.
First, while security is crucial to healthy and sustainable
travel and the tourism sector, it has also become clear
that tourism is a very important development pillar for
many countries around the world, promoting economic
growth, reducing poverty and creating millions of jobs.
It is therefore very important to recognize the fact that
while travel and tourism need security, it is also very
important to preserve social and economic stability and

14-430269/13

A/68/PV.97

the security associated with the economic growth that
tourism brings.
Secondly, security issues are often given as reasons
for cumbersome immigration and border procedures,
but very often the processes are simply not aligned with
current travel flows and security concerns. Intelligent
and state-of-the-art use of technology in order to
facilitate friendly, smooth travel that is respectful of
human rights and dignity can and must go hand in hand
with effective, high-level security measures. Security
and openness are not a zero-sum game.
Thirdly, Member States have clearly indicated that
tourism is often not properly addressed in national
emergency plans, and most of the time is only tackled
when an incident with major consequences actually
occurs. In that regard, it is therefore important to
adopt strategies that are proactive and preemptive, not
reactive.
Last but not least, joint efforts and actions at the
regional and international level should be put in place
in order to produce international standards, guidelines,
manuals and best practices. The prospective work of
the UNWTO with the CTC and the CTITF is a good
example of such joint action.
I sincerely hope that all of these issues will be
taken into consideration in the next review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I look forward greatly to the Assembly’s discussions,
and I trust they will contribute significantly to the
sustainable development of the tourism industry and
many other growth-related sectors, and to their capacity
to contribute to the post-2015 development agenda.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/68/L.50, entitled “The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review”.
I give the floor to the representative of Georgia to
introduce an oral revision to the draft resolution.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): I would first like to
once again commend the Turkish delegation for its
great efforts during the lengthy process of facilitating
draft resolution A/68/L.50.
After consulting with many delegations represented
in this Hall, we have come to an understanding that
the draft resolution would be improved by adding

10/13

13/06/2014

a reference to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. I would therefore like to propose a small
amendment to paragraph 30, in which the wording
would become the following:
“Notes with appreciation the activities
undertaken in the area of capacity-building by
United Nations entities, including the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force entities, inter
alia, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
in coordination with other relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations to
assist Member States, upon their request, in
implementing the Strategy, and encourages the
Task Force to ensure focused delivery of capacitybuilding assistance, including in the framework of
the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
Initiative”.
I hope this small amendment will meet with
consent and that delegations will approve its inclusion
in paragraph 30.
The Acting President: In accordance with
rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly will
first take a decision on the oral amendment submitted
by the representative of Georgia.
May I take it that the Assembly agrees to the
adoption of the oral amendment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.50,
entitled “The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy Review”, as orally amended. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/68/L.50, as orally amended, was
adopted (resolution 68/276).
The Acting President: On behalf of the President
of the General Assembly, I should like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Halit Çevik of Turkey,
who so ably and patiently conducted the discussions
in the informal consultations and to all Member
States for their excellent contribution to the successful
coordination of resolution 68/276.
I now call on those delegations wishing to make
general statements.
Mr. Ali (Sudan): My delegation has requested
the floor to make a general statement following the
adoption of resolution 68/276.
14-43026

13/06/2014

Allow me at the outset to pay tribute to the
Permanent Representative of Turkey and his efficient
and able team for their tireless efforts during the process
of informal consultations on resolution 68/276, entitled
“The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Review”, which was conducted in a transparent and
open manner. My delegation participated actively and
constructively in the process that led to the consensus
on the resolution adopted by the General Assembly this
afternoon.
In connection with paragraph 26 of the resolution,
my delegation would like to emphasize the importance of
maintaining multilateral efforts in combating terrorism
through international and regional cooperation, which
contribute positively to the promotion of the efforts
and initiatives undertaken at the national level. My
delegation strongly rejects the unilateral practices
of some States accusing others of sponsoring and
supporting terrorism. Such unjustified practices, which
are politically driven by narrow interests, jeopardize
the collective wisdom and multilateral efforts in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. My delegation calls on those States
to refrain from such practices, which are inconsistent
with international law and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
My delegation would like to reiterate its firm
commitment to continuing to cooperate with the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): As the Assembly knows,
on 14 January I was appointed by the President of
the General Assembly to serve as facilitator for the
consultations with Member States on the outcome of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
review. On 10 June, I presented the draft resolution to
the President of the General Assembly.
On this occasion, I would like to thank President
Ashe for his confidence in me. Today, I welcome the
adoption of resolution 68/276 on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review. I would
like to thank all my colleagues and representatives
for their kind words addressed to me and my team
during the review. I also express our sincere gratitude
for the expressions of solidarity on the occasion of the
abduction of our collegaues in Mosul.
Following my appointment, during the period of
almost six months in my capacity as facilitator, I paid

A/68/PV.97

visits to many colleagues and received their views
on and support for the process. I held regional group
meetings, as well as meetings with the participation of
all Member States. During the process, transparency
and inclusiveness were my guiding principles. From
the very beginning, I tried to reach out to each and
every delegation. I believe that each delegation had an
equal opportunity to make their voice heard during the
negotiations. The resolution reflects that understanding.
We came a long way and, together, we achieved the
outcome. I appreciate the spirit of cooperation displayed
among colleagues during the process. I believe that that
is an essential asset in our work. In that regard, the
cooperation shown during the negotiations in order to
produce the resolution was exemplary.
The resolution that we have just adopted is not a
technical rollover. It is comprehensive and responds
to the new trends and challenges of terrorism that we
face. The consensus resolution is also a testament to the
determination of Member States to eliminate terrorism.
Once again, I would like to thank all my colleagues and
delegates for their hard work and contribution to this
process and for their cooperation.
The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives who have requested to speak in
exercise the right of reply. May I remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to
10 minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second intervention and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Zmeevsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia repudiates the fabricated accusations
of territorial occupation and terrorism addressed to
it. It is entirely unacceptable when, under the flag
of combating terrorism, as currently taking place in
Ukraine, activities to suppress protests are implemented
with external support and blessings from abroad, using
force against the civilian population with the support of
radical nationalists. This unacceptable form of violence
will lead to a full-fledged civil war, and constitutes
nothing less than a crime against the Ukrainian people.
Careful study is required on the Ukrainian use of
prohibited types of weapons.
The accusation that Russia is participating in the
escalation of tensions is untrue and unsubstantiated.
Especially unacceptable are complaints that Russia has
interfered in the situation in Ukraine by sending armed
forces and weapons to the country. I will answer that with
the words of the President of the Russian Federation,

14-4302611/13

A/68/PV.97

Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin, who has stated that
there are no Russian armed forces or instructors in
south-eastern Ukraine. There are none and there will
not be any; neither are we sending weapons there.
In addition, we have recently taken steps to
decrease the number of Russian armed forces in our
own territory close to the Ukrainian border. On 7 June,
the President of the Russian Federation ordered the
federal border services of the Russian Federation to
strengthen the protection of the border between Russia
and the Ukraine in order to eliminate illegal border
crossings, and that is being implemented.
The same cannot be said for the Ukrainian side,
which is not fulfilling its own commitments. On the
night of 13 June, Ukrainian armoured vehicles and
armed forces violated the State border of the Russian
Federation in the Rostov region. We consider those
actions by the Ukrainian side to be a violation of the
basic provisions of international law and an illegal act
that will not lead to a peaceful resolution of the armed
conflict in south-eastern Ukraine. We call on Ukraine
to end such acts of provocation, which are harming
the process aimed at restarting Russian/Ukrainian
dialogue.
We do not hide our concern about the situation
and the increase in violations of basic rights, including
those of our citizens in Ukraine, whose interests are
being violated in the most intolerable manner. On
2 May, in Odesa, ultranationalists burned and killed
dozens of their own citizens, including the elderly,
women and children, a fact concerning which the
Ukrainian mass media has remained silent. We are
supposed to consider that evil act as one of patriotism.
Never will the international community agree to such
a cynical description of a crime against humanity. All
those who perpetrated those crimes and war crimes in
contravention of other norms and humanitarian law in
Ukraine must be brought to justice.
Russia calls for an immediate end to the armed
attacks and violence of the so-called anti-terrorist — but
in fact punitive — operation in eastern Ukraine, and
calls on Ukraine to draw back its troops and move
towards a full implementation of the Geneva declaration
of 17 April and the road map developed by the current
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, the President of the Swiss
Confederation. We continue to expect those steps from
the new Government in Ukraine.

12/13

13/06/2014

Russia is an unwavering foe of terrorism. We will
never agree to such operations being launched against
civilians in the fight against that scourge, or to the
authority of the international community, including the
United Nations, being manipulated for those ends. What
the United Nations should do regarding the actions in
Ukraine in order to end the violence and implement
humanitarian tasks is, as stated by the representative
of the Russian Federation in the Security Council, to
consider how to combat the radicalization of social and
political views that has led to violence and terrorism,
among other things. First and foremost, we are speaking
about the spread of extremism and terrorist ideologies
under the banner of ultranationalism, neo-Nazism and
fascism. That danger must be rooted out at the very
source, immediately and effectively.
Within the framework of those tasks, we must create
a unified front like that which once defeated fascism.
What is impermissible is to attempt to use Nazism and
the extremists who believe in it to serve geopolitical
ambitions. We have gone through that once before. We
must all remember what that led to in the 1930s.
Mr. Kasap (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor to speak in exercise of my right to reply
to the comments of the representative of the Russian
Federation.
(spoke in Russian)
It is truly unfortunate that my Russian colleagues
were not able to react in an appropriate manner to the
criticism and appeals addressed to you, Sir. That is
understandable, however, given that nothing can justify
Russia’s actions towards Ukraine.
We offered our analysis of Russia’s actions in our
statement, and I will not repeat myself here. We simply
wish to inform delegations present in this Hall today that
while the Russians claim to be carefully and fraternally
keeping an eye on what is happening in eastern
Ukraine, they have also set themselves up as arbiters
of who is right and who is wrong and are supplying
weapons, fighters, armoured vehicles and even tanks
to those fighting us in the east of the country — the
very actions that they say are being taken against the
peaceful citizens of Ukraine.
I would like to note the following. It does not matter
how the Russian Federation describes the operation.
The world is unfortunately already accustomed to
the disinformation that Russia spreads through its

14-43026

13/06/2014

television broadcasts. What is important is the goal of
our operations, which is to put an end to the terrorist
acts perpetrated by the groups in Donetsk and Luhansk
in order to ensure that the residents of those regions
of Ukraine can live in peace. If Russia believes that
the peaceful population of those regions is using mines
and anti-aircraft weapons, kidnapping people, even
children, and shooting prisoners, then it will be very
difficult for us to find anything to speak about with
them.
The Russians say there is no proof, but there is
an enormous amount of proof. Only those who do not
want to see or hear can repudiate such evidence. It is
impermissible to lie, yet the Russians have tried to hide
the facts from the entire international community. The
General Assembly has already given its verdict on the
activities of the Russian Federation in Ukraine, and the
Security Council has often spoken against the Russian
Federation’s acts in eastern Ukraine.
We call upon the Russian Federation not to interfere.
It is our task to fight terrorists on our soil. We are
responsible for that task; we are responsible to our own
people. As many speakers, including the representative
of the Russian Federation, have said, double standards
in combating terrorism are unacceptable. I would
therefore call on him to prove to everyone that Russia’s
words are consistent with its actions.
Mr. Lustig (Israel): For the past 24 hours a search
has been under way for three Israeli teenagers who
are believed to have been taken hostage in an act of
terrorism. The thoughts of the people of Israel are
with the boys and their families, and we pray that they
will return home safely. Israel holds the Palestinian
Authority responsible for the well-being of the missing
boys.
As the ongoing victim of terrorist attacks, Israel
cannot sit silently by and listen to other countries make
baseless accusations even as they themselves harbour
and sponsor terrorist groups. In particular, it took
a great deal of audacity on the part of the Lebanese
delegation to demonize my country given the countless
human rights abuses taking place in Lebanon. Added

A/68/PV.97

to that audacity is the fact that the newly established
Lebanese Government includes representatives of
an internationally designed terrorist organization,
Hizbullah.
Before speaking against Israel in this Hall, I
suggest that the Lebanese delegation take a look at the
refugee camps throughout Lebanon, such as Ein elHilweh and Nahr al-Bared, where Palestinians are kept
in some of the worst conditions in the region and are
deprived of their rights. They are subject to violence,
discrimination and economic and social oppression.
Before its representative chooses to launch an attack
against Israel, I advise the Lebanese Government first
to address all the attacks launched by Hizbullah on
innocent civilians in Syria.
Mr. Zmeevsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We naturally fully repudiate the words
and imaginative accusations flung against the
Russian Federation. We would only like to exhort the
representative of Ukraine not to mask the criminality
of actions being taken against his own people by
labeling them “combating terrorism”. Sooner or later
he will have to face judgement for that, be it through
the courts, before the international community and or
when answering for his own honour.
Mr. Kasap (Ukraine): I thank my colleague from
the Russian delegation for his clear message. I just want
to say that we stand ready to answer for everything
that we are doing. It is difficult to commend the words
of my colleagues in the delegation of the Russian
Federation. It is always difficult to have a dialogue
when your opponent does not hear you and does not
want to hear you. I have nothing to add but once again
urge the Russian Federation to leave us alone and let us
deal with our future in peace.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 119?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

14-4302613/13
