UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/718
18 September 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 17 SEPTEMBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated
12 September 1997, which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

97-24530 (E)

190997

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/718
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 12 September 1997 from the Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) addressed
to the Secretary-General

In accordance with Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I attach the
eighth monthly report on Stabilization Force (SFOR) operations. I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1997/718
English
Page 3

Appendix
Monthly report to the United Nations Security Council
on SFOR operations

SFOR operations
1.
Approximately 36,500 SFOR troops are currently deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all members of NATO and from
20 non-NATO countries.
2.
Over the reporting period (21 July-20 August), there were no significant
changes in the overall size and composition of the force. However, the
multinational divisions started to make force adjustments in preparation for the
municipal election. SFOR has continued to conduct reconnaissance and
surveillance by means of ground and air patrols and to make random inspections
of weapons cantonment sites. During the period, approximately 2,500 sorties
were flown by combat aircraft, while the SFOR helicopter fleet flew 124 hours.
3.
Support continues to be provided to the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES), with
SFOR maintaining its regular, coordinated training missions over Eastern
Slavonia in order to exercise plans to provide close air support if necessary.
4.
In pursuance of a policy communicated to the Entity Presidents by the SFOR
Commander on 7 August to assist with restructuring and reforming the Entity
Police Forces, on 15 August General Saric, Commander of the Republika Srpska
Specialist Police, was given a copy of the supplementary instructions to the
parties concerning the Specialist Police. These lay out the procedures to be
followed during the period in which the Specialist Police are subject to
annex 1A of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, prior to their
recognition and certification by the International Police Task Force (IPTF) to
act as a component of the civil police. General Saric indicated that he would
comply with these instructions, and progress since then has been good. The same
instructions have been passed to the Federation Police authorities, where
restructuring under IPTF is more advanced, for compliance by 30 August.
5.
On the morning of 17 August, members of the Specialist Police loyal to
Mrs. Plavsic took control of the Public Security Centre in Banja Luka. SFOR was
requested by the Serb Member of the Collective Presidency, Momcilo Krajisnik, to
allow the Ministry of the Interior Specialist Police to expel them. Permission
was denied and SFOR took action to deal with the breach of the supplementary
instructions to the parties. At the same time, IPTF responded to the direction
from the Office of the High Representative to investigate reports of the
existence of evidence, within the Public Security Centre, concerning serious
violations of human rights and telephone interception. SFOR was asked to assist
in providing area security. This investigation discovered unauthorized arms,
and IPTF continues to examine possible evidence of the bugging of telephones of
President Plavsic and Constitutional Court judges. By the evening of 18 August
the Public Security Centre had been handed back to the Ministry of the Interior
Civil Police. On the morning of 20 August, SFOR and the IPTF returned to the
/...

S/1997/718
English
Page 4

Public Security Centre and other police sites in Banja Luka to investigate
reports of further irregularities. Civil police from outside Banja Luka, who
occupied these facilities, were expelled. Large quantities of arms and
ammunition were discovered. These were confiscated and are still being
inventoried, but initial estimates are that they included up to 12 tons of
equipment, including automatic rifles, rocket launchers, grenades and mines.
6.
Between 1 and 5 August 1997, protest actions against the return of Muslims
to the area occurred in Jajce and in the valley immediately east of the town
(comprising the villages of Divicani, Lendici, Bucici, Kruscica and Donja
Sibenica). Muslims were harassed and fled the villages of Bucici and Lendici,
and a number of roadblocks were set up. SFOR dismantled the roadblocks and
maintained a presence in the area in order to prevent violence and destruction
or vandalism. A return programme for the period 16 to 21 August 1997 was
agreed. In that time 341 heads of family (equivalent to 1,200 people) returned
to the valley. The only incidents were two land mine explosions which occurred
in Divicani. SFOR asked explosive ordnance disposal teams to assess the
situation and clear the area.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
7.
Overall, the entities remain substantially compliant in most aspects across
the area of operations. The situation throughout the theatre remains militarily
stable. However, while there is general compliance concerning the entity armed
forces, the police of both entities still do not meet internationally accepted
standards. The actions, through recent operations to control the Specialist
Police as forces under the General Framework Agreement for Peace, are proceeding
well.
8.
During the reporting period, a total of 481 inspections of weapons storage
sites were carried out by SFOR. By party, this figure comprises 170 Bosniac,
130 Croat and 181 Bosnian Serb inspections. SFOR continues to confiscate
weapons which, after a period of time to allow for appeals, are normally
destroyed. With the exception of the incident in Banja Luka involving the
Bosnian Serb Specialist Police, the following weapons were confiscated over the
past month: from the Bosniac Army, 20 AK47 rifles, 20,000 7.62 rounds of
ammunition and an item of electronic warfare equipment; from the Bosnian Croat
Forces, two AK47 rifles, two 76mm anti-tank guns, 100 tank rounds, 169 napalm
rounds and five small arms; from the Bosnian Serb Army, 50 AK47 rifles, one M80
rocket launcher. Two long-barrel weapons, 1,633 7.62 rounds of ammunition,
16 pistols, 40 hand grenades and six rifle grenades; and from civil components,
160 pounds of ordnance and one pistol.
9.
During the past month, SFOR has removed, or participated in the removal of
10 unauthorized checkpoints (three Bosnian Serb and seven Federation). It is
apparent that the number of checkpoints has been reduced through the efforts of
IPTF with SFOR support. Equally apparent is that checkpoints continue to be
intermittently established in both the Federation and the Republika Srpska.
Specialist Police have been involved in a significant number of these incidents
and the SFOR operation SECURE BEAT, a four-phase plan, starting on 8 August to
bring the Entities' Specialist Police under article 1A of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace as Forces and to ensure their compliance with the IPTF civil
/...

S/1997/718
English
Page 5

police restructuring programme, should assist freedom of movement. Republika
Srpska customs and police officials continue to harass trucks of
non-governmental organizations transporting humanitarian aid items into the
Federation.
10. During the reporting period, SFOR monitored a total of 662 training and
movement activities (249 Bosniac, 203 Bosnian Croat and 210 Bosnian Serb).
11. Over the reported period, all the training and movement bans imposed by
SFOR on the parties for failing to meet de-mining requirements were lifted: on
28 July, the ban on HVO TSG corps by the multinational division (SW); on
17 August, the three bans on the third VRS corps, the HVO ORASJF group and the
II ABIH corps by the multinational division (N). On 1 August, the training ban
due to discrepancies in previous movement and training activities imposed on the
seventy-seventh VRS regiment of the seventh Army corps was lifted by the
multinational division (SE). Additionally, on 6 August, the ban on VRS air and
air defence activities due to radar and missile infringements was lifted.
12. Over the reporting period, entity armed forces, under SFOR supervision,
removed 3,484 explosive devices (224 anti-tank mines; 3,184 anti-personnel mines
and 76 items of unexploded ordnance) from 280 mined areas. Since 10 March,
2,452 anti-tank mines, 10,403 anti-personnel mines and 712 items of unexploded
ordnance have been removed from a total of 1,307 areas. The rate of operations
in the first week of the reporting period was slow mainly due to the spate of
accidents in the previous reporting cycle. There have been three accidents this
month, with two of them resulting in serious injuries. In spite of those
accidents, this is the best monthly performance yet reported. In general,
compliance improved considerably. The Bosniac Army tends to be consistent with
its compliance; the Bosnian Croat Army has improved considerably and the Bosnian
Serb Army has in fact performed better than was expected, although they remain
the least compliant of the three Armies. The threat of training and movement
bans is a significant factor.
13. Since 20 July 1997, there have been two meetings of the Inter-Entity
Boundary Line Subcommission, held on 31 July and 12 August 1997 in Lukavica.
All three parties were in attendance. During the Subcommission meetings the
negotiators for the Federation (Bosniacs and Croats) and the Republika Srpska
reached agreement on a proposal to exchange land south of Klujc (Dobocani, in
favour of the Federation) for land north of Sanski Most (Koprivna, in favour of
the Republika Srpska). The Agreement must now be ratified by the Governments of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Federation and the Republika Srpska and
countersigned by the SFOR Commander for implementation to take place.
Additionally, the Republika Srpska made a new map proposal for a gain of
territory north-east of Sarajevo which is linked with a Federation proposal in
the Kladanj-Vares area made in August 1996. On request of the Federation/Croat
negotiator, the discussion on land swaps in the Posavina area was postponed
until after the municipal elections.
14. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), IPTF and SFOR
coordinated and secured the release of two Serb prisoners-of-war held in the
Zenica military prison. Acting on information provided by relatives concerning
their whereabouts, IPTF discovered the two men locked in a room in a building
/...

S/1997/718
English
Page 6

situated at the rear of the main administration block, away from the other
detention facilities. The prisoners-of-war were transported to Banja Luka and
reunited with their families. Ambassador Kai Eide indicated that this was a
gross violation of international humanitarian law and the terms of the Peace
Agreement and asked Federation authorities to investigate and bring to justice
those involved in the human rights violations of these two men. IPTF will also
be conducting an investigation. Evidence indicates that the factions continue
to hold detainees, notwithstanding the provisions of annex 1A, article IX,
Prisoner Exchanges, that comprehensive lists were to be supplied to ICRC to
facilitate its work in implementing and monitoring the plan for release and
transfer of prisoners.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. Within its capabilities, SFOR continues to offer assistance to the
international organizations in theatre, and provides security for IPTF
inspections, as demonstrated by operation SECURE BEAT (see para. 9 above).
16. Media abuses continued in this period, with the Republika Srpska state
radio and television outlet being particularly biased and vitriolic. SFOR and
its Civic Military Cooperation (CIMIC) Task Force has increased efforts to work
with the Office of the High Representative and the international community on
the media problems through several integrated working groups, sharing of
resources and coordinated operations to develop means to counter blatant media
bias and improve the populace's ability to have alternative access to
information.
17. SFOR support of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
investigations continued. The main activities on exhumation sites were carried
out in the Brcko and Srebrenica areas, with SFOR providing a secure environment
for the Tribunal teams.
18. On the municipal elections, SFOR is working extensively with the other
international organizations to help ensure a secure environment for their
conduct. A security plan has been developed and approved by the entities that
includes instructions concerning the movement of voters.
19. The Supreme Allied Commander of Europe has agreed that arms control experts
working for the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) may
accompany SFOR during routine cantonment inspections. This will help resolve
the under-reporting issue by allowing treaty and weapons knowledgeable officers
to view holding sites and then assist the parties in correcting their
declarations. During the reporting period, Republika Srpska updated its
declarations under article IV of the Peace Agreement, adding a further
841 pieces of heavy equipment to its previous declaration.
20. SFOR also supports many other international and local organizations and
authorities. The activities occur throughout the country, often within the
immediate locale of an SFOR camp. For example, SFOR troops are continuing work
on the Tuzla-Brcko railway, with completion due at the beginning of
November 1997; a CIMIC Task Force public health team has been assisting in the
training of doctors; a telecommunications team has been coordinating efforts for
/...

S/1997/718
English
Page 7

the movement of equipment and site preparation for the free election radio
network in preparation for the municipal elections; veterinary teams have been
monitoring cattle in quarantine; and SFOR engineers signed road contracts with
Republika Srpska companies on 11 August that should act as prototypes for
opening up the Republika Srpska to similar contracting procedures in the future.
21. SFOR and the Office of the High Representative have continued to pursue the
issue of opening up the regional airports. Under the General Framework
Agreement, SFOR is required gradually to transfer control of the regional
airports to the appropriate institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The issue
has a clear link to the Sintra deadlines and to reconstituting the Civil
Aviation Authority (CAA). In response to the latest Serb argument against
signing, the Office of the High Representative, on 21 July 1997, issued a legal
opinion. Following a series of meetings in the Council of Ministers and
bilaterally with the Serb side, pursued by the SFOR Deputy Commander to explain
the issue and seek agreement, the memoranda of understanding for Tuzla, Mostar
and Banja Luka airports were signed by Dr. Siljadzic and Mr. Tomic following a
meeting of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers on 4 August 1997.
Mr. Bosic (Serb Co-Chairman) refused to sign.
22. At a meeting on 8 August 1997, the Presidency agreed to the rules of
procedures for the Standing Committee on Military Matters (SCMM). This
development will allow SCMM to move into discussion of more substantive issues.
SCMM will coordinate the activities of the armed forces of the two entities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Committee is due to meet at least once a month.
The rules of procedure establish the membership of SCMM as the three Members of
the Presidency, the Defence Ministers of the Federation and the Republika Srpska
and the Chiefs of Staff of the Federation and Republika Srpska armed forces,
plus one further nomination from each President. The High Representative, the
SFOR Commander and the OSCE Head of Mission, or their representatives, are
observers. The Foreign Ministry of Bosnia and Herzegovina will also be
represented by an observer. The Members of the Presidency may invite other
persons to attend as observers or in an advisory capacity. Members of the
Presidency will chair the Committee. The Chairmanship will alternate between
the Republika Srpska and the Federation.
Outlook
23. The overall situation in theatre is expected to remain stable, despite
continuing increased tension in the Republika Srpska. SFOR will continue to
carry out its mission firmly but fairly, without tolerating any recourse to
force or violence, or the unauthorized deployment of military or paramilitary
forces. In the forthcoming period major activities for SFOR will include
support for the municipal elections, support for a free and balanced media and
the continuing conduct of Operation SECURE BEAT.

-----
