S/2015/295

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 April 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 28 April 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the nineteenth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemica l Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The present letter covers the period from 23 March to 22 April
2015.
With respect to the destruction of the remaining 12 chemical weapons
production facilities in the Syrian Arab Republic, all four underground structures
that are accessible have now been verified by OPCW as destroyed. In addition, four
of seven hangars have now been prepared for destruction with explosives. Resources
have been mobilized to begin drilling at the fifth hangar. One underground structure
and two hangars remain inaccessible for security reasons.
Dialogue between OPCW technical experts and the Syrian authorities
continues with regard to the initial declaration by the Syri an Arab Republic and
subsequent amendments. The Declaration Assessment Team of OPCW is planning
its ninth visit to the Syrian Arab Republic to continue its clarification of outstanding
issues. In view of the importance of this matter, I welcome the continu ed
consultations between OPCW and the Syrian authorities and reiterate my previous
calls for ongoing cooperation in that regard.
The work of the fact-finding mission that is looking into allegations of the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic is ongoing and OPCW
experts are closely analysing all available information. I profoundly regret that such
allegations continue to be raised and there can be no ambiguity regarding the
seriousness with which they must be considered. I call aga in for the perpetrators of
such acts to be brought to justice and I reiterate that any use of chemical weapons,
by any party and under any circumstances, is utterly abhorrent.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex urgen tly
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-06680 (E)

290415

*1506680*

S/2015/295

Annex
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of Executive Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the
Security Council. My report covers the period from 23 March to 22 April 2015 and
also covers the reporting requirements contained in Executive Council decision
EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/5

15-06680

S/2015/295

Enclosure
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian Chemical
Weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Coun cil
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its re porting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, also adopted a decision entitled
“Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated
4 February 2015).
4.
This, the nineteenth monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions, and includes information relevant to the
period from 23 March to 22 April 2015.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
5.

Progress within the reporting period by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) With respect to the destruction and verification of the 12 chemical
weapons production facilities (CWPFs) (seven aircraft hangars and five
underground structures) in the Syrian Arab Republic as per Council decision EC -M43/DEC.1 (dated 24 July 2014), the timeline for destruction of one underground
structure and two aircraft hangars may become protracted should they remain
inaccessible due to the security situation near these sites. Nevertheless, all four of
the underground structures that are accessible have been verified by the OPCW as
destroyed, and the drilling to accommodate the explosive charges has been
completed at four of the five accessible aircraft hangars. The contractor’s resources
have been mobilised to begin drilling at the fifth accessible hangar. The destruction
of these hangars can commence once the supplier has delivered the required
explosives.
(b) On 17 April 2015, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
seventeenth monthly report (EC-M-49/P/NAT.1, dated 17 April 2015) regarding
activities on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and
CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1.

15-06680

3/5

S/2015/295

(c) The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary
cooperation in accordance with the implementation of subparagraph 1(e) of EC -M33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118
(2013).
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
6.
As reported previously, all declared chemicals have been removed from the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, and all declared stocks of the Categor y 1
chemicals have been destroyed. A total of 93.1% of the Category 2 chemicals has
now been destroyed, representing a combined total of 98.6%, including the
isopropanol previously destroyed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The status of the
destruction of the remaining Category 2 chemical (hydrogen fluoride (HF)) and
effluents is as follows:
(a) A total of 43.8% of the HF has been destroyed at Veolia ES Technical
Solutions, LLC in the United States of America and at Mexichem UK Limited in the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. As the destruction at Veolia
ES is currently on hold pending the resolution of technical issues, an accurate
forecast about its completion date cannot be provided at this time.
(b) A total of 76% of the DF effluent and 93.8% of the HD effluent produced
by the neutralisation process on board the United States Vessel MV Cape Ray has
been destroyed by Ekokem in Finland and at the GEKA facility in Germany,
respectively. Destruction activities are progressing in Finland and Germany, and are
expected to be completed by the end of June 2015.
7.
The Secretariat will continue to brief States Parties in The Hague on the
aforementioned destruction activities. Timelines for the completion of the destruction
of Syrian chemical weapons were provided in the overall report on the elimination of
the Syrian chemical weapons programme (paragraph 25 of EC-76/DG.16, dated 4 July
2014), which was noted by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
8.
In the context of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, cooperation
with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has continued and
three OPCW staff members were deployed as part of that Mi ssion as at the cut off
date of this report. Ambassador José Artur Denot Medeiros of Brazil, as the Special
Adviser to the Director-General on Syria, continued his meetings with senior Syrian
officials, UNOPS staff, and the United Nations Designated Offici al in Syria during
his visit from 21 to 23 March 2015.
9.
The Director-General has continued to communicate with senior
representatives of the States Parties hosting a destruction facility or providing
assistance with the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, and with senior
officials of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by the
Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated 7 March
2014), the Secretariat, on behalf of the Director-General, has continued to brief
States Parties in The Hague on its activities.
10. The Secretariat and the Syrian authorities have continued to cooperate on
outstanding issues regarding the Syrian initial declaration, as encouraged by the
Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of EC-76/6, dated 11 July
2014). During its eighth visit to the Syrian Arab Republic, which occurred between

4/5

15-06680

S/2015/295

22 March and 3 April 2015, the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continued its
technical consultations and interviews with key principals from the Syrian chemical
weapons programme, including discussions on the analytical results of the samples
taken during its visits in December 2014 and January 2015. Samples from three sites
that were taken during the latest visit of the DAT are being kept under seal in
Damascus and, together with future samples, will be transported to the OPCW
Laboratory and then to the designated laboratories for analysis. The DAT will
continue its consultations during its next visit, which is currently scheduled to take
place from 17 to 29 May 2015.
11. Regarding the implementation of additional special monitoring measures in
accordance with Notes EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1 (dated 21 July 2014) and
EC-M-40/DG.2/Add.1 (dated 20 July 2014), the construction of the base monitoring
stations at the four underground structures has been completed, as has the
installation of cables at these sites. The training of the operators by Aquila
Technologies on the installation, operation, and maintenance of the special
monitoring system began on 20 April 2015 at OPCW Headquarters in The Hague
and is expected to continue until 1 May 2015. The Secretariat is in receipt of the
first set of the special monitoring system equipment to be installed in the Syrian
Arab Republic, and is currently concluding the administrative and technical
arrangements with the operators with respect to the aforementioned activities for
which they are being trained. The arrangements include the conditions, such as the
requirement for certain activities to be conducted in the presence of OPCW staff,
and the related time frames (for example, the installation schedule, and so on).
Supplementary resources
12. The total contributions of EUR 50.3 million in the Syria Trust Fund for the
Destruction of Chemical Weapons and the contributors thereto remained unchanged
from the previous report.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
13. A follow-up to the information provided by the Syrian Arab Republic in
December 2014 alleging a number of incidents involving the use of chlorine remains
pending. The Secretariat has responded to the State Party’s further queries
concerning team composition, the terms of reference, and the working methods of
the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM). An FFM team stands ready to travel to Damascus
upon receipt of clearance from the Syrian authorities.
14. With regard to the recent allegations of use of toxic chemicals in Idlib
province, the Director-General has expressed his serious concerns. The FFM is
examining all available information and will be guided in continuing its work by
Council decision EC-M-48/DEC.1 and Security Council resolution 2209 (2015).
Conclusion
15. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will continue to be on the destruction of the eight remaining CWPFs
and on making the special remote monitoring system operational in the four
underground structures. The DAT and the FFM will also continue their work in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

15-06680

5/5
