UNITED NATIONS

GURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of welcome to Ministers for Foreign Affairs of member States of
the Council ,,.,,,,,,,,,,,,,,*,......,..<1..1.................,......

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President .*.,,,,..................*..

1

Adoption of the agenda ,.,,.,....,.**1..*.,........*..*...*............

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S114434) <t *. *. . . <. . . . . * . . *. . . . . . . ..,.,,.*........*.....**.,......

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2267)

SlPV.2267 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Ssrpplcments of the Of$%YdRecords qf the Security Coumil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of rlte Secwity Comcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2267th MEETING
Weld in New York on Tuesday, 21 April 1981, at 6.30 p.m.

--

Pt+ti~itlct?t:Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

behalf of the Council to pay tribute to my predecessor,
Mr. Peter Florin, Permanent Representative of the
German Democratic Republic, who presided over the
Council during the month of March, for the great
diplomatie skill, tact and courtesy with which he
conducted the business of the Council at a11times.

Prcseut: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Provisional

Adoption of the agenda

agenda (S/Agenda/2267)

The agenda was adopted.

1. Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from tbe Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
@/l~W

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)
Thc meetitlg

4. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to inform members of the Council that 1have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Benin, Cuba,
Ethiopia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, 1 propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

was c~alled to order at 6.50 p.m.
Statcment

by the Presideut

1. The PRESIDENT: As this is the first time that
1 have had occasion to preside over a forma1 meeting
of the Council since my country took its place in the
Council on 1January, 1 should like at the outset to say
that 1 am honoured to do SO,especially at the start of
such an important debate.’ As President 1 shall try to
act with hirness and try to promote harmony and
progress in our discussions. In doing SO,1 hope and
believe that 1 cari Count on the co-operation and good
Will of a11the delegations on the Council towards me
and my country,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Be&torri
(Algeria), Mr. de Figuciredo (Atzgola), MI.. Howgctvou
(Betzin), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Gedle-Giorgis
(Ethiopia), Mr. Coumbassa (Gainea), Mr. KrishnarI
(Xndia), Mr. Kamil (Indonesia),
Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. Baba (Nigeria),
Mr, Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Fourie (South Ajrica), Ms. Hameecl (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Akul~~~o-Ahicrtlyo (Togo), Mr. Salim (Utlired Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Vrhovec ( Y~rgoslavia),
Mr. Katnanda wa Kamanda (Zaire),
Mr. Lusaka
(Zambia) and Mr. Mashingaidzc (Zimbabwe) rook the
places reservcd .for thern at the side of the Council
chamber.

Exprcssiou of welcome to Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of member States of the Council

2. The PRESIDENT: 1 should also like at the very
outset of this meeting to acknowledge the presence
at this table of distinguished Ministers for Foreign
Affairs, to whom on behalf of the Council 1 extend
a very warm welcome. They are Mr. Daouda Diallo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of thc
Niger; Mr. Jorge Enrique Illueca, Minister for External
Relations of Panama; and Mr. Albert Picho Owiny,
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.
Expression of thanks to the retiring

5. The PRESIDENT: 1 should also like to inform
members of the Council that 1 have received a lette1
dated 20 April from the President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, which reads as follows:

President

3. Thc PRESIDENT: As this is the fîrst meeting of
the Council for the month of April, 1 should like on
1

10. My delegation would associate itself with the i;
words of gratitude that you quite rightly addressed to :
your predecessor, Mr. Peter Florin, head of the dele- ,
gation of the German Democratic Republic, for the ;
way in which he conducted the business of the Council j
during the month of March.
i
11. My delegation, like the delegations of other members of the Council that belong to the non-aligned
movement, as well as other delegations, considers
that the request which appears in document S/14451
gives rise to certain objections because, as the document states, it relates to the request distributed on
16 April from the President of the so-calfed Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) of Namibia. That is a
political entity, whose juridical personality flows from
an administrative
act by the Government
of South
Africa, which does not have the legal authority to take
decisions of such a nature, obviously relating to *
electoral activities in Namibia.

“1 have the honour to convey to you, on behalf of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the interest
of the Council in participating in the forthcoming
Security Council debate on the question of Namibia.
“The Steering Committee of the United Nations
Council for Namibia has appointed a delegation led
by myself as President of the Council and including
the following Vice-Presidents:
Mr. Mohammed
Bedjaoui, Permanent Representative of A@ria;
Mr. Noel G. Sinclair, Permanent Representative of
Guyana; Mr. Natarajan Krishnan, Permanent Representative of India; Mr. A. CoSkun Kirca, Permanent Representative of Turkey; Mr. Miljan Komatina, Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia.”
6. On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration
of matters on its agenda. In accordance with past
practice, therefore, 1 propose that the Council extend
an invitation pursuant to rule 39 of the rules of procedure to the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the delegation of the Council.

12. That is why we consider that this request is not in i
line with the provisions of rule 39 of the provisional [
rules of procedure nor with the provisions of Council /
resolution 439 (1978), which hold that an entity of this :
kind does not have the valid personality to take part in ;
the debate. Therein lies the objection which leads me
to ask that the request at issue belput to the vote.

At the invitation of the Presidenr,
Mr. Lusaka
(President of rhe Vnited Nations Council for Namibia)
and the other members of the delegation took places
at the Council table.

13. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, 1 should like at the outset, on
behalf of the French delegation, to convey to you our
most sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the lofty position of President of the Security Council
for this month. 1 have had the privilege of knowing you
throughout my career and have appreciated
and ;
admired your abilities as a negotiator, your spirit of
co-operation and your Will to succeed. You have 1
already demonstrated those qualities since taking up
your duties. Al1 our good wishes are with you as you
begin to guide our work in this difficult and major i
debate.

7. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform members of the Council that 1 have received a letter dated
20 April from the representatives of France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America [s/14#51], which reads as
follows:

French):

‘ ‘We have the honour to refer to the request circulated on 16 April from Mr. Peter Kalangula and
the others associated with his request to the President of the Security Council to speak at the forthcoming discussion of the Council concerning the
situation in Namibia. In accordance with the usual
practice of the Council in inviting persons whom it
considers competent for the purpose to supply it
with information, we request that, in the course of the
forthcoming discussion of the Council conceming
the situation in Namibia, an invitation under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure should be
extended to Mr. Peter Kalangula and the others
associated with his request. We would of course
similarly support applications from other persons
competent for the purpose who requested the
opportunity to speak at the meeting in order to supply the Council with information on this matter.”
8.

1s there any objection to this proposal?

9.

Mr.

14. 1 should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Florin, who demonstrated very
remarkable qualities throughout the month when
he was President and guided our work.
15. By letter of 20 April, the delegations of France,
the United Kingdom and the United States asked that ,
favourable action be taken on the request made by
Mr. Kalangulaon 16 April to address the Council during
its consideration of the situation in Namibia.
Our
request is based on rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, by which the Council is authorized to invite
persons whom it considers competent for the purpose
to supply it with information. Mr. Kalangula represents
a Namibian political party and spoke at the pre-implementation meeting held at Geneva last January.

ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, fïrst of a11 1 should like to
’ congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council. You may rest assured that we
shall give you our full co-operation.
Spanish):

16. It seems to us that one of the main functions of
the Organization is to make possible the expression of
2

1 wish to refer specifically to Security Council resolution 439 (1978), paragraph 3 of which reads as follows:

the most diverse opinions within the framework of
United Nations deliberations. The free circulation of
ideas, the comparison of points of view, are means of
negotiation which, to our mind, should not be disregarded. There is no need to recall that my delegation
has always in the past supported the participation of
a representative of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO) in our deliberations on this
matter. The question before us relates to the procedure
of the Council. It is not, however, unrelated to the
substance of the Namibian question. Council resolution 435 (1978) provides for the organization of free
and fair elections in the Territory. We think that the
Council should hear the opinions of those who Will
be participating in those elections.

“Decfcrres those elections and their results nul1
and void and states that no recognition Will be
accorded either by the United Nations or any Member State to any representatives or organ established
by that process”.
23. That was the resolution which declared nul1 and
void the sham elections organized in Namibia, and
which declared nul1 and void any system of representation arising out of those sham elections. The DTA is a
direct product of the sham elections organized by the
occupying Power, and, therefore, the provisions of
paragraph 3 of resolution 439 (1978) apply clearly to
DTA. TO admit DTA here to address the Council on
the question of Namibia would be to go some way
towards revoking that resolution. There is no constitutional or political provision for the Council to revoke
its resolution-a substantive resolution-through a
procedural method.

17. Mr, OTUNNU (Uganda): Since this is the first
time that my delegation has spoken this month, allow
me to express our warm congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your election to the high office of
the presidency of the Council. We are sure that, under
your wise leadership and given your diplomatie skills
and political wisdom, the Council Will discharge its
responsibility wisely and swiftly.

24. For those reasons, my delegation would oppose
the participation of the so-called DTA in the deliberations of the Council when it discussesthe question of
Namibia, because DTA is part and parce1 of the instrument, the tool, of illegal occupation which the
Council and the whole United Nations have been
fighting since 1966, when South Africa’s Mandate
was terminated by the General Assembly [resollc-

18. May 1 also take this opportunity to pay a tribute
to Ambassador Florin, the President of the Council
for the month of March, for the very inspiring and
energetic leadership he gave to the Council.
19. Turning now to the request contained in document S/14451,my delegation must express its astonishment that it has become necessary for the Council to
take a procedural decision on whether or not the entity
known as DTA should participate in the work of the
Council.

tiorr 2145 (XXI)].

Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
1 should like fïrst to add my voice to those of the representatives who have already congratulated you on
your assumption of this extremely important office for
what is, 1 think, the fïrst time. Perhaps 1 could add on
a more persona1note a friendly greeting to a friend and
cousin from across the Irish Sea.
25.

20. It is clear that the situation in Namibia consists
of two clear forces, well recognized by the whole international community. There are, on the one hand, the
forces and the power of occupation-illegal occupation-represented by South Africa and various puppets; and there are, on the other, the forces of selfdetermination and independence represented by the
vast majority of the people of Namibia. There are only
two forces poised in the situation: one represents a
continuous act of illegality and the other represents a
resistance to that illegality.

26. 1 should also extend my congratulations to your
predecessor, the representative of the German Democratic Republic, in nbsentia.
27. Turning now to the matter which we are here
discussing, my delegation added its signature to the
request from Mr. Kalangula of DTA to be allowed to
address the Council in the course of the debate on
which we are now embarking because in our view it
is absolutely clear under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure that he is competent to speak as an
individual, and on behalf of his political party, and to
supply the Council with relevant information on the
situation in Namibia. There is no doubt, in our view,
that rule 39 applies, fair and square, to his case.

21. The United Nations, for its part, has pronounced
on the illegality of the continued occupation of Namibia. That pronouncement was reinforced by an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice’
and has been reinforced also by resolutions of the
Security Council and of the General Assembly.
22. It would therefore be extremely odd for the Council, the highest organ of the United Nations, to begin
now to give some semblance of recognition to the
elements which constitute the forces that are illegally
occupying the Territory of Namibia. Indeed, it would
be contrary to the clear decision of the Council. And

28. Resolution 435 (1978), which endorses the five
Western States’ settlement proposa1 ES/12636 of
10 Aprif 19781, calls for free and fair elections in Namibia under United Nations supervision and control.
It is therefore fully in accordance with the spirit of that
3

resolution that a11Namibian political parties, without
distinction, should be granted equal treatment by the
Council. As we made clear in our letter to you, we
would support the application of any of the Namibian
political parties which sought to speak at meetings of
the Council. It seemsto us that simple justice demands
a fair hearing for a11interested parties.

35. Therefore, the question, it seems to us, is whether
the members of the Council should stifle in this arena
the expression of DTA’s opinion merely because the
majority of the Council expects to disagree with that
opinion, 1s the majority of the Council ever justified in
refusing even to listen to the arguments of a group
whom some of its members desire to have heard?
We think not. We think further that the stakes here are
very high. By their actions on such a fundamental
matter of principle-and the principles which are
involved seem to me to be the most fundamental:
fairness, democratic spirit, even-handedness-the
United Nations and the Security Council define themselves. The Council damages its capacity to act as a
forum, as a peace-maker, as an impartial mediator
that cari be trusted to treat a11parties fairly.

29. Resolution 439 (1978), to which reference was
made by the Minister for External Relations of Panama
and then by the representative of Uganda, who quoted
from that resolution, is not in our view applicable to this
case, since Mr. Kalangula, in his request to the Presiderit, did not claim to speak as a representative of,
or on behalf of, an organ established by the process
which that resolution declared to be nul1 and void.
He asked merely to speak as a representative of a
political party, and in our view he should be accorded
that right.

36. If the Council were to deny DTA the right even to
be heard, then the Council would, it seems to me,
damageprecisely those principles on which the United
Nations itself is based: those principles of reason,
discussion, representation. It is as easy to damage these
principles of reason, discussion, representation as
it is to silence dissent.

30. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK (United States of America): I too, Mr. President, should like to begin by adding
our voice to those of other representatives who have
congratulated you on your accessionto the presidency
of the Council. Even more. I should like to congratulate us, this body, for having such an indefatigable,
imaginative and altogether excellent President.

37. 1 hope the members of the Council Will consider
very carefully before they vote which course-listening to DTA or not listening to DTA-will be most
31. I regret that Ambassador Florin is not here SO consistent with the principles of the United Nations
that 1 could thank him personally for his marvellous
and the peace and independence of Namibia.
performance as our President last month. 1 do not
pretend to be an expert on these matters, but 1 must 38. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Sosay that he seemed to me an exemplary President.
cialist Republics) (interpretation
from
Russian):
Mr. President, 1 do not know across which waters
32. Turning now to the matter before us. 1 should’ 1should welcome you-perhaps the Baltic or the North
like to emphasize that the United States believes it a Sea. In any case, the Soviet delegation joins other
very important matter of principle that ail individuals
delegations in the congratulations addressed to you
with relevant information to impart to the Council
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
should be permitted to speak under rule 39 of the for this month. We are sure that under your guidance
provisional rules of procedure.
the Security Council Will make a positive contribution
towards accomplishing the tasks facing it. You cari
33. We believe that there are two important issues Count on the full co-operation of the delegation of the
here. One is whether the United Nations, through the Soviet Union.
Council, is and should be willing to listen to a party to
any important question before it, assuming that an 39. We should like also to associateourselves with the
application has been made in accordance with the rules words of gratitude that have been expressed to the
of the body , The second is whether it matters whether
representative of the German Democratic Republic,
the United Nations-and the Council through which
Ambassador Florin, who was SO successful in disit acts-is willing to listen to any such group.
charging his duties as President of the Council last
month.
34. It seems to us that no one here tonight requests
of the Council that it should agree to agree with the 40. We should like also to welcome the large number
analysis or the position of DTA; no one asks that of Ministers for Foreign Affairs who have corne here
anyone in the Council support the positions of, or the for the Council’s consideration of the question of Naarguments which Will be made by, the representatives
mibia. Their presence shows the importance that the
of DTA. We ask merely that the Council hear the repre- international community accords to the question now
sentatives of this group of Namibians. We do not before the Council. We are sure that their participapurport to know how many Namibians support this tion in the Council’s work Will have a positive influence
party or any other party. We Will not know the answer on resolving the Namibian issue.
to that question unless, or until, free elections are held
41. The Soviet delegation would like to support the
in’that country-if, indeed, they cari ever be arranged.
representatives of African and other States who have
We only know that some Namibians support this party.
4

spoken out against the request contained in document
S/14451, which would allow certain persons to participate in the Council’s debate on the question of Namibis. As is weli known, in its resolution 439 (I978), the
Council condemned the decision of the Government
of South Africa ta proceed with elections in the Territory in violation of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435
(1978). It declnred “those elections and their results
nul1 and void” and stated that “no recognition Will
be accorded either by the United Nations or any Member States to any representatives or organ established
by that process”.

48. 1turn now to the matter before us. MY delegation
has voted in favour of an invitation to DTA because it
is the view of this delegation that the Security Council,
whose responsibility is to seek peaceful and practical
solutions to disputes, should hear the range of views
of those substantially concerned, and that decisions
to invite such persans should be dealt with purely as
procedural matters. From this point of view, despite
Japan’s strong opposition to the policies of apartheid
and the practice of minority rule, my delegation bas
supported, as a purely procedural matter, an invitation
to DTA. My delegation considers that such an invitation would have also been useful in demonstrating that
accusations of United Nations partiality are unfounded.

Since the persons referred to in the letter in
document S/I4451 are precisely persons whose credentials were directly refuted in resolution 439 (1978),
allowing them to participate in the Council’s deliberations on Namibia would be tantamount to violating
the Council’s own decisions, and in particular resolution 439 ( 1978).

42.

49. Mr. ZACHMANN (German Democratic Republic): Mr, President, first of all, permit me to congratulate you on your assuming the office of President
of the Council for the month of April. We wish you
successin the performance of your responsible tasks.
1 thank you and our colleagues for the kind words
addressed to Ambassador Florin, who very soon Will
return to New York,

43. The delegation of the Soviet Union regards this
asa matter of principle and Will vote against the request
contained in document S/14451,
44. The PRESIDENT: Since no other representative
wishes to speak, it seems to me that the position is
this: The Council has before it a proposa1 contained in
document S/14451, submitted by the delegations of
France, the United Kingdom and the United States;
Ob*jectionhas been made to that proposal, 1 shall therefore ask the Council to proceed to a vote on that proposai.

50. My delegation, for well-known reasons, voted
against the request made in document S114451.The
so-called Democratic Turnhalle Alliance does not in
any way represent the people of Namibia, The Organization of African Unity, the non-aligned movement
and the General Assembly have emphatically and in
strong terms confirmed this assessment-the Assembly only a few months ago, during its thirty-fifth
session.

III firrlolrr: France, Ireland, Japan, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America

51. Furthermore, the request contained in document
S/14451 contradicts resolution 439 (1978), as already
mentioned by the Minister for External Relations of
Panama and the representative of Uganda. Consequently, the question of the participation of DTA was,
from the very outset, pointless.

Agaimt:
China, German Democratic Republic,
Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Tunisia, Uganda,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

52. Mr. de PINI&S (Spain) (interpretation J-m
Spcrnish): 1 wish to join the preceding speakers in congratulating you, Mr, President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and to add that in the discharge of your responsibilities you Will, of course,
always have our co-operation.

45. The PRESIDENT: 1shall now cal1on those representatives who wish to explain their vote.

53. May 1also extend our cordial greetings to Ambassador Florin and congratulate him on the way in which
he presided over the Council during the month of
March .

46. Mr, NISIBORI (Japan): First of all, 1 should like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, the representative
of an island country like mine, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. 1 am,
sure that under your able guidance the Council Will be
successful in meeting the serious challenges confronting it,

54. My delegation voted in favour of the request contained in document S/ 14451,asit Will also vote in faveur
of the request contained in document SJi4452. It bas
done SO,and Will do SOfollowing a tradition and under
rule 39 of the rules of procedure. This has no more
significance than that which the rule attributes to the
presence of such persons in this Council. We also wish
to receive as much information as possible,

47, I should like also to extend our thanks to our
colleague Ambassador Florin of the German Democratic Republic for the ski11and wisdom with which he
conducted the work of the Council last month.
5

61. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretation
fiom
French): Speaking on behalf of the three delegations
which sianed the letter circulated under the symbol
S/l445l,?
wish to note that the decisions just taken
on two requests to speak in the Council have not
achieved the same result. One cari only express surprise at this and wonder whether such a result does not
reflect regrettable discrimination
between various
parties which are or should be participants in the settlement of the Namibian question. Our countries were in
favour of the two requests to speak submitted under
rule 39 of our provisional rules of procedure. Rest
assured that we did SOout of respect for custom, a sense
of equity and the desire for broad information, which
have traditionally characterized the Council’s deliberations.

55. Of course, we are familiar with the role of each
of these organizations, and in no way do we equate
thern as to their representation, as we have shown on
many occasions in the past when the question of
Namibia was being considered.
56. The PRESIDENT:
As no other delegation wishes
to explain its vote, 1 should now like, as representative
of IRELAND,
to explain our vote on the proposa1 to
invite Mr. Kalangula and others, as contained in document 5/14451.
57. While we did not ourselves put forward that proposa], we voted in favour of it. We did SOas a matter of
principle, and not because we wished to single out any
particular group or to confer on it any particular status.
We would also have voted in favour of other, similar
invitations had such been proposed, as we consider
that the Council should not be restrictive in its application of rule 39 of its rules of procedure in discussing an
issue such as that before us. 1 want, however, to make
quite clear our view, which we believe to be in accordance with the Council’s past practice, that, when the
Council decides to give a hearing to an individual under
rule 39, the Council makes no judgement as to the
representative nature of any body to which the individual belongs.

The Council is meeting today
62. The PRESIDENT:
in response to a request from the representative of
Uganda, on behalf of the Group of African States at
the United Nations, in a letter addressed to the President of the Security Council [S/14434].
63. Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/l4423, which contains the text
of a note by the Secretary-General dated 1 April
drawing the Council’s attention to General Assembly
resolutions 35/227 A, 1 and J, concerning the question
of Namibia, and document S114333, which contains the
text of a further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of resolutions 435 (1978)
and 439 (1978).

58. For our part, it should be clear that our vote
does not imply that we regard the so-called Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance as representative of Namibia, or
give it recognition in the sense of paragraph 3 of resolution 439 (1978). 1 want to state quite clearly that Ireland
remains strongly committed to the full and rapid
implementation of resolution 435 (1978), which would
enable the people of Namibia to determine their own
future, in free and fair elections under the supervision
and control of the United Nations.

64. Mr. OWINY (Uganda): It gives me great pleasure, Mr. President, to convey to you, on behalf of the
Uganda delegation, our warm congratula.tions on your
assumption of the high office of President of this
Council. Your persona1 commitment to the pursuit of
peace and justice, your diplomatie and negotiating
skills, as well as the well-known contribution of your
country to the cause of international peace and security, a11 give us great confidence that under your
presidency the Council Will discharge its responsibilities with wisdom and boldness.

59. That is the end of my explanation of vote, and 1
now resume my function of PRESIDENT
of the
Council.
50. 1 should like to inform members of the Council
:hat 1 have received a letter, dated 20 April, from the
representatives of the Niger, Tunisia and Uganda
[S/14452], which reads as follows:

65. 1 wish also to take this opportunity to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, Ambassador Florin of the German
Democratic Republic, for the very inspiring and
dedicated leadership he gave the Council during the
month of March. It was an honour and a pleasure for
my delegation to work under his leadership in the
Council.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that the Council
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Peter Mueshihange,
Secretary for Foreign Relations of the South West
Africa People’s Organization, during the course of
the Council’s consideration of the item ‘The situation
in Namibia’.”

66. My delegation requested this meeting of the Council on behalf of the Group of African States in order
to consider the question of Namibia in the light of South
Africa’s continued refusa1 to implement
various
Security Council resolutions on Namibia:

May 1 take it that there is no objection to this request?

67. It was here at the United Nations last year that
we celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Peter Mueshihange took a place at the Council table.
6

Countries <III~PeopIe~. We noted then with satisfaction
that a large number of colonial peoples had achieved
independence since the adoption of resolution 1514
(XV> by the General Assembly in 1960. But conspicuously missing from this otherwise proud list was the
people of Numibia, This fact remains a11the more
disturbing and ironie since Namibia, as no other Territory, has been the unique responsibility of the United
Nations.
68. The history of Namibia is the history of a continual betrayal of trust. It is a bitter history of a people
struggling und waiting; a people struggling against the
oppression of foreign occupation and waiting for the
international community ta uct and to restore their
rights,
69, The process of occupation in Namibia has continued uninterrupted for close to 100 years now, beginning with the original colonization by imperial
Gcrmany in 1884. With the defeat of Germany in the
First World Wnr rose the hupes of the people of Namibia for a speedy restoration of their rights. But these
hopes soon came tumbling down when the League of
Nations decided under its Mandates System to replace German colonial occupation by the even more
pernicious occupation by rucist South Africa,
70, It is no wonder that, instead of the so-called
system of tutelage provided for in Article 22 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations, South Africa proceeded to organizt: a programme of systematic oppression in Namibin. Instead of applying the principle of
Article 22 of the Covenant, which stated that “the wellbeing and rlevelopment of such peoplcs form a sacred
trust of civilisation”, South Africa instituted a system
for the ruthless exploitation of the human and natural
resources of Nnmibia. In short, wnder the League of
Nations the people of Namibia witnessed the betrayal
of a trust.
71. With the demise of the League of Nations and the
birth of thc United Nations, the people of Namibia
reposed new hapcs in the new Qrganization. Soon these
hopes too Came tumbling down. South Africa, though
a signatory to the Charter of the United Nations,
refuscd to place Namibia under the new Trusteeship
System as provided under Chapter XIX oEthe Charter,
Moreover, it repudiated ail its obligations under the
old ‘Mandates System.
72, After all attempts to persuade South Africa to
comply with the provisions of Chapters XT and XII of
the Charter had failed, thc General Assembly finally
decided, in resolution 2145 (XXI), to terminate South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. In the same resolution the General Assembly decided to place Nakibia
under the direct and sole responsibility of the United
Nations. From that time, South Africa’s occupation,
which bas continued in fact, has been an act of illegality.

73. Upon the request of the Security CounC% the
International Court of Justice issued an advisory
opinion on Namibia’ on 21 June 1971, in which it held
that South Africa’s Mandate had been validly terminated by the General Assembly and that %Mh
Africa’s continued occupation of Namibia was therefore illegal, Because of that illegality, the Court cmcluded that South Africa was under obligation to withdraw immediately from Namibia, Lt Will be recakd that
the decision of the Court was upheld by the Security
Council in resolution 301(197 1). That position bas been
reaffîrmed in all subsequent resolutions of the Council
concerning Namibia,
74. That, then, is the background to the illegality
about which we are holding deliberations today. NOW,
what has been the response of the Council SOfar to
this act of illegality? Regrettably, thus far the response
of the Council-which has came in phases-has been
tentative and indecisive, Broadly speaking, the Council has responded in three phases to South Africa’s
illegality.
75, In the first phase, which began with resolution
264 (1969) in March 1969,the Council repeatedly called
on South Africa to withdraw from Namibia. During
that phase the Council also addressed repeated appeals
to a11States having dealings with South Africa to
refrain from any contacts which might imply recognition of the authority of South Africa over Namibia,
Because South Africa would not co-operate, those
attempts of the first phase yielded no results whatsoever.
76. The second phase of response, which might be
called the period of dialtigue, began in earnest in
February 1972during the Council’s meetings in Addis
Ababa [1627th ta 1639th mctings].
In its resoïutian
309 (19721,the Council charged the Secretary-General
with the task of initiating contacts with a11parties concerned, including South Africa, in order ta çxpedite
the processof independencc for Namibia. Those efforts
at dialogue had to be abandoned in 1973because South
Africa refused to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral.
77. After a long impasse, in April 1978 the Council
began a third phase of response, which might be çalkd
the period of resumed dialogue. This time the CounciI
had before it the settlement proposa1 of the five Western members of the Security Council /S/12636], That
proposa1 eventually culminated in resolution 435
(1978) and the United Nations plan of action for the
independence of Namibia, which provides for a ceasefire, United Nations-supervised elections and the
establishment of a United Nations Transition Assistance Group in Namibia.
78. Although the Pretoria régime had accepted the
Western States plan before, South Africa bas sjnce
employed every trick and decçption in the book to
wreck that plan and prevent the implementation of

resolution 435 (1978). As is now weil known, this phase
of resumed dialogue finally ended last January in the
debacle at Geneva.

84. The fohowing are the specifïc elements Of breach
of international peace and security created by South
Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia.

79. The Secretary-General’s report on the Geneva
talks [SI143331 was presented to the Council on
30 January 1981.

presence in Namibia,

85. First, there is South Africa’s massive military
which is the means by which
it ensures the forcible occupation of the Territory.

84. Secondly, South Africa continues to use the
Territory of Namibia as a springboard for launching
constant armed attacks against the neighbouring
countries. The Council is familiar with these repeated
acts of aggression: in July 1976 the Council adopted
resolution 393 (1976), following South Africa’s aggression against Zambia; and in May 1978 the Council
adopted resolution 428 (1978), following a massive
South African attack on the Angolan town of Cassinga.
There have been many other acts of aggression against
Angola, Botswana and Zambia which have not been
formally considered by the Council. Indeed, over the
Iast few months we bave witnessed an escalation of
these attacks. What South Africa has launched from the
Territory of Namibia is nothing short of a systematic
and comprehensive programme of violent destabilization of the entire region of southern Mica.

80. In spite of SWAPO’s declared willingness to sign
a cesse-fire agreement and submit to United Nationssupervised elections, South Africa was interested only
in using the Geneva talks as a propaganda platform,
81. Resolution 435 (1978) was a Western initiative.
We accepted it reluctantly, but in good faith, on the
understanding that the fïve Western Powers for their
part would exert pressure on South Africa to comply
with the United Nations plan. The lesson of Geneva,
to our deep regret, is that the five Western Powers have
failed to apply pressure on South Africa. Indeed, South
Africa has been strengthened in its arrogance and
intransigence by public words of comfort and support
which have recently been flowing in favour of South
Africa from a prominent member of the group of five
Western Powers.

87. Thirdly, South Africa has organized an elaborate
machinery of repression, of which execution, torture,
detention and forced labour are common features. The
people of Namibia are naturally resisting the illegal
occupation. The ansuing conflict between the Namibian patriots, on the one hand, and the occupying
Power, on the other, has now reached a very dangerous
level indeed. The Council, beginning with its resolution 269 (1969), has long recognized the legitimacy of
the struggle of the Namibian patriots against South
African occupation. The conflict cannot therefore
corne to an end until the complete withdrawal of South
Africa from Namibia.

82. It is almost 15 years since the General Assembly
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia
[resolurian 214.5 (X.XZl]; still, the Security Council has
not succeeded in bringing to an end this illegal occupation. The Council cannot allow this state of affairs to
continue indefïnitely. In this regard, the International
Court of Justice, in paragraph 117 of its opinion of
21 June 1971, made the following categorical determination:
“A binding determination made by a competent
organ of the United Nations to the effect that a situation is illegal cannot remain without consequence.
Once the Court is faced with such a situation, it
would be failing in the discharge of its judicial functions if it did not declare that there is an obligation,
especially upon Members of the United Nations, to
bring that situation to an end.“’

88. Fourthly, in spite of the provisions of the Charter
and various resolutions of the Security Council and of
the General Assembly, South Africa has persisted in its
design to dismember the Territory of Namibia through
the purported annexation of Walvis Bay.

That decision entails a legal consequence-namely,
that of putting an end to an illegal situation.

89. It is not often that the Council is faced with a
situation where the illegality of one State gives rise to
consequences that exhaust a11 three categories of
Article 39 of the Charter, namely, threat to the peace,
breach of the peace and act of aggression. In view of
the fact that South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of Namibia has created a grave situation comprising the specific elements of a serious threat to international peace, continued breach of the peace and
constant acts of aggression, a11within the meaning of
Article 39; and also in view of the fact that the various
measures SO far employed by the Council over many
years bave failed, my delegation submits that the
Council is now under a clear obligation to apply Article 41 of the Charter and impose comprehensive
mandatorysanctions against South Africa. In SO doing,

83. The Council has SO far failed to put an end to
South Africa’s act of illegality because it has continually adopted lukewarm and indecisive measures.
Yet South Afiica’s continued occupation of Namibia
is no ordinary act of illegality. This particular act of
illegality has given rise to consequences of the gravest
magnitude. The situation has been characterized by a
serious threat to international peace and constant acts
of aggression, a11of which fa11 within the purview of
Article 39 of the Charter. These developments have
now combined to constitute a clear breach of international peace and security within the meaning of
Article 39 of the Charter of the United Nations.
8

the Council not only would be fulfilling its responsibility under the Charter but would also be acting in
accordance with its own precedent. 1 refer to resolution 232 (1966), concerning Southern Rhodesia, in
which the Council, in an attempt to end that other act
of illegality, invoked Articles 39 and 41 and imposed
comprehensive economic sanctions against Smith’s
régime.

for the month of April, you have conducted the affairs
of this august body. Your country, the Republic of
Ireland, is undoubtedly one of the staunchest supporters of the United Nations system and the contribution of that systemto making our world a safer place.
We are therefore fortified and encouraged that the
question of Namibia is being considered at this juncture
in the Council under your presidency.

90. The situation in Southern Rhodesia in 1966 no
doubt constituted a threat to international peace. But
the situation in Namibia in 1981not only constitutes a
much graver threat to the peace but has already resulted in nctual breaches of the peace and continuous
acts of aggression, If the Council could invoke Articles 39 and 41 of the Charter in 1966against Rhodesia,
that is the least it cari do in the much graver situation
existing in Namibia today.

96. Please allow me also to express appreciation to
your predecessor in office, Mr. Peter Florin of the
German Democratic Republic, for the commendable
manner in which he conducted the affairs of the Council
during the month of March.

91. Such action by the Council would accord with
the unequivocal verdict of the overwhelming mtiority
of the international community reflected in the resolution adopted by the co-ordinating Committee for the
Liberation of Africa of the Organization of African
Unity, at its meeting at Arusha from 19 to 23 January;
the Declaration adopted by the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign A&irs of the Non-Aligned countries, held
at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February;z the resolution
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity nt its meeting held at Addis Ababa
from 23 February to 1 March [S/14390, unnex]; the programme of action adopted by the Co-ordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Countries at its extraordinary
ministerial meeting at Algiers last week [S/lr(rcSB,
u,urcs]: and the relevant resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, a11of which
called on the Security Council to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa,
92, The Council cannot procrastinate any more.
The situation is clear in all its legal and political aspects.
1 submit chat the Council must act now and apply the
full scope of Article 41 of the Charter against South
Africa for ils continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
which has given rise to a grave threat to international
peace, breaches of the peace and constant acts of
aggression.

97. Today, as the situation in southern Africa becornes even more explosive and more menacing to
international peace and security, as the prospect of a
racial war of indefïnite duration and unforeseeable
magnitude unfolds in southern Africa as a direct consequence of South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia and its use of that Territory as a springboard
for launching armed attacks against the neighbouring
territories of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and
Zambia, we cal1on the Council, as the primary guardian
of international peace and security, and in the name of
the overwhelming majority of mankind, to assume its
responsibility in that part of the world and to restore
peace and confidence in that area,
98. It is pertinent to recall at this juncture that it was
early in 1968-some 20 years after the inception of the
dispute over South Africa’s relationship with the
Territory of Namibia-that the Council was formally
seizedof the question of Namibia. This followed in the
wake of the infamous terrorism tria1 of the Stotc~
v~‘rsus Tuhacleleni crrrcl0thcr.sin 1967.In its resolution
245 (1968), adopted unanimously, the Council then
took note of and endorsed General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), by which the General Assembly had
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory
of South West Africa,
99. Our purpose in coming to the Council at this time
is, without much ado, to ask the Council in the name of
peace, in the name of international security and in the
name of world public opinion, and, indeed, in the name
of the Namibian people, to implement the appropriate
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations against South Africa in order to suppress and
prevent further breaches of international peace and
security and acts of aggression by that country.

93. At a later stage the African Group Will submit
draft resolutions tu that effect.
94. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, Mr. Abdulai
Conteh, 1 welcome him on my own behalf and on behalf of my fellow members of the Council. 1 invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
a statement.

100. We shall seek to establish here that South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia not only is a
threat to international peace and security but has also
led to a deterioration of international peace and security in the area, portending dire consequences not only
for the area but for global peace as well. Secondly, we
shall seek to establish that Namibia is without doubt
a United Nations responsibility. Thirdly, it Will also
be established that a11peaceful efforts to persuade

95. Mr, CONTEH (Sierra Leone): Mr. President,
before 1 proceed please allow me to register our apPreciation and gratitude for the exemplary manner
in which, in your capacity as President of the Council
9

that it was under an obligation to withdraw its administration therefrom immediately. *

South Africa to evacuate the Territory of Namibia
have met with outright resistance and intransigence.
Fourthly, it Will be established that South Africa’s
iIIegaI occupation of Namibia and its use of that Territory for cross-border raids against neighbouring
States in the area is a direct breach of peace and security and an act of aggression as understood and provided for under Article 39of the Charter of the Organization.

106. From a11this it is clear that South Africa has no
place, either in morality or in law, in the Territory.
Today, therefore, Namibia is a United Nations responsibility. South Africa’s military occupation of the
Territory by force is therefore illegal and a violation
of the Charter, of the opinion of the International Court
of Justice, of innumerable resolutions of both the
General Assemblyand the Security Council and indeed
of international law. South Africa’s violation of the
territorial integrity and denial of the self-determination
of the Namibian people are equally in violation of the
Charter and equally condemnable.

101. We shah also seek to establish that it is the
undoubted responsibility of the Council to assumeits
obligation under the Charter to impose effective
mandatory and comprehensivesanctionsto meet these
manifest and clear violations of the Charter by South
Africa.

107. South Africa’s use of military force against the
Namibian people and, in particular, against the liberation movement, SWAPO, is tantamount to an act of
war against a foreign territory and its inhabitants.

102, The question of the status of the League of Nations Mandated Territory of South West Africa and of
the policies pursued by South Africa, the then mandatory Power, has been before the United Nations in
one or the other of its organs since its inception and
has plagued the Organization from its birth. On 14December 1946if a reminder is necessary-the General
Assembly considered South Africa’s request to incorporate the Territory of then South West Africa into the
then Union of South Africa as one of its provinces.
The General Assembly categorically rejected that
request, and instead, in its resolution 65 (1) affrmed
inter alia that “the mandated Territory of South West
Africa be placed under the international trusteeship
system”.

108. Notwithstanding South Africa’s defiance of the
United Nations and in spite of its illegal occupation of
Namibia, it was believed that a political solution was
feasible and achievable in the struggle for the accession of the Namibian people to its inalienable rights of
self-determination and independence. It was, in our
view, no doubt this belief in a peaceful political solution and the negotiating processthat must have inspired
the contact group of fïve Western countries, namely,
Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the
United Kingdom and the United States, to embark on
an arduous, tortuous and-as it has proved in the
event-thankless bargaining processthat culminated in
Security Council resolution 435(1978). That resolution
contained the plan for Namibia’s accession to independence. It was in itself, in our view, an act of faith
and we accepted it as such. That resolution called for
a United Nations civilian and military operation in
Namibia designedto pave the way for elections leading
to the Territory’s accessionto independence.

103. Since then the historical and political development of the Territory has run its course not only
through the political organs of the United Nations but
through its judicial organ as well, and in the course of
time the latter body, the International Court of Justice,
has rendered no less than six judgments on the status
of the Territory and South Africa’s presence therein.
104. In October 1966, because of gross violation of
the rights of the Namibian people owing to South
Africa’s intransigence and colonial designs on the
Territory, and that country’s denial and impeding of the
people’s right to self-determination, the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa over
the Territory and demanded its complete and unconditional withdrawal therefrom [resofution 2f45 (Xx2)].

109. Severally and collectively within the Organization of African Unity (OAU), we had our reservations
and misgivings about resolution 435 (1978). For, in our
view, the question of Namibia’s independence was one
of principle, subject to no equivocation or compromise,,‘,
In the end, the entirety of the membership of the OAIJ
came to accept resolution 435 (1978) and indeed pei,;
suaded SWAPO to go along with it, for in that resolu:,
tion was envisaged the blueprint for Namibia’s actes- f,
sion to independence.
t
110. In return for that act of faith, South Africa ic
repaid not only the OAU and SWAPO but also members of the contact group of five Western States with
subterfuge, vacillation and prevarication, as evidenced
by its clallousand premeditated scuttling of the recent
pre-implementation talks in Geneva with pious charges
of partiality.

105. The United Nations then assumed direct responsibility for the Territory by placing it under the
jurisdiction of the United Nations Council for South
West Africa, established by the General Assembly in
1967 [resdrrtion 2248 (S-V)] as the sole legal Administering Authotity of Namibia, and in 1970, in its resolution 276 (1970), the Security Council affïrmed that
“the continued presence of the South African authorities in Namibia is illegal”. In June 1971,in paragraph
133 of its advisory opinion, the judicial organ of the
United Nations system stated clearly that South
Africa’s continued presencein Namibia was illegai and

111. It is, in our view, inadmissible and it lies il1 in the
mouth of South Africa to make chargesof paeiality
on
10

the question of Namibia. TO hear South Africa charge
the United Nations and its system, and indeed our
indefatigable Secretary-General, with parnality sounds
like the devil accusing GO~ of partiality after the devil
has committed a manifest wrong.

nations are submitting to the Council today that, in the
face of a11these illegalities, it is incumbent on the
Council to put on its mantle of responsibility and act
decisively in this matter.
118. It was inevitable that South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia, its betrayal of the sacred trust
to promote the national and moral well-being of the
Namibian people, its introduction of the abominable
system of qmtheid in the Territory, its ruthless SUPpression of the inhabitants in the Tesritory and its
denial of their right to self-determination, were bound
to invoke the legitimate political and military response
of the Namibian people in the form of resistance to
win their national liberation, which endeavour is today
channelled through SWAPO.

112. At Geneva this year South Africa demonstrated
beyond any scintilla of doubt that for it negotiations are
not a means to achieving Namibia’s independence.
By its actions at Geneva, South Africa has implacably
set its face against negotiations, against reason, against
good sense, and tlaunted its defiance in the face of the
world body to do what it Will. This is the challenge and
one of the reasons we are here in the Council today,
Are we going to allow this one single nation, which is
a veritable pariah in the community of nations, to
challenge our collective and singular Will and get
away with it’?
113. Of course there are CC~Itomit~em arguments
which some here in the Council are disposed to invoke
for not going along with the imposition of measures
against South Africx under Chapter VII of the Charter,

119. It is for a11those reasons and more that the OAU
has over the years given untlinching and unwavering
support to SWAPO as the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, a position that has
been endorsed and echoed in resolutions of the various
organs of the United Nations.

114. TO those we say the issue is clear. Do we want
to observe and uphold international peace and security,
on which, at the end of the day, collectively and severally, our welfare depends? Or do we want, for paltry,
short-sighted, short-term and immediate interests, to
shelter and allow South Africa to live undisturbed in its
cocoon of obduracy and defiance? Surely in the latter
course lies disaster, not only for South Africaand those
who may be disposed to side with it, but for a11of us.

120, As a response to the valiant struggle being waged
by the Namibian people for their independence, South
Africa, with the futile and base aim of consolidating
its illegal occupation of the Territory, has unleashed a
reign of terror of genocidal proportions against the
Namibian people, and has converted Namibia into a
military armed camp with an occupation force of more
than 75,000 men under arms.

115. In the face of sustained and unremitting efforts
by the United Nations and indeed by the international
community at large to bring about a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question, South Africa has time
and again demonstrated its callous disregard, its unreasonable disregard for the decisions of the Organization
and for international law, and it persists in its illegal
occupation of Namibia.

121. South Africa, whether for propaganda or other
reasons, has asserted that in the last two years it has
killed 3,343 freedom fighters belonging to SWAPO.
The strategy behind this is clear: it is aimed at decimating the population of the Territory. For, since the
South African army is raised and nurtured on racism,
what is relevant for them is the colour of the person,
and there is no way of determining whether those killed
were SWAPO freedom fighters or peaceful and defenceless inhabitants who happened to be black,

116, Instead of engaging in a peaceful search for a
solution of the problem, South Africa has a11this while
been engaged in activities aimed at the dismemberment
of the Territory, destroying its national and territorial
integrity, upsetting its natural demographic composition, annexing Walvis Bay, laying claim to sovereignty
over several islands which constitute an integral part of
Namibian territory, and systematically and ruthlessly
exploiting the natural resources of the Territory, in
clear and manifest violation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice earlier referred to and Decree
No.1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of
Namibia,” enacted on 27 September 1974by the United
Nations Council for Namibia.

122. South Africa-in a new imperialist aggressive
strategy aimed at consolidating its hold over Namibia
and intimidating the neighbouring African States
which, because of geographical propinquity and
humanitarian considerations, have provided refuge to
thousands of Namibian women, old people and children who have fled, and continue to flee, South Africa’s
military terrer in Namibia-has converted that Territory into a springboard from which it carries out
incessant armed attacks and repeated aggression
against Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. Those repeated acts of aggression are not only
in clear and manifest violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of those States, but are also in clear
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of
principles of international law which govern the
conduct of relations between the States of the world.

117. The foregoing list is not exhaustive but it underpins the foundation of the petition the African Group,
and indeed a11peace-loving members of the COmitYof
11

123. In view of a11those facts, we solemnly cal1 upon
the Security Council to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa as provided for
in Chapter VII of the Charter, and also including an oil
embargo, in order to ensure South Africa’s immediate
compliance with the resolutions and decisions of this
body relating to Namibia.
124. Our cal1 is hallowed in the Charter and is based
on ourjurisprudence and practice. It is also a reaffirmation of our faith in the Organization. We cannot afford
to abandon the Namibian people. We are mindful of the
argument of those who say that comprehensive mandatory sanctions Will cause suffering to the innocent.
That is inevitable. TO them we say: the sooner the
better, in order not to prolong the agony. More particularly, the principle involved is such that no price is too
high to pay.

Council and by the General Assembly, is undoubtedly
not only a violation of Namibia’s territorial integrity,
but a clear and uncontestable act of aggression.
129, TO compound and exacerbate the situation,
South Africa’s use of the Territory of Namibia to
launch cross-border raids against the sovereign independent States contiguous to the area is, we submit,
a further clear and manifest breach of international
peace and an inexcusable act of aggression.
130. We corne to the Council today as supplicants.
We supplicate for the integrity of the United Nations.
For in a11the Organization’s 35 years of existence no
single State has been SOcontemptuous, SOdefiant, SO
dismissive of the Organization as South Africa. We
supplicate for confidence in the international process
and system, for if the Council fails today to put on its
mantle of responsibility and adopt the appropriate
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, it Will
by this failure deal a body blow to global confidence in
the international process and system. Finally, we supplicate for international peace and security, for South
Africa’s continued presence and policies in Namibia
disturb international peace and security in a material
way.

125. We are a11aware of the unilateral imposition of
sanctions in some cases, political, military and economic boycotts by one State or group of States against
another, in order to achieve a political objective, even
though the innocent have suffered from such actions,
1s it therefore too much to ask that the international
community, under the aegis of the Security Council,
which has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, impose sanctions
on an errant and recidivist member of the community
of nations? In recent practice, the Council had the
duty to order comprehensive mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter against an entity
that not only was defiant of the decisions of the international community, but also constituted a threat to
international peace and security . Those principles, we
submit, are the same in the case of the Namibian question in relation ta South Africa; only in this case the
enormity of the problem is compounded by South
Africa’s unacceptable and inadmissible practices,
underpinned by its intransigence.

131. In the name of our common humanity, in the
name of the integrity of the United Nations and the
upholding of peace and justice, we beseech that this
supplication be answered afftrmatively by the Council.
132. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Minister for External Relations of Cuba, Mr. Isidoro
Malmierca. 1 invite him ta take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement,
133. Mr. MALMIERCA (Cuba) (interpretntion fiom
For 15 years now, our representatives and
those of other Member States have heard directly
from the representatives of the United States Government and its partners in exploitation of the black people
of South Africa and Namibia torrents of words, of
mendacious arguments and twisted interpretations
aimed at impeding the implementation of decisions
adopted since 1966 by the General Assembly and by
the Security Council itself, which on many occasions
have established that the racist authorities of Pretoria
must cesse their illegal occupation of that Territory and
embark upon a process which would allow Namibia to
take its place in the concert of independent, sovereign
nations.

Spanish);

126. For a11those reasons and more we beseech the
Council to rise to the sacred responsibility conferred
upon it by the generality of the membership of the
United Nations: that it shall have primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security.
127. Without doubt, the facts and the evidence disclose that over the years South Africa’s policies and
practices with relation to the Territory of Namibia, its
continuous and callous disregard of the decisions and
opinions of both the politiçal and the judicial organs of
the United Nations constitute not merely a threat to the
peace: South Africa is, in fact, in veritable, clear and
manifest breach of the peace,

134. It was for that reason that the extraordinary
ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from 16 to
18 April this year, decided as follows:

128. Moreover, South Africa’s continued militarization of the Territory, in flagrant disregard of the
findings of the International Court of Justice that its
presence in that Territory is illegal and of the repeated
affirmation of that illegality both by the Security

“In view of the deterioration of the situation in
southern Africa caused by the illegal occupation of
Namibia and in view of the many obstacles created
frequently by South Africa to impede the search for
12

a solution to the question of Namibia, the Bureau
unciertakes to make every effort to oppose the
efforts to distort the substance of the question of
Namibia, which is a specific problem involving
decolonization and illegal occupation.” [,Y//#&&
(lIlIIC’.r,puro. IN.]

régime, which constitutes a threat to international
peace and security” [ibid., pnru. 71.
140. The failure of the meeting relating to the Preimplementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia, held at Geneva earlier this year, was caused both
by the resolve of the racist authorities of South Africa
to persist in their defiance of the international community and by the lack of political Will on the part of
the members of the contact group of Western States
to crown with successthe process of negotiated settlement which they themselves had begun [S/12636’Jand
to exert the necessarypressure on the Pretoria régime.

135, My delegation is taking part in these meetings of
the Council on behalf of the non-aligned movement,
currently presided over by the head of State and Government of the Republic of Cuba, President Fidel
Castro, in express compliance with the mandate conferred by that meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau at
Algiers,
136. Our delegation is pleased, Mr. President, to sec
you presiding over these meetings of the Security
Council devoted to the question of Namibia, an important item for whose prompt and just solution the
international community has launched an urgent
appeal,
137. As we said at the outset, 15years have gone by
during which, Far from heeding the Will of the General
Assembly and Security Council, the apartheid régime,
with its allies and supporters, has persisted in its arrogant detiance of the international community,
refusing ta comply with the Organization’s resolutions
and stepping up its military presence and its régime of
terror, racism and oppression, as well as its systematic
exploitation of the natural resources and of the black
people of Namibia, in open violation of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,J enacted on 27 September 1974 by the United
Nations Council for Namibia.

141. For the non-aligned countries the policy of the
Pretoria racist régime and of those who regard it as an
ally is also intended to impose a neo-colonial solution
on the Territory of Namibia in keeping with Pretoria’s
interests, contrary to Security Council resolutions
435 (1978) and 439 (1978), and ta prevent SWAPO,
the sole and legitimate representative of the Namibian
people, from attaining power through a democratic
process, under United Nations control and supervision.
142. It is therefore essential to reiterate most emphatically our full support for and solid’arity with the liberation movement of the people of Namibia-SWAPO,
its sole and authentic representative-and the appeal
made by the General Assembly in its resolution
35/227A to lend SWAPO multilateral assistance in its
struggle to ensure Namibia’s early access to national
independence, to sovereignty and to fol1 territorial
integrity, including Walvis Bay and the Penguin and
other off-shore islands.

138. Let no une be misled as to who has encouraged
and made possible the lawlessness of the minority
Government of South Africa. Only the support and
connivance of certain Western Powers-particularly
the United States of America, together with its transnational corporations and banking and financial institutions-have permitted the South African racists to
continue their illegal occupation of the Territory of
Namibia and to develop their expansionist, interventionist and aggrcssive policy against the independent
neighbouring States-mainly against Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia.

143. Furthermore, an end must be put to the plunder
of Namibia’s natural resources and to the exploitation
of the Namibian people by the racist South African
acçupiers and by the transnational corporations of
several Western Powers; to the military and nuclear
collaboration of some of those Powers and of the
Zionist régime of Israel with the Fascist Botha Government; to the acts of criminal aggression committed
by South African armed forces, even from the Territory
of Namibia itself, against the front-line States; and to
the development of a policy of open State terrorism
against the black people of South Africa, the liberation
movement of Namibia-SWAPO-and
neighbouring
States.

139. The illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa, with the support of those Western Powers, in
flagrant violation of the put-posesand principles of the
Charter and of United Nations decisions and resolutiens not only denies the inalienable right of the Namibian people to self-determination and freedom and
national independence in a united Namibia but also is
aimed at keeping southern Africa in a state of instability and insecurity, For that reason the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
Non-Aligned Countries, at Algiers in April, condemned “the systematic policy of destabilization,
provocation and aggression of the racist Pretoria

144. In this connection, the Co-ordinating Bureau
expressed deep concern over the measures announced
by the United States Government, designed to ensure
the repeal by the United States Congress of the Clark
Amendment in order openly to lend military assistance
to the traitor groups serving the Pretoria régime, groups
which, based in Namibia, are attempting to destabilize
the legitimate Government of Angola, It also reaffirmed
the commitment of the movement of non-aligned
countries to support the front-line States and to
strengthen their defensive capability in the face of
13

South Africa’s repeated acts of aggression [s//44581
put-as,

15 atrd 161.

145. I~I reiterating that the question of Namibia is
specifically a problem of decolonization and illegal
occupation, the Co-ordinating Bureau condemned a11
attempts aimed at distorting the basic dimensions ofthe
question in order to impede the exercise by the PeoPle
of Namibia of its inalienable right to self-determination and national independence; at affecting the territorial integrity of Namibia; at imposing an “interna1
settlement” based on puppet organizations; at Presenting the case of Namibia as a regional confhct, depriving it of its universal scope and minimizing the
defiant attitude of the racist occupiers towards the
people of Namibia, the Will of the United Nations and
the international community in general; and at modifying or watering down the key elements of the Unitcd
Nations plan, the only universally accepted framework
for a peaceful transition to independence for Namibia
[ibid.,

para.

181.

146. Recent history unequivocally shows that South
Africa’s racist régime refuses to accept the Will of the
United Nations and to take any serious steps to end its
illegal occupation of Namibia and to pave the way
towards its independence. On the contrary, for the
past 1.5 years it has systematically strengthened its
economic and military presence in the Territory and has
sabotaged a11 efforts at reaching a negotiated settlement based on intemationally accepted elements. The
South African racists have, in fact, shown their deep
scorn for international law and for the principles and
pur-poses that are embodied in the Charter of the Organization, their disrespect for the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independence and their barbarous’
commitment to the infamous and brutal system of
apartheid,
which has been termed a crime against
humanity by the General Assembly.

which was held at Algiers
Non-Aligned Countrh,
recently, 1 have the honour to request of members of
the Council through you the application of comprehensivc mandatory sanctions, including an oil embargo, provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter,
against the racist Government of South Africa, whose
flagrant violation of the principles and purposes contained in the Charter and its utter scorn for the norms,
decisions and resolutions of the Organization place it
outside international law and in rebellion against the
wjll of this community of nations, constituting at the
same time a grave danger to international peace and
security.
150. Mr. SLIM
(Tunisia)
(interpretath
frotn
French): Mr. President, we derive reassurance and
comfort from the fact that this meeting is taking place
under your presidency; your boundless devotion to the
principles of the Charter, your dynamism and your
spirit of initiative, your truly outstanding sense of
compromise, to which you have accustomed us and
which has been made manifest in an even more striking
manner since your accession to the presidency of the
Council at the beginning of this month, strengthen our
conviction that under your authority the Security
Council Will live up to the responsibilities
conferred
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations, in particular during this diEcult time of testing. Along with our
most heartfelt congratulations, 1 should like to assure
you of the full co-operation of my delegation.
151. My congratulations go also to your predecessor,
the representative of the German Democratic Republit, Ambassador Florin, for the admirable, exemplary
and particularly effective manner in which he conducted the work of the Council last month.
152. 1 should also like to welcome the presence
amongst us of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of a
number of our countries who have corne to reaffirm
here the devotion of their Governments and States, as
well as of the regional organizations which have given
them mandates, to the maintenance of international
peace and security and the strengthening of the role
of the United Nations and of the Council. At the same
time, they have corne here to testify to the overriding
importance accorded within and outside this forum to
the question before us today-the question of Namibia.

147. Duplicity and prevarication have been typical
of the behaviour of the Pretoria racist régime in the
negotiations that have taken place throughout recent
years at the initiative of the contact group of the five
Western Powers. There is no more room for further
delays or manoeuvres. The Namibian people, under the
wise and incorruptible leadership of its sole and authentic representative, SWAPO, Will not cesse in its
endeavours to attain independence by force of arms
if there is insistence on closing down other avenues,

153. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Tunisia was to have been amongst us today to add
his voice to those of his colleagues to whom the OAU
and the non-aligned movement have given mandates,
For scheduling reasons pertaining to our interna1
Pohies he was not able to make the journey. He is
none the less very concerned with following the debates
as closely as possible, and he has entrusted me to supPort the joint action undertaken by his African and
non-aligned colleagues in the Council and to reaffirm
here the full solidarity of the Government of President
Bourguiba with SWAPO in its struggle for the dignity
of our Namibian brothers and the independence of
Namibia.

14% The Security Council has the political and moral
duty to contribute to ensuring for the people of Namibia
the exercise of its inalienable rights, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which contains
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial
Countries and Peoples, -and in this regard it
also bas the inescapable duty of making the racist
régime of Pretoria comply with the General Assembly’s
decisions and resolutions as well as its own.
149. Pursuant to the mandate of the extraordinary
ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the
14

154. Because of the gravity of the subject on which
it has been called upon to deliberate and the expectation and hopes that it has raised, the Council is now
witnessing a period which is of crucial and primary
importance in its history. It is called upon to pronounce
itself on the fate of the ideals and principles which the
United Nations has helped define and make universal
and which the Council itself has undertaken to defend
and implement throughout the world.
155. In this last quarter of the twentieth Century,
more than 20 years after the adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 1514 (XV), we still have to
take up implementation of the principles called selfdetermination, independence, freedom and justice,
156. Still in the land of Africa, in Namibia, there is
a people struggling for the recognition of its right to
dignity and independence. In that same land of Africa
there is still an enclave where oppression, repression
and exploitation have been established as a system,
where the régime there flouts the inalienable rights of
the people to self-determination and displays with
equal self-assurance and arrogance, on behalf of its
own colonialist interests, its total scorn for the Will of
the international community and the decisions of the
United Nations.
157. If it falls to us to bring about the triumph and
implementation of the internationally recognized principles, it also falls to us-because it is high time for
this-to take note of the incessant, arrogant acts of
defiance thrust at the Organization by the South
African régime.
158. Those acts of defiance did not, unfortunately,
begin only recently.
159. Back in 1946, one year after the establishment of
the Organization, South Africa committed its first act
of defiance: it refused to place the Territory of Namibia,
which was then called South West Africa, under the
Trusteeship régime, as advocated by the General Assembly at its first session [resolrrlion 65 (I)l.

and to remove from South Africa any right to administer the Territory [Gcnerd Assetnhly resohiiot1 2/43
(&!Y)]. Assuming its full responsibilities in the matter,
it decided to take charge-through the United Nations
Council for South West Africa, which was established
subsequently [Generul Assembly resolution
.Z?48
(S-F/)]-of conducting the Territory to independence.
163. That decision was met by South Africa with
another act of refusal, a further act of defiance and the
continuation of its presence-by then illegal-in Namibia.
164. Pretoria showed the same attitude of rejection
and defiance to the decision of the Security Council
which, in its resolution 276(1970), confirmed the illegal
character and presence of South Africain Namibia, and
to the opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971, which declared in paragraph 133 that
South Africa “is under obligation to withdraw its
administration from Namibia immediately and thus
put an end to its occupation of the Territory”.’
165. After a period of five years-during which time
Pretoria had reinforced its positions, systematically
exploiting the workers and resources of the Territory,
brutally repressing the struggle of the Namibian people
for its emancipation and devoting itself shamelessly
to the unspeakable bantustanization operation-in
1976the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 385 (1976), in which, in paragraph 7, it reaffirmed
the right of the Namibian people freely to determine
its own future and declared that: “it is imperative that
free elections under the supervision and control of the
United Nations be held for the whole of Namibia as
one political entity”.
166. The elections decided on by the Council in 1976
have not yet seen the light of day. Pretoria’s unanswered actsof defîance generateddoubts about the Will
and determination of the Organization. The Namibian
people and the whole of Africa began asking questions.
A reply to them came in 1978. It was made by five
countries members of the Security Council which
formulated a settlement plan for the question of Namibia through negotiations [S/12636].

160. In 1949, South Africa unilaterally declared the
international Mandate obsolete and refused, notwithstanding the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice in 19504confirming the validity of the Mandate, to give account of its administration to the General Assembly as it was explicitly called upon to do.

167. The people of Namibia, which has given proof
of its resolve and courage, accepted, through the voice
of its sole authentic representative, SWAPO-whose
international recognition in 1973testified to its maturity
and keen sense of responsibility-the way offered it
to exercise its right to self-determination and to accede
to independence through dialogue and negotiation,

161. Since that date Pretoria’s acts of defiance have
been constant and its opposition to any idea of cooperation and negotiation with the United Nations has
been systematic. The appeals of the Organization have
been met by a policy of&it accompli, and the Territory of Namibia has been increasingly regarded by
Pretoria as its fifth province.

168. What of the attitude of the other party? Were the
pressure and influence of the five Western countries
decisive? The international community none the less
noted the acceptanceby South Africa of the settlement
plan.

162. Exasperated, the United Nations decided in
1966 to terminate the international Mandate oftïcially
15

169. The entire international community agreed to
adopt the plan at the same time as the Security Council, in 1978.
170. Three years after the adoption of resolutions
431 (1978) and 435 (1978) the pre-negotiations were
still going on. But the legendary patience of Africa was
reaching its limits as well as that of the United Nations
and the Secretary-General, whose constancy and
resohe in this matter deserve our full praise. Then
Pretoria gave a sign, and the Geneva meeting was
organized.
171. The Namibian people, through SWAPO, and
Africa as a whole, through the front-line countries,
convened, under United Nations auspices, the countries members of the contact group to meet across the
table of the Geneva conference from the representatives nominated by the Pretoria régime.
172. Between 7 and 14 January 1981, the representatives of Pretoria lived up to their reputation. They
engaged in a vast public-relations exercise, and finally
they replied to both sides, whose efforts and patience
deserve to be emphasized, that they were not prepared
to keep their promises or to honour their commitments.
Once again they proved that they could not accept the
language of negotiation or the idea of democracy and
elections. The Secretary-General’s report [S//4333],
which is exhaustive and objective, and which was
submitted to this Council on 30 January 1981,is particularly eloquent and meaningful in this respect.
173. Of course, the Geneva failure could have been
foreseen since South Africa had inured us to subterfuge, dilatory tactics and crude manoeuvring the
unavowed aim of which was to gain time to perpetuate
its domination of Namibia and to pursue the exploitation of its people and the resources that belong to them.
That is another act of direct defiance in addition to
those made manifest to the Geneva meeting and
thereby to the international community and the Security Council.

176. With Geneva a11means of persuasion and moral
pressure seem to have been exhausted. The Patience
shown by the people of Namibia cannot be endless.
The peoples of Africa have since 14January 1981 been
waiting for ouï. reaction. Our silence cannot reassure
them. Will we now be able adequately to meet those
expectations?
177. Ofcourse, it is not for us around this table now to
advocate independence for Namibia. That stage bas
long since passed. At the most in this respect we should
reaffrrm for the benefit of the people of Namibia that
we support and salute the heroic struggle that it bas
been waging against subjugation and dehumanization.
We must decide on ways and means that Will enable it
to exercise its right to self-determination without
further procrastination or subterfuge.
178. The plan laboriously elaborated by the United
Nations in accordance with resolution 435 (19781
certainly offered a framework that could have becn
judged valid since it was supposed to transfer power to
the Namibian people in 1981. What is the situation
eight months later? Can we in the Council let the Namibian people have recourse to the ultimate measure of
despair to recover its inalienable rights? After the
Geneva conference, Will people still believe us if we
once more advocate settlement of the question through
negotiation and dialogue alone?
179. At this stage, while reserving the right to speak
again during this debate, my delegation believes it is not
a question of advocating negotiation without there first
being total reafftrmation, without restriction of any
kind, by the members of the Council, and in particular
those that have primary responsibility in this matter,
of their commitment to achieving independence for
Namibia within the allotted time-frame and in accordance with the objectives laid down by the United
Nations.

180. My delegation considers that what is necessary
to enable that goal to be reached-and this in fact
emanatesfrom our commitment-is to do everything to
remove from South Africa the means of carrying out
174. Does one have to give an exhaustive account its policies of sufftciency and arrogance based on selfof the acts of defiance of the United Nations since assuranceand impunity. For what effect cari our deci1946which have remained unpunished? It is clear that
sions bave, and what credibility cari we have, when,
the time has corne for the Organization once and for a11 on the one hand, we declare ourselves to be struggling
to resolve this grave dispute with which it has lived
against the racist, expansionist and colonialist policy
since its foundation. It must once and for a11put an end of Pretoria, and, on the other, we maintain with that
to the intolerabie acts of defïance to which it has been same régime offtcial relations supposedly based on
thus far subjected by a country that was among the mutual respect, when we offer it the possibility of
fïrst 51 signatory States of the Charter.
procuring arms notwithstanding the relevant resolutions of the Council, and when we allow it to build up
175. That should have been sufficient reason for the its arsenal, tihich exists to support its policies of represUnited Nations to take, in accordance with the Charter,
sion and aggression, and when we maintain with it,
steps which South Afi-ica’s behaviour makes essential. directly or indirectly , economic and trade relations that
That would have been sufftcient reason had it not in
strenghten it internally and reinforce its racist and
addition been a question of the fate of a whole people hegemonistic practices?
fed on the ideals and principles of the Charter, which
181. The commitment of the international comquite rightly aspires to dignity, freedom and indemunity
to achieving Namibian independence prependence.
16

)
{

1

rea! and effective pressure on the South
African régime, pressure that Will deprive it of the
means t0 carry Out its policies. The provisions of the
Charter, and in particular Chapter VII, authorize and
campe! US t0 do SO. Comprehensive and mandatory
sanctions must be adopted against South Africa. It is
then that, bereft of support and seriously threatened
by isolation, South Africa wil! decide to abandon its
attitude of arrogance and detïance and Will agree really
to join in a process that Will lead to Namibian independence.

187. Here we are, then, once again gathered to debate
the question of Namibia. The subject is so old that we
are well acquainted with a!! its circumstances and
implications. But today we know more: the pure, SteelY
determination of racist South Africa to continue its
illega! domination of Namibian territory. The Geneva
conference, whose only merit Will appear to future
historians to be that it unmasked South Africa, clearly
revealed that it would henceforth be illusory to seek
to persuade by arguments a country that 15 years of
rebellion against the international community without
damage have fully confïrmed in its extreme obstinacy,
in its blatant policy of provocation and defiance, and
finally in its calm impunity towards the warnings and
the most solemn decisions of the OAU, the non-aligned
movement and the United Nations itself.

supposes

182. That being SO,if it is done expeditiously, it will
be possible for South Africa ta find-within the framework of constructive discussions under the auspices of
the United Nations and side by side with the contact
group and the front-line countries, supported by the
whole of Africa and the non-aligned countries, as well
as al! nations that cherish peace and freedom-the
authentic representative of the Namibian people,
SWAPO, which remains resolved, through negotiations or by any other means, to achieve independence
for its country.

188. In the circumstances, what could be more
fitting and revealing than the collective voyages of SO
many Ministers for Foreign Affairs especially charged
by the OAU and the non-aligned movement with
denouncing in the Counci! the South African attitude
and declaring the inadmissibility of any prolongation of
the present situation in Namibia?

183. In the course of these meetings we are being
called upon to take important decisions and to adopt
concrete measures. We must show political courage,
just as we must be animated by a concern for effectiveness. On the attitude of each of us wi!! depend the
future of a people whose fate is bound up with the fate
of the Princip!es of the Charter, the credibility of the
Organization and the preservation of international
peace and security,

189. We are actually entering upon a new phase in
international relations, in which any additional delay
in the liberation of Namibia, any inertia on the part of
the international community in regard to this painful
problem, any indulgence of the advocates of apartheid,
could greatly endanger the stability of Africa and world
peace. Let us briefly consider the context.
190. We know the secret plan of South Africa: it is to
shape Namibia to measure, a Namibia which would
have, at most, independence in name only; which
would be subject to tallage or a feuda! tax; which would
sel1 off its resources to South African power; and
which would serve as a bridgehead for apartheid to
sow turmoil and disorder in the neighbouring States.

184. We are meeting at a time when the world is
looking at us and judging us. The peoples of Namibia
and Africa are watching this body and awaiting our
decision. 1 hope, Mr, President, that under your wise
guidance we cari unanimously and without delay give
them answers that Will live up to their expectations.

191. That was the meaning of the so-called elections
of December 1978, which flagrantly violated Council
resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). That was also
the meaning of the administrative and political tinkering
invented and applied by South Africa at Will to the
Territory of Namibia. It is, tïnally, the meaning of the
provocative manoeuvres, asfrequent as they are crude,
used by South Africa since the failure of the Geneva
conference to try to discourage United Nations efforts
and SOto dissociate itself as far as possible from resolution 435 (1978).

185. Mr. DIALLO (Niger) (interpretntion
frotn
Allow me, at the outset, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on your accession to the presidency
of the Security Counci! for the month of April. The
outstanding manner in which you have guided the
work of this prestigious organ during the past weeks
bears cloquent witness to your qualities, among which
we would point to your eminent talents as a diplomat,
your fine consistency and moderation, and your keen
sense of international relations. 1 am certain that
under your lofty guidance the present work of, the
Council will bave the interest and the precision that Will
accord with the gravity of the agenda item before us.
Fretrclt):

192, But there is more. There are active alliances
and warm friendships which Pretoria puts to fruitful
use since it knows that they are solid and that they play
a not insignificant part in the complexity of the Namibian story. It is clearly those that the racist régime
usesnow to poison international relations, attempting
even to foment confrontation between the partners just
mentioned and the rest of the world, with the Af&an
States in the forefront.

186. 1should like also to pay a sincere tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Florin of the German
Democratic Republic, who showed agreat commitment
during the month of March to the Council’s fu!fïl!ing
its role and demonstrating its vitality.
17

193. Moreover, this tactic of Pretoria is quite clear:
it seeksin the first place to discredit the United Nations
as far as possible, notably by dramatizing the scandalous allegation of a lack of impartiality on the part
of the Organization. Then it looms up theatrically,
using barely concealed blackmail against its own allies
and friends to recall the close economic ties binding
them and thus to bring about their active caution if not
their clear support. It is finally a question, at the same
time, of seeking to continue and intensify’the exploitation of Namibian wealth; of creating in that Territory
new conditions of a new subjection; of stepping up the
acts of sabotage, provocation and armed aggression
against the front-line States,,which have the courage to
proclaim, loud and clear, all the South African tricks
and to pit their meagre resources against the dark
designs of the advocates of apartheid.
194. And behind a11these manoeuvres, there appears
just beneath the surface a determination to stifle, to
gag and finally to isolate SWAPG, that genuinely Namibian organization, the sole representative of the
Namibian people, which is struggling with calm and a
sense of responsibility. We are bound to recognize
that it is thanks to SWAPO that the worst has not happened in Namibia, despite the many martyrs which the
South African colonizer creates daily in its ranks,
despite the fact that its militants are fed up-that is to
say, the vast majority of the Namibian people-ready
for their part to intensify the struggle to the point of
chaos.
195. Regrettably we must be apprehensive that the
present course of events, along with the lukewarm
attitude and the lack of understanding of a certain part
of the world, which should nevertheless have every
interest in showing somewhat more initiative, cannot
but lead SWAPO to change its position in the near
future and to answer war with war, repression with war,
scorn with war, procrastination with war, and even
offers of dialogue with war. In the event of such a
catastrophe, it is obvious that the OAU, Africa, the
non-aligned movement and the vast majority of the
progressive world, cannot remain indifferent and Will
not hesitate to bring to bear, out of solidarity and a
sense of duty, a11the force of their weapons a11their
means to safeguard the independence and freedom of
Namibia. Already we have decided, at the level of the
OAU and of the non-aligned movement, as several
resolutions demonstrate, to increase the means of
SWAPO to enable it to meet a11its responsibilities, to
take up any challenge, and to counter any vague
impulse towards individual or mass repression.
196. But perhaps it is still premature to place this
tragic development in the realm of the inevitable. Perhaps after a new analysis of this situation, to which
there cari be no other outcome, the most visible partners of South Africa Will join the rest of the world in
persuading it that its own survival and world peace Will
be served by its working actively, honestly and positively towards the imminent liberation of Namibia.
And to that end, the sooner is indubitably the better.

197. That is why, when we turn in particular to the
five Western countries of the contract group, we stress
that their role is taking on harrowing features, for their
room to manoeuvre Will henceforth be extremely
limited. They cari no longer run with the hare and hum
with the hounds. They cari only plead the case of
inescapability: of the urgent, democratic and total
liberation of Namibia in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations, more specifically
Security Council resolution 435 (1978).
198. On this point we are convinced that South
Africa, atready rebellious beyond the limits of tolerance, Will not begin truly to calm down and to evaluate
the price of future negotiations unless comprehensive
mandatory sanctions are applied against it in conformity with the relevant provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. This is SOdespite
the certainly considerable harm which such sanctions
would unquestionably do to Namibia itself and to
the fragile economies of the front-line countries. But
it would certainly be another opportunity for the international community to demonstrate its active solidarity
with those countries SOthat their suffering might be
light and their fïght-our fïght-might triumph. In this
connexion, we shall never forget the magnificent
example of heroic Zimbabwe, which was recently
born of the debris of rebellious Rhodesia.
199. Those sanctions, in the general area of economic
relations, and especially reflected in an oil embargo,
would thus be added to the amis embargo already
decided upon in resolution 418 (1977), SOas really to
make South Africa feel the weight of isolation, the
result of its incredible obstinacy and of international
disapproval.
200. Those are some of my thoughts on the situation
in Namibia, thoughts 1 wished to share with the Council
as a contribution to this important debate.
201. But 1 would not wish to end without stating my
appreciation and that of my country for the remarkable efforts of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, who, in spite of numerous obstacles and the
most unfair and gross accusations, unshakably continues his efforts to restore South Africa to reason, and
thus to obtain the peaceful liberation of Namibia. 1wish
to assure him of the support and encouragement of the
Niger for his devotion to peace and harmony among
nations. 1 hope he Will transmit these congratulations
and encouragements to his entire Secretariat team,
and especially to Mr. Brian Urquhart.
202. I should also like to salute the efforts of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, which has taken
its duties SOmuch to heart and which Will certainly
deserve its day of commemoration by the international
community.
203, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia, Mr. Feleke Gedle18

Giorgis. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
204. Mr. GEDLE-GIORGIS (Ethiopia): Mr. President, 1 should like at the outset to thank you and,
through you, the members of the Council for acceding
to my delegation’s request to participate in the debate
on the important and urgent question of Namibia.
1should also like to join previous speakersin extending
to you felicitations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. Congratulations
are also in order ta your predecessor for the able
manner in which he presided over the deliberations of
the Council during the month of March,

wage a long and costly struggle for their freedom and
independence. The collective Will of mankind and the
moral authority of the United Nations were expected to
prevail on the South African régime. Time has now
shown that those expectations were unwarranted, for
a régime based and thriving on force and terrorism cari
neither understand nor have any use for reason.

206. It is therefore on the specific instructions of my
head of State, Comrade Chairman Mengistu Haile
Mariam, that 1 am here today to discharge Ethiopia’s
historic responsibility to the people of Namibia and to
fulfil the mandate given to my country to represent,
with other sister States, the movement of non-aligned
countries in the current meetings of the Council,

209. Four years ago, when SWAPO and Africa
accepted the plan [S/12636] put forward by the five
Western countries to end South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia, they were led by the expectation that
reason and justice would ultimately prevail in the
counsel of South Africa. Moreover, since those five
Western Powers presented their plan-not as mere
members of the Security Council but more as States
with vested interests in southern Africa-SWAPO
and Africa, indeed the international community at
large, were led to believe and expect that those vested
interests would be used to serve as leverages against
South Africa. The experience of the last four years
amply demonstrates that reason and justice have not
prevailed and that, SOfar, the Western nations have not
shown any willingness to use positively their immense
influence in Pretoria in order to vindicate the trust
reposed in them by the international community. Al1
along, treachery and deception have been the hallmark
of South Africa’s behaviour, while sincerity and
patience have distinguished the diplomatie conduct
of SWAPQ. In any event, by taxing beyond limit the
patience and forbearance of SWAPO and Africa
through its prevarication and by fïnally rejecting
outright the United Nations plan, the terrorist and
racist régime of South Africa had dashed a11hopes
for a peaceful transition of Namibia to independence.

207. Today the attention of the international community is focused on this august body, the only body
under the Charter of the United Nations that has the
legal competence and political obligation to enforce the
Will of the world community, Whether the Security
Council plays its role effectively and discharges its
responsibilities with honour this time Will depend on
neither the novelty nor the complexity of the question
of which it is currently seized.

210, Those four years of false hopes and unfulfilled
expectations have only benefited South Africa,
allowing it to entrench itself in Namibia through the
establishment of illegitimate and unrepresentative
institutions. Instead of independence, Namibia has
regrettably witnessed the entrenchment of dependence. TO every cal1 of the Security Council, South
Africa has invariably responded with defiance and
impudence.

205. It is with a keen awareness of Ethiopia’s longstanding tradition of anti-colonialism and anti-imperialism that my delegation is taking part in the current
delibemtions of the Security Council on the question of
Namibia. Since Ethiopia and Liberia, as members of
the defunct League of Nations, brought the case of
Namibia to the International Court of Justice some two
decades ago, and more particularly since the onset of
the Ethiopian Popular Revolution in 1974, the independence of Namibia and indeed the total liberation of
Africa and the emancipation of its peoples have been
among the most important objectives of my country.

208. The question of Namibia is as old as the United
Nations, and the issues involved are simple and well
known to ah. In essence, the issue at stake is whether
the South African régime Will be forced to end its illegal
occupation of Namibia or whether it Will be allowed to
continue in its denial of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms ta the Namibian people. Reason and
justice demand that South Africa be evicted from the
Territory of Namibia without further delay. That this
Will eventually and inevitably corne to pass through the
gallant struggle of the Namibian people, under the
leadership of SWAPO, their sole, legitimate and.
authentic representative, is a foregone conclusion for
a11those who draw lessons from history. In this enlightened age, however, it had been the hope of Africa
that the people of Namibia would not bave had to
19

211. The question now is: Where do we go from here?
Should Pretoria be allowed indefinitely to deny the
people of Namibia their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence? Should it be allowed
to continue in its defïance of the whole world with
impunity? The answer should be a resounding no.
What then should the world community-more particularly these meetings of the Council-do in order to
fulfil the aspirations of the Namibian people and realize
the Will of the United Nations?
212. That is the historic task that the Council must
discharge if it is to remain a viable and positive force
in the life of nations and peoples. The United Nations
has a unique responsibility for Namibia’s independence, and it is incumbent upon the Council to discharge that responsibility.

tiens for the stability of the entire continent of Afr$
bave Ilot escaped us. It is with serious concern thqt
Africa is following the actions of the new United Stat’$
Administration and, indeed, of a11those Western Sta$
with colonial interests in southern Africa,

213. The South African régime has tjme and again
made it clear that it is unwilling to accede to ‘the independence of Namibia. 1 submit, therefore, that the
only course of action left for the world community,
apart from supporting the continuing armed struggle,
Is to avail itself of the enforcement measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter,
214. Through its persistent and continued denial of
the eghts of self-determination and independence to
the people of Namibia, South Africa has violated bath
the letter and spirit of the Charter. Through its war of
repression within Namibia and repeated acts of aggression against the independent neighbouring States of
Angola, Botswana, Mozambique and Zambia, it bas
breached the peace, thereby threatening international
peace and security. This fact was determined by the
General Assembly a long time ago. It is, therefore,
only natural to expect the Council to follow suit and
not to await a racial conflagration on the African continent +

217. The present United States Administration anw
the other Western States must realize that they canna\
for long safeguard their vested interests, be it in Na,
mibia or South Africa, by collaborating with the
terrorist and racist rkgime of Pretoria. 1 submit that
these States have to choose between their short-teq
and long-term interests. Their choice is nothing les8
than a choice between alliance with racist South Africq
and friendly relations and fruitful co-operation on 4
long-term basis with a free and independent Africa,
The stand they take now in the Council Will undoubt..
edly constitute their choice, The Ethiopian delegatioq
hopes that the dictates of reason and justice woulQ
be given due weight, more than financial and racial
considerations.
218. Finally, permit me to avail myself of this opportunity to retirm Ethiopia’s unswerving commitment
to the independence of Namibia and its full support
for the arcned struggle being waged, with SO much
valour and sacrifice, by SWAPO-the legitimate
representative of the Namibian people. On behalP
of the Government and people of socialist Ethiopia,
1 should like to hail here and now the gallant sons and
daughters of Namibia for the valiant struggle they arc
waging for their freedom and dignity. Namibians have
been left with no alternative but the intensification of
their legitimate armed struggle. In this, they deserve
the continued assistance of a11peace- and freedomloving people of the world.

215. We a11know that there are permanent members
of the Councii which have close and extensive economic and military co-operation with South Africa and
which pretend to view the whole situation differently.
Those States are among the fïve Western Powers
which initiated the plan that culminated in Council
resolution 435 (1978) of September 1978 and which
have failed to fulfil their special obligation in its implementation. They are also the primary beneficiaries of
the unbridled exploitation of the human and natural
resources of Namibia. That these same countries,
through a wide,network of overt and covert political,
economic and military-including
nuclear-links
with Pretoria, have contributed ta the ability of South
Africa to remain in Namibia is beyond contest. In this
regard, the recent overtures by the present United
States Administration to the terrorist South African
.régime cannot but be interpreted as encouragement for
Pretoria to continue in its repression of the Namibian
people and unprovoked aggression against the frontline States.

219. Pursuant to its long-standing position and in
conformity with the decisions taken by the OAU at
Addis Ababa in March and by the non-aligned countries at New Delhi in February and Algiers in April,
Ethiopia calls upon the Council to discharge its rcaponsibility to the Namibian people by immediately imposing comprehensive mandatory sanctions against
South Africa.

216. Even before taking power, through its public
embrace of the terrorist South African régime, the
new Administration in Washington contributed to the
scuttling of the so-called pre-implementation talks in
Geneva. This cari only be interpreted as a total disregard of the genuine aspirations of the African peopIes+Not content with its open support for the racists
in Pretoria, the present United States Administration
has moreover embarked on strengthening its collaboration with the enemiesof Africa by, as an initial measure,
requesting the United StatesCongres$ to lift the ban on
subversive activities against the legitimate Government
of the Peopie’s Republic of Angola. The move to repeal
the so-called Clark Amendment is clearly designed net
only to undermine the stability of Angola but a]so to
weaken that country’s resolve and ability to play an
active part in the total liberation of Namibia. The
sinister motives behind this move and its wider implica-

220. The world is watching and let no one doubt the
historic signifïcance of the outcome of these meetings
of the Council. The question of Namibia is inextricably
linked with the history of the United Nations. What
is, therefore, at stake today is not the fate of the Namibian people alone, but the future of the United
Nations as well.
221. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Jamaica, the Right Honourable Hugh Shearer, P.C.
I welcome him here tonight and now cal1 upon him to
take a place at the Council table and to make bis
statement.
222. Mr, SHEARER (Jamaica): Mr, President, permit me, on behalf of my delegation, to join the speakers
20

who bave preceded me in extending warmest congratulations to you on your assumption of the high office
of the presidency of the Council for this month. The
supportive and innovative role of your great country,
Ireland, and its contribution within the context of the
United Nations in promoting the cause of freedom,
independence and justice are well known.
223. The history of United Nations involvement
with the question of Namibia is a sagaof the determined
and dedicated efforts of the members of the world body
to terminate South Africa’s illegal occupation of the
international Territory, to end the racist régime’s brutal
and inhuman oppression of the Namibian people, to
frustrate and prevent South Africa’s attempts to foist
a puppet and client régime on that richly endowed land
and, above ah, to ensure the inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence of the Namibian
people.
224. These efforts of the United Nations date back
to 1966 when, by its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 Octobcr 1966, the General Assembly assumed direct
responsibility for the future of Namibia by ending
South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory and declaring it an international Territory, Today, 15 years
later, this & j/rr*c termination of South Africa’s Mandate remains unrealized and unimplemented, to our
shame and discredi t.
225. In X967, the General Assembly took further
action by establishing the United Nations Council for
South West Africa [rcsohtiort 2248 (S-V)] as the sole
legal Administering Authority for the Territory. The
United Nations Council for Namibia, currently under
the able leadership of Ambassador Paul Lusaka of
Zambia, has rendered invaluable service in mobilizing
international public opinion for the cause of the Namibian people in their just struggle for independence
under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative. It rightly deserves our continuing support.
226. Although the overwhelming majority of the
international community was steadfast in these
demands that sustained pressure should be brought
to bear on South Africa to divest itself of the political
and administrative control of Namibia, a few sought to
explain their lack of commitment and political Will by
questioning, on legal grounds, the General Assembly’s
decision to withdraw South Africa’s Mandate [rcsohiior1 214s (XXI)].

227. Representatives Will recah that on 21 June 1971
the Assembly’s decision was upheld in a ruling by the
International Court of Justice. By an overwhelming
vote, the verdict of the Court, in paragraph 133 of its
advisory opinion, was
“that, the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its administration from Namibia
‘21

immediately and thus put an end to its occupation of
the Territory”. I
228. At innumerable points during these 15years, the
Security Council has reaffirmed the special responsibility of the United Nations towards Namibia. This
responsibility must and Will remain throughout the
decolonization phase of Namibia’s history, notwithstanding the contributing role played by the non-aligned
movement and other international organizations,
movements and groups to secure the inalienable rights
of the Namibian people.
229. On a number of occasions during the past 15
years, the international community, against its better
judgement, has dared to hope that at least South Africa
would agree to co-operate with the United Nations in
ending its illegal occupation of Namibia.
230. Each time, however, those expectations have
floundered against the harsh realities of Pretoria’s
duplicity and deceit; and whenever the Security Council has justifiably sought to impose sanctions against
a recalcitrant and intransigent South Africa, such
actions have been blocked either by those countries
that continue to maintain significant political and
economic vested interests in South Africa or by yet
another spurious promise to “co-operate” by the racist
régime of South Africa itself.
231. Today, the Council is meeting at perhaps the
most critical of such crossroads just described.
232, We have before us the proposais of the five
Western members of the Council for an internationally
acceptable settlemenl of the question of Namibia
which embodies provisions for a cesse-fire and that
country’s transition to independence after elections
held under the supervision and control of the United
Nations.
233. With a11its deficiencies and limitations, this
plan is supported by the Government and people of
Jamaica, who remain fully committed to the achievement of genuine majority rule in a free and independent
Namibia.
234. However, in the light of Pretoria’s deliberate
sabotage of last January’s Geneva meeting, which
was organized to prepare for the implementation of
the United Nations plan, it is pertinent to ask whether
that régime is genuinely interested in a peaceful settlement in keeping with the United Nations plan, or
whether it aims through a process of attrition to SO
compromise and undermine this initiative that by the
time that régime accedes to it the plan Will be little
more than a recycled version of an interna1 settlement.
235. As custodians of the legitimate aspiration of the
Namibian people, the utmost vigilance on the part of
the Council Will be required to ensure that the Council’s
own resolutions are complied with and its credibility is
not further compromised.

236. Of particular importance are resolution 385
(1976), which called on South Africa to transfer power
to the people of Namibia through free and fair elections,
and resolution 435 (1978), which established a United
Nations Transition Assistance Group to supervise
and control the electoral process in Namibia and
thereby promote the early independence of that
Territory.
237. It would be exceedingly dangerous for the
Council to allow itself to be deflected from its primary
objective in Namibia at the present time, that is, to
ensure the full implementation
of the United Nations
plan in accordance with resolution 435 (1978) and
secure the racist régime’s speedy compliance. Such
a step, 1 submit, now requires the application of comprehensive economic sanctions under Chapter VII of
the Charter against the racist South African régime. It
is for the Council to live up to its responsibility and
resolution 439 (1978) which, in paragraph 6, wamed
South Africa that failure to co-operate with the Council
would compel it “to meet forthwith to initiate appropriate actions under the Charter of the United Nations,
including Chapter VII thereof . . .” That is a commitment that the Council has already made.
238. This course of action has been urged repeatedly
by my Government, by the Conference of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries held
at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February, and by the meeting
of the Council of Ministers of the OAU held at Addis
Ababa from 23 February to 1 March, as well as by the
extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries held at Algiers,
which ended afew days ago, where member countries
agreed to a comprehensive programme of action to be
taken against South Africa.
239. The Council must also consider the fact that acts
of aggression against neighbouring States which are in
defiance of the whole United Nations system have been
perpetrated by South Africa from Namibia and that

o in Unitcd Nations, New York

international peace and security have been violated
repeatedly within the meaning of Article 39 of the
Charter.
240. We cannot continue to allow South Africa to
treat the decisions of the Council with scorn and
contempt, flout the opinion of the international community and treat the United Nations as an impotent
body.
241. Let me remind the Council that, were sanctions
to be considered inadequate, Article 42 of the Charter,
to which we are a11already committed, provides for
additional measures which the Council cari and should
take to enforce compliance.
242. 1 declare in this forum that the Government and
people of Jamaica are ready to play a constructive role
in the efforts to secure a free and independent Namibia.
TO this body and to a11those who bear responsibility,
1 urge: Clear the way for the peoples of Namibia to
secure their inalienable rights now; create a reliable
mode1 for the peaceful settlement of dispute; decide
now in favour of totally eradicating the scourge of
racism and rrpnrrheid from Namibia, and thereby clear
the way for a11the peoples and races of Namibia to live
side by side on the basis of equality and justice.
The meeting rose nt 10 p.rn.

NOTES
1 Legal
Conseqnenccs
for States
of the Contimred
Presence
of
Sorrth
Africa
in Namibia
(South
West
Africa)
notwithstanding
Security
Council
Resolution
276 (1970),
Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.

2 A/361116 and CO~T.~, annex III
s Officia1
Records
of the General
Assetnbly,
Supplement
No. 24, vol. 1, annex 1.
4 International
Stans
of South West Africa,
I.C.J.
Reports
1950, p. 128.

oQ400

Thirty-fifth

Session,

Advisory

Opinion:

86-61103-June 1988-2,050
