A /75/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

87th plenary meeting

Friday, 25 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Picco (Monaco),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/891)
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I have the distinct honour
to deliver the following remarks on behalf of Canada,
New Zealand and my own country, Australia (CANZ),
on the occasion of the adoption of resolution 75/285, on
the status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, in Georgia.
The CANZ countries are concerned about the forced
demographic changes created by conflicts in Georgia
and the humanitarian situation caused by the armed
conflict in 2008 that resulted in the forced displacement
of civilians. We welcome the Assembly’s recognition of
the right of return of all internally displaced persons and
refugees and their descendants, regardless of ethnicity,
to their homes throughout Georgia. We reiterate our
support for the respect and protection of human rights,
including the rights of forcibly displaced persons, as
well as for enabling their safe, voluntary, dignified and
unhindered return to their homes, in accordance with
international law.

More broadly, CANZ is concerned about the fact
that the ceasefire agreement mediated by the European
Union and concluded between Georgia and Russia
in 2008 remains largely unfulfilled. The process
of so-called borderization, that is, the erection of
razor-wire fences and other artificial obstacles along
the administrative boundary line and the denial of
access for international human rights monitors to the
Abkhazia and South Ossetia regions, represents a
grave deterioration of the humanitarian situation on
the ground. Those acts prolong the conflict, threaten
peace and stability, interfere with people’s enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and have
a negative effect on the health and safety of citizens
across Georgia, destabilizing the region as a whole.
We call on all the parties to facilitate immediate
access for international humanitarian organizations to
populations in need so as to implement the obligations
and commitments under the ceasefire agreement. Last
but not least, CANZ unequivocally reaffirms its support
for Georgia’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Mr. Thomas (United Kingdom): As noted in the
Secretary-General’s report of 21 May (A/75/891), there
are still more than 280,000 individuals registered as
internally displaced in Georgia. That is an important
humanitarian issue that should be addressed, and that
is why the United Kingdom, alongside so many other
Member States from across all regions, sponsored and
supported resolution 75/285, which was adopted last
week. The topic of refugees and internally displaced
persons remains a core issue of discussion within the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16715 (E)

*2116715*

A/75/PV.87

Geneva International Discussions, and we encourage
all parties to redouble the engagement with all agenda
items in the Geneva International Discussions, including
the session on internally displaced persons (IDPs). We
also encourage all parties to implement the six-point
ceasefire agreement of 2008 and its implementing
measures in full.
We remain deeply concerned about the political
and human rights situations in the breakaway regions of
Georgia, which have been compounded by the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic. We will continue to
draw attention to the lack of access for international
monitoring mechanisms. We reiterate our support for
the respect and protection of human rights, including
the rights of forcibly displaced persons, as well as the
importance of enabling their safe, voluntary, dignified
and unhindered return to their homes, in accordance
with international law.
The United Kingdom remains unwavering in
its support for Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We call on the Russian Federation to end
impediments to the return of IDPs to their homes, as
well as its blatant disregard for international law with
respect to Georgia’s internationally recognized borders.
The United Kingdom therefore welcomed the adoption
last week of resolution 75/285, on IDPs, which is a
simple statement of humanitarian principles regarding
IDP rights of return and a call for meaningful action to
be taken on them.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States was pleased to once again become a sponsor
and supporter of this annual resolution (resolution
75/285). Its adoption sent a strong message of support
to the people of Georgia. We support the human rights,
dignity and humanitarian needs of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees and are actively working
with the United Nations to draw attention to and address
their plight.
Under the Biden Administration, we are also
renewing our focus on climate change, including
its connection to displacement and migration. The
United States fully supports Georgia’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders. The Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia are integral
parts of the Georgian territory, and we call on Russia to
cease its recognition of their so-called independence.
Russia’s military presence in the Georgian regions of
2/13

25/06/2021

Abkhazia and South Ossetia violates the territorial
integrity of Georgia and undermines Georgia’s
sovereignty. Russia’s military presence further divides
communities and puts at risk the health and lives of the
conflict-affected population. We call on Russia and the
de facto authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia to
take immediate steps to ensure respect for human rights,
cease construction of barriers along the administrative
boundary lines and create security conditions that
are conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return and reintegration of IDPs and
refugees. We also call on Russia to fulfil its obligation
under the 2008 ceasefire agreement to withdraw its
forces to pre-conflict positions and to allow unhindered
access for humanitarian organizations. Russia’s actions
in Georgia are not isolated but are rather part of a clear
pattern. It has violated the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine as well.
The United States also supports the High-level
Panel on Internal Displacement established by the
Secretary-General, and we urge Member States to look
towards implementing its recommendations, including
integrating IDP concerns into development efforts.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): Brazil once
again abstained in the voting on resolution 75/285,
concerning the status of internally displaced persons
and refugees from Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia, in Georgia, as we believe the text will
prejudge or influence the considerations of the issue
and the relevant negotiations in Geneva.
Brazil reiterates its recognition of the territorial
integrity of Georgia and expects its dispute with the
Russian Federation to be resolved peacefully and
through dialogue as soon as possible. We encourage
all actors to seek lasting solutions to the situation of
internally displaced persons and refugees in order to
create favourable political conditions for their safe
return and dispel any fears that the conflict might
be resumed.
Brazil calls on all the parties concerned to pursue
further cooperation and adopt confidence-building
measures, including in the framework of the
Geneva process.
Mr. Baror (Israel): Israel welcomes the steps taken
by the Government of Georgia to improve the status
of internally displaced persons in the areas under its
control. Israel appreciates the work done within the
framework of the Geneva International Discussions
21-16715

25/06/2021

and its mandate of 12 August 2008, which led to
concrete action on humanitarian issues, including those
related to environmental protection, and supports the
constructive discussions in that context.
Israel also has a positive view of Georgia’s
programme of engagement through cooperation, which
aims to build trust and confidence among divided
communities. We support the spirit of reconciliation
through direct dialogue promoted by the Georgian
Government. Israel would also like to take this
opportunity to reiterate its support and recognition of
Georgia’s territorial integrity. We reiterate our position
on this issue as on all similar matters, which is that the
way to resolve conflict is through negotiations and any
solution must be based on a mutually agreed approach
rather than unilateral actions.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 14 and 122 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.101 and A/75/L.102)
Draft amendment (A/75/L.104)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to the representative of Guinea to introduce
draft amendment A/75/L.104 on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
Mr. Diane (Guinea): The Group of 77 and China
attaches enormous importance to the reviews of the
Economic and Social Council and the high-level
political forum on sustainable development. In that
regard the Group has engaged very constructively
throughout the process, showing tremendous flexibility
in several areas for both draft resolutions (A/75/L.101
and A/75/L.102) and their annexes, accepting many
proposals of compromise in both review processes,

A/75/PV.87

always in the best possible spirit and with the best
possible effort, in order to reach a consensus on both
draft resolutions.
However, regarding draft resolution A/75/L.101 and
its annex, despite all of the Group’s attempts to ensure a
focused and balanced text that addresses all outstanding
issues in accordance with the context, mandates and
role of the Economic and Social Council, the Group
felt that some of its remaining concerns, which were
conveyed in a clear, transparent and consistent manner
at all times, were not properly addressed in the final
version of the text that we are considering today.
It was in that spirit that the Group decided not to
break the silence procedure for the second time on
both draft resolutions and instead to introduce a draft
amendment, contained in document A/75/L.104, to draft
resolution A/75/L.101, on the review of the Economic
and Social Council. The draft amendment proposed
addresses the third preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution and paragraphs 19 and 25 of the annex in
order to bring to the text a more balanced approach that
builds on language and definitions previously agreed
by all, including in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the previous resolutions on the
review of the Economic and Social Council. The draft
amendment reads as follows:
“Replace the third preambular paragraph with
the following text:
‘Recalling that the 2030 Agenda is guided by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including full respect for international
law, is grounded in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and international human rights
treaties, the Millennium Declaration and the 2005
World Summit Outcome, and is informed by other
instruments such as the Declaration on the Right
to Development’;
“Replace paragraph 19 of the annex with the
following text:
‘During the coordination segment, the
Economic and Social Council may also hold
discussions on existing coordination-related
mandated agenda items that have been thus far
considered during the management segment’;
“In paragraph 25 of the annex, replace the third
sentence with the following text:

21-167153/13

A/75/PV.87

‘It may also discuss, among other relevant
issues, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development and providing access
to justice for all in accordance with the respective
mandates of the Economic and Social Council and
other intergovernmental bodies.’”
The Group feels it is important that we neither
rewrite the 2030 Agenda nor discuss the mandates,
remits and scope of the Economic and Social Council.
We should address every issue in a holistic, balanced
and comprehensive manner to avoid overemphasizing
certain issues over others or treating particular issues in
a selective manner, to the detriment of the development
pillar. We are confident that by doing so we will be
able to accelerate our efforts to implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in this Decade of
Action to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals,
as well as build back better in our recovery from the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
We call on all delegations to look favourably on
the proposed draft amendment (A/75/L.104) to draft
resolution A/75/L.101 in the spirit in which it has been
put forward. The Group truly believes that it will help
us all achieve final consensus on this very important
draft resolution. However, if a vote should be requested
on the proposed amendment, we ask all delegations to
vote in favour of it.
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
we proceed to take a decision on draft resolutions
A/75/L.101 and A/75/L.102 and draft amendment
A/75/L.104, delegations wishing to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting on any of the two
draft resolutions or on the draft amendment are invited
to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Niang (Senegal): I would like to make a brief
statement on behalf of Ambassador Alexander Marschik
of Austria and myself, as co-facilitators for the review
process of the Economic and Social Council and the
high-level political forum on sustainable development.
We were honoured to undertake that challenging
task, and we would like to sincerely thank all delegations
for their active engagement over the past six months. It
has been a difficult process, but we managed to come
4/13

25/06/2021

to a conclusion. Draft resolutions A/75/L.101 and
A.75/L.102, which are before us today, were placed
under silence. As co-facilitators, we did our best. After
thorough consultations with all delegations aimed at
presenting drafts that we think are balanced, reflect
the middle ground and are agreeable to all delegations,
we are grateful that the silence was not broken by any
delegation. We hope that the same constructive spirit
will prevail this morning for the adoption of the drafts.
Our common endeavour in this exercise was to
strengthen the Economic and Social Council and the
high-level political forum, especially in the context of
the coronavirus disease pandemic and our collective
efforts to build forwards better. We should not lose
sight of that bigger picture and our common endeavour.
I would once again like to thank the President and the
delegations on behalf of Ambassador Marschik and
myself for the active engagement of all delegations in
this process.
Mr. Lages (Portugal): Portugal, on behalf of the
European Union (EU) member States, has, together
with the United Kingdom and the United States, called
for a vote on the proposed amendments to the third
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/75/L.101,
entitled “Review of the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council; Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolutions
67/290 on the format and organizational aspects of the
high-level political forum on sustainable development
and 70/299 on the follow-up and review of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global
level”, as well as to paragraphs 19 and 25 of the annex
to the draft resolution.
We deeply regret that the process to which we have
devoted the past couple of months was concluded in
an unnecessarily rushed and polarizing manner. We
acknowledge the dedication of the co-facilitators, who
have gone above and beyond to achieve consensus on the
text. We applaud the constructive engagement shown
by a majority of the delegations, which participated in
this process with an open mind, discussing possible
improvements to the work of the Economic and Social
Council and the high-level political forum with the
goal of making both of them more efficient, relevant
and focused.
We had hoped for an outcome that would enjoy
the support of all parties involved, particularly given
21-16715

25/06/2021

the great flexibility shown by most delegations,
including the EU and its member States. It is worth
noting that last week the third version of the final
text of draft resolution A/75/L.101 passed the silence
procedure and was therefore assumed to be enjoying
the support of the entire United Nations membership.
We are appalled by the fact that we are now faced
with draft amendments to three paragraphs in that
very text (A/75/L.104). We believe that proposing
amendments in such circumstances undermines the
trust in the co-facilitators, the process and the entire
premise of multilateral negotiations, particularly as
the draft amendments were discussed in detail during
the negotiations. They were deemed unacceptable and
were subsequently replaced by language that was meant
to serve as a compromise. In one case the language
was in fact proposed by the Group that now proposes
further amendments.
On the substance, we would like to note that the
third preambular paragraph is agreed language from
the Declaration on the commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations (resolution
75/1), and as such should be acceptable to all. On
paragraph 19, we strongly oppose the proposed removal
of the current wording, which lists two specific and
existing Economic and Social Council agenda items.
With regard to paragraph 25, we are dismayed by the
new language, which further deviates from the concept
of the humanitarian-development-peace nexus and the
idea behind the reimagined meeting on the transition
from relief to development to deepen the discussion
on the relationship between humanitarian action,
development and sustaining peace. For those reasons,
we will be voting against the draft amendments.
Mrs. Stern (Australia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and
my own country, Australia.
Draft resolution A/75/L.101 is part of our ongoing
work to ensure that the Economic and Social Council
is fit for purpose. After months of challenging
negotiations, the draft resolution — which successfully
passed the silence procedure last week — reflected
numerous concessions from all delegations, including
ours. While our delegations continued to have concerns
with some language in the final version of the text, we
were ready to join others and adopt the draft resolution
by consensus.

A/75/PV.87

We are disappointed to find ourselves considering
multiple draft amendments (A/75/L.104) being
presented after the text had successfully passed silence
procedure. We are also deeply disappointed that one of
the draft amendments proposes to delete a much-needed
discussion on mainstreaming a gender perspective
within the United Nations system as part of the
Economic and Social Council coordination segment.
The proposed amendments also remove important
language on human rights, which was agreed as part of
the Declaration on the commemoration of the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations (resolution
75/1). For those reasons, our delegations cannot support
the draft amendments.
Mr. Chung (Republic of Korea): On behalf of the
Republic of Korea, I would like to first express our
gratitude to the co-facilitators and their respective
teams for their leadership, dedication and hard work
throughout this process.
We nonetheless must regretfully express our
disappointment that draft amendments to the final
text (A/75/L.104) have been proposed even after the
silence procedure was successfully concluded without
objections. While we were not entirely happy with
certain parts of the final text, along with many other
delegations we chose not to break the silence, in a
spirit of flexibility and compromise. We have also
recognized the imperative to reach a collective decision
on this process, which has important implications
for the functioning of one of the principal organs of
the United Nations, as well as a principal mechanism
for the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The silence procedure is a time-tested practice and
tradition at the United Nations, and indeed in many
other multilateral arenas. It is built on the mutual trust
between all partners that collective decisions made
through it will be honoured and considered by all those
participating to be agreed on as final. This proposal for
amendments introduced after the successful conclusion
of the silence procedure represents a serious breach
of trust among us. It also undermines one of the
fundamental building blocks of multilateral dialogue,
based on mutual respect, trust and equal commitment.
We are therefore deeply concerned about the possibility
that it could set a dangerous precedent for the future.
Lastly, we regret that the draft amendments devalue
the tireless work of the co-facilitators and the months

21-167155/13

A/75/PV.87

that they poured into this process in the goal of achieving
a consensus outcome. In that regard, the Republic of
Korea will vote against the proposed amendments.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before
the voting.
Before we proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.101, in accordance with rule 90 of
the rules of procedure, the Assembly will first take a
decision on draft amendment A/75/L.104. A recorded
vote has been requested on the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.104.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon,
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
6/13

25/06/2021

Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/75/L.104 was adopted by 71
votes to 51, with 10 abstentions.
The Acting President (spoke in French): Since
draft amendment A/75/L.104 is adopted, we shall
now proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.101, as amended.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.101, as amended, entitled “Review
of the implementation of General Assembly resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council; Review of the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development and 70/299 on the followup and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level”. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
21-16715

25/06/2021

A/75/PV.87

Against:
None

Social Affairs and other colleagues from the Secretariat
for their support, including their substantive support,
throughout the process. I want to repeat that we are
extremely disappointed by the final stages of the
process, in particular the introduction of amendments
to a finalized text that had passed the silence procedure.
We disapprove of this way of proceeding and do not see
it as a precedent for the future.

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Draft resolution A/75/L.101, as amended, was
adopted by 90 votes to none, with 47 abstentions
(resolution 75/290 A).
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.102, entitled “Review of the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the
strengthening of the Economic and Social Council;
Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 67/290 on the format and organizational
aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development and 70/299 on the follow-up and review
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the
global level”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.102?
Draft resolution A/75/L.102 was adopted (resolution
75/290 B).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote
after the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Lages (Portugal): We would like to start by
thanking the co-facilitators, Ambassadors Marschik of
Austria and Niang of Senegal, as well as their teams,
for their perseverance and what can only be described
as a heroic effort, both of which have brought us here
today for the conclusion of a lengthy and difficult
negotiation process. We would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Department of Economic and

The member States of the European Union (EU)
abstained in the voting on resolution 75/290 A on
the review of the Economic and Social Council and
joined the consensus on resolution 75/290 B on the
review of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development. We did not do it without reservations.
First of all, we are disappointed that a process that
started as an ambitious exercise to thoroughly assess
the functioning and organization of the Economic and
Social Council and the high-level political forum and
to introduce necessary adjustments in order to make
both more efficient, effective and impactful concluded
with a product that does not reflect the initial ambition
of either the co-facilitators or the delegations that
have engaged in the process since the beginning. On
the contrary, to a large extent it maintains the status
quo, in particular the largely obsolete high-level
segment of the Economic and Social Council and
the somewhat duplicative Development Cooperation
Forum. We hope nonetheless that the discussion we
had on those meetings will inspire the organizers and
the participants to improve them as well as make them
useful and meaningful.
Another major problem for the EU and its member
States in the adopted text is the allocation of additional
time for the annual session of the Economic and Social
Council. We have consistently argued against such a
solution. We are convinced that that is not the right
way to go and that the work of the Economic and Social
Council and the high-level political forum needs to be
rationalized. It seems easy to add days and meetings to
the current calendar, and yet it is almost impossible to
eliminate them, even if they are shown to be obsolete
or unable to fulfil their expected function. We will be
watching carefully how the Council and the Secretariat
use the additional time, and we expect every effort to
be made to ensure efficiency in the proceedings of the
newly created coordination segment and meeting on
the transition from relief to development so that the
additional time is not used unless absolutely necessary.

21-167157/13

A/75/PV.87

We remain extremely concerned about what we
see as attempts to weaken stakeholder participation
in both the Economic and Social Council and the
high-level political forum. It is our view that the
participation of a variety of stakeholders adds value to
the meetings of the Council and the forum, enriching
our discussion and bringing in perspectives that we
often lack at the United Nations. We would like to see
the uninhibited participation of all stakeholders across
the United Nations. That refers to the participation of
such institutions as national human rights institutions,
among others, which cannot be qualified as either
governmental or non-governmental and therefore
are often unable to access the United Nations. It is
a shame that collectively we have failed to secure
a solution allowing for that. We do not support the
current formulation of, for example, paragraph 21 in
the annex to resolution 75/290 A or paragraph 25 of
the annex to resolution 75/290 B. We appeal to Member
States to include representatives of civil society, the
private sector, academia and national parliaments in all
activities pertinent to the follow-up and review of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as in
their delegations to various meetings of the Economic
and Social Council.
We are appalled by the persistent questioning of the
relevance of human rights to the work of the Economic
and Social Council and of the high-level political
forum, and by the fact that the broader United Nations
membership refuses to refer to the clear mandates of
the Council in this area, as expressed in the Charter
of the United Nations. That is apparent in the current
formulation of paragraph 1 of the annex to resolution
75/290 A. We want to reiterate that human rights and
fundamental freedoms are an undeniable part of the
concept of sustainable development, underpinning
all actions related to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda. They cannot be separated from development.
They are development. We are glad that the text seems
to acknowledge that fact, and yet we could have
wished for far more explicit and specific language in
that regard.
Finally, we are disappointed that our proposal to hold
the next review of the Economic and Social Council and
high-level political forum during the General Assembly
at its seventy-seventh session was disregarded despite
the lack of opposition. We believe it would make sense
to have a comprehensive and hopefully constructive
8/13

25/06/2021

discussion on the topic before the beginning of the next
cycle of the high-level political forum.
Despite the aforementioned reservations, the EU and
its member States do see and appreciate the potential of
the text to make the Economic and Social Council and
the high-level political forum work better. One of the
examples is certainly the elimination of the integration
segments, which we have long deemed obsolete. Another
is the establishment of a new coordination segment with
an ambitious and extensive mandate. Let us collectively
make an effort to make this meeting matter. We also
see value in the language on the enhanced cooperation
between the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. And we support the new
iteration of the meeting on the transition from relief to
development, which has the promise to become a bridge
between humanitarian and development discussions
and will surely be used by the EU and its member States
to highlight the implementation of the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus, as well as to look into the
issue of sustaining peace as it relates to the items now
moved over from the management segment and placed
on the agenda of the transition meeting. We regret that
it was impossible to reflect the changed focus of the
meeting in its name or to use such formulations as “the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus” or “sustaining
peace” to describe its content.
We also want to underline that we expect the broadest
possible participation of stakeholders in the meeting’s
deliberations, as was the case with the transition events.
We similarly hope that the adjusted Partnership Forum
will contribute to stronger ties between the Economic
and Social Council and a broad range of stakeholders,
as well as to the creation of lasting partnerships, which
are desperately needed in the last stretch to 2030. We
hope that even though there was no agreement to reflect
that in the name of the meeting, the forum will have
genuine multi-stakeholder participation.
On the high-level political forum, we are glad that
we have reached an agreement on its themes for the years
2022 and 2023, as well as on the subsets of Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) to be reviewed in depth in
those years. The same goes for the reaffirmation of the
2030 Agenda principles that should be applied to the
voluntary national reviews and for ensuring an early
delivery of reports informing the work of the high-level
political forum on an annual basis, in the case of the
SDG progress report, or quadrennial, in the case of the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review.
21-16715

25/06/2021

A/75/PV.87

In conclusion, we should make it very clear that we
do not read any provision of the newly adopted resolution
as undermining or changing related provisions of the
2030 Agenda, even though some paragraphs do deviate
from the Agenda’s language, as for example paragraph
27 of the annex to resolution 75/290 B.

Council is intended to improve its working methods, as
opposed to reaffirming the status quo. Despite the most
recent changes to the aforementioned paragraph, the
resolution denies what has already taken place in the
meeting on the transition from relief to development,
the humanitarian segment and the operational segment.

Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico would like to thank the co-facilitators and their
team for their very hard work and intensive efforts to
achieve a consensus text.

Mexico has also taken note of the way in which
language in the texts relating to the participation of civil
society has been watered down, which we disagree with.
The participation of civil society in our deliberations
enriches dialogue and promotes understanding between
decision-makers and individuals on the ground, with a
view to ensuring that our agreements have an effective
and positive impact on their lives.

While Mexico joined the consensus on resolution
75/290 B and voted in favour of resolution 75/290 A,
we believe that the potential and the value of those
texts were watered down throughout the discussions,
addressing the priorities of only one negotiating group.
We want to underscore the fact that the third preambular
paragraph, which contained agreed language from the
Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations (resolution 75/1),
was one concession that originated in a modification to
paragraph one of the annex of resolution 75/290 A, to
the detriment of the Charter of the United Nations. That
foundational document should not be questioned, and
nor should it be done away with in a draft resolution that
has to do with the functioning of one of the main bodies
of the Organization. Not recognizing that the Economic
and Social Council should be dealing with economic,
social, cultural, educational and health issues as well
as making recommendations to promote the respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms is to deny the
normative and founding principles of the Organization.
My delegation is taking this opportunity to reiterate
once again Mexico’s view that sustainable development
and human rights are two sides of the same coin. We
cannot hope to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development if we do not comply with our international
obligations in the area of human rights. Both thematic
bodies have the common purpose of ensuring the wellbeing of our peoples.
With respect to paragraph 25 and the various
modifications it has undergone, Mexico underlines
that sustainable peace is not the same as Sustainable
Development Goal 16. To replace one with the other is
to confuse their meanings and is a failure to recognize
that the intrinsic link between development and peace
has already been dealt with routinely in the discussions
of the Economic and Social Council. Mexico is of
the view that the review of the Economic and Social

Finally, Mexico would like to highlight that
discussion of the inclusion of human rights and gender
as topics that can be “cherry-picked” is neither wise
nor appropriate. The United Nations has acknowledged
in numerous documents adopted since the turn of this
century that development, peace, security and human
rights are interrelated and mutually reinforcing. As
we have said on numerous occasions, Mexico does not
envisage sustainable development without ensuring that
we respect, promote and protect human rights and the
empowerment of women and girls. We have promoted
that comprehensive view in the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council.
The documents that we have adopted fall far below
our expectations. Despite that, we hope that in future
we can go beyond our ideological positions, face our
realities and improve our intergovernmental forums for
the well-being of our peoples. In that regard, Mexico can
be trusted to redouble its efforts to promote a functional
and accountable Economic and Social Council.
In conclusion, Mexico dissociates itself from the
practice of proposing amendments after the successful
conclusion of the silence procedure, which goes against
established policy.
Mr. Thomas (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of Austria and Senegal, and their teams
for their tireless efforts to bring delegations together on
resolutions 75/290 A and 75/290 B.
We sincerely regret today that all delegations could
not come together to set the text presented this morning,
which passed the silence procedure, and that draft

21-167159/13

A/75/PV.87

25/06/2021

amendments (A/75/L.104) were put forward that led to
the need for the vote we witnessed today. That is not in
the spirit of constructive negotiation and compromise
that we aspire to here at the United Nations.

includes empowering all women and girls. That we do
not acknowledge that today in the text in the strongest
possible terms continues to be a source of dismay for
my delegation.

The overarching goals of the United Kingdom for
this text were made clear throughout the six months of
negotiations: maintaining the delivery of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) as the principle focus of
the Economic and Social Council and the high-level
political forum on sustainable development; ensuring
that all activities are aligned to their delivery as we
begin this crucial moment of the Decade of Action to
deliver the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030;
focusing on cross-cutting priority areas — which enable
wider progress on the SDGs but were undermined
by today’s amendments — including human rights,
climate, environment and gender; guaranteeing the
highest level of civil-society participation possible,
as its actors are the critical stakeholders and delivery
partners for the achievement of the SDGs, especially at
the high-level political forum, which must be included;
and finally, streamlining and ensuring the efficiency
of the Economic and Social Council and the high-level
political forum, including by preventing an expansion
of their mandates, functions and budgets.

Finally, we share our disappointment today in
this process. For our part, we did not feel as though
our efforts to continually compromise in good faith
were matched by other delegations, nor did we hear
convincing arguments as to why certain language was
unacceptable, including consensus language from the
Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations (resolution 75/1).

Overall, we are pleased that the focus of the
Economic and Social Council and the high-level
political forum remains on the 2030 Agenda. We
are pleased that there is no expansion of roles with
knock-on budget implications. It is important that we
managed to reach agreement on the high-level political
forum themes for 2022 and 2023 and on the SDGs to
be reviewed. However, it is with profound regret that
we express our disappointment that the Economic
and Social Council calendar has been lengthened.
We believe the practical ability, particularly for the
new February segment to be productive, is slim. The
calendar is now longer and more complicated instead of
more efficient. The unproductive high-level segment of
the Economic and Social Council and the Development
Cooperation Forum have been retained.
We are also disappointed that we did not achieve
greater ambition on civil-society engagement. As
I mentioned, our efforts can only be strengthened
by working with partners. Civil society is integral
to SDG delivery. I would also like to emphasize that
development and human rights cannot be separated.
They must go hand in hand. We cannot achieve the
SDGs without a strong rights-based approach, which
10/13

The United Kingdom stands ready to continue to
engage constructively and in good faith in all future
negotiations. In conclusion, beyond today, I will express
the aspiration of the United Kingdom for a strong and
ambitious ministerial declaration for the 2021 highlevel political forum.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking the co-facilitators, Austria
and Senegal, for their efforts to achieve a consensus
on this important issue. The United States abstained in
the voting on resolution 75/290 A to protest the failure
of some Member States to approach the negotiations on
this vital issue in good faith. Our collective goal should
be to make the Economic and Social Council and the
high-level political forum more effective and responsive
to meet the challenges that we face as Member States.
The concessions made by many were a true effort
to reach consensus. However, the repeated breaking
of the silence and the amendments (A/75/L.104) made
following the passage of the silence procedure suggest
that not all Member States share that goal. It is our hope
that in future negotiations on the issue, Member States
will come to the table to address the issues at hand. The
amendment offered today undermines the importance
of human rights, the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective into the policies and programmes of the
United Nations system and the promotion of peaceful
and inclusive societies, including the vital necessity for
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions. We
reject any attempt to undermine those principles and
underscore their importance to the fundamental work
of the United Nations, including the need to incorporate
the voices of civil society in informing our efforts and
achieving our goals.
The addition of one and a half days to the calendar
of the Economic and Social Council does not advance
21-16715

25/06/2021

the goal of a more effective Council. We urge Member
States and the Secretariat to focus on making the
existing meetings more relevant to Member States’
concerns before adding additional days, with additional
costs, to the Economic and Social Council calendar.
Finally, we should note once again that the term
“right to development”, including references in
resolution 75/290 B, lacks an internationally accepted
definition, and our views on this matter are well
known. Additionally, the United States underscores
that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was
conceived as a whole, and we are concerned about the
decision to selectively highlight a particularly sensitive
paragraph from the Agenda to suit the interests of some
delegations. The United States therefore dissociates
itself from the third preambular paragraph of resolution
75/290 A, as amended, and the sixth preambular
paragraph of resolution 75/290 B.

A/75/PV.87

the resolution, stating that the Council should
also strengthen its efforts to mainstream a gender
perspective across its agenda and programme of work.
However, we also believe it is equally important to
promote a discussion on including a gender perspective
in all policies and programmes in the United Nations
system as a whole, including during the Economic and
Social Council coordination segment, as pointed out in
paragraph 19 of the annex. In that way, we recognize
that mainstreaming a gender perspective in all the
work of the United Nations is absolutely essential to
achieving our international commitments and moving
forward with the 2030 Agenda.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala would like to take this opportunity
to briefly explain its vote on the amendment (A/75/L.104)
to resolution 75/290 A, concerning the Economic and
Social Council.

Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of Argentina,
Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, Lebanon,
Uruguay and my own country, Chile, to explain our vote
on resolution 75/290 A, which we have just adopted,
and the amendment (A/75/L.104) that was introduced.

We thank the co-facilitators of the consultation
process, Ambassadors Cheikh Niang, Permanent
Representative of Senegal, and Alexander Marschik,
Permanent Representative of Austria, and we welcome
their enormous efforts to ensure consensus results in
this process. Their work was exemplary.

We would first like to express our sincere thanks
to the co-facilitators of the resolution, Ambassadors
Cheikh Niang, Permanent Representative of Senegal,
and Alexander Marschik, Permanent Representative
of Austria, for their excellent work during this lengthy
negotiation process, which has concluded today.

Guatemala voted with the Group of 77 and
China, representing the consensus view of developing
countries on issues related to sustainable development
in the United Nations. However, we want to take
this opportunity to offer some clarifications of our
national position. With regard to the third preambular
paragraph, my country would like to reaffirm its full
agreement with and support for the Declaration on
the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations (resolution 75/1), adopted in
September 2020.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
is at the heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It is a cross-cutting and unresolved
challenge that has been negatively affected by the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Today more than ever,
we must work together to recover the progress achieved
in previous decades in terms of gender equality.
Women and girls are one of the groups most affected
by the socioeconomic fallout of the current pandemic.
The agenda of the Economic and Social Council
addresses a range of issues that affect our societies.
The appropriate inclusion of a gender perspective in
its work reflects considerations of justice while also
facilitating progress towards the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals, reflected in the 2030
Agenda and its Goals and targets.
Fortunately, the resolution takes on those
considerations in paragraph 13 of the annex to

With regard to paragraph 19, Guatemala would like
to point out that it fully supports gender equality and
the empowerment of women as essential conditions
for achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It is crucial to shed light on the specific
needs of women and girls by providing information
and disaggregated data so as to ensure that no
one is left behind. The language presented in the
amendment does not prevent consideration during the
coordination segments of specific issues in the text of
the co-facilitators concerning the mainstreaming of
a gender perspective throughout all the policies and
programmes of the United Nations and concerning the

21-1671511/13

A/75/PV.87

implementation of General Assembly resolutions related
to strengthening the Economic and Social Council.
Regarding paragraph 25, Guatemala reaffirms that
the three pillars of the United Nations are mutually
reinforcing. We welcome a preventive approach to
strengthening resilience in the three dimensions of
sustainable development, which will contribute to
sustainable peace, with all of it based on human rights,
including the humanitarian-development-peace nexus.
Mr. Diane (Guinea): In my current capacity as
Chair of the Group of 77 and China, I have the pleasure
to refer to resolutions 75/290 A and 75/290 B, on the
review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council; review of the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development; and 70/299 on the followup and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level, to which the Group
attaches the greatest importance.
We would like at the outset to sincerely thank
Mr. Alexander Marschik, Permanent Representative
of Austria, and Mr. Cheikh Niang, Permanent
Representative of Senegal, the co-facilitators of these
intergovernmental negotiations, for their constant
engagement, tireless efforts and feedback throughout
the process. We fully understand that despite all their
efforts, it eventually became very difficult to bridge
the various views and positions, especially in the
light of the relevant implications that this review will
have on shaping our work in coming years for such a
fundamental United Nations organ as the Economic and
Social Council, as well as the high-level political forum
on sustainable development, which serves as a platform
for the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda.

25/06/2021

to no avail, the Group decided not to break the silence
procedure but instead to present amendments to address
those concerns and reservations — which had been
raised with the co-facilitators on several occasions — on
the final text. We stated from the very beginning of the
process that it was important that we neither rewrite the
2030 Agenda nor discuss the mandates, remits or scope
of the high-level political forum and the Economic and
Social Council other than in a holistic, balanced and
comprehensive manner, in an attempt to avoid putting
focus on any particular development issue.
The Group resisted attempts to include individual
topic areas in the texts and remains disappointed that
the co-facilitators were unable to bring us back to
the regular practice of these reviews, which entails
taking a more holistic approach. In future, the Group
believes that reviews of the Economic and Social
Council and the high-level political forum should
include more dialogue on what is not working and why,
and what adjustments can be made before we arrive at
the irrational decision of removal. The Group firmly
believes that many of the segments of the Economic and
Social Council need adjustments that would promote a
more effective Council and also meet the expectations
of the development agenda. We want to place on record
that we are disheartened that on these two extremely
important documents, we were unable to find the sort
of consensus that would have given an impetus to the
system to continue its work in a manner that is fit
for purpose.

In keeping with that spirit of unity and
constructiveness throughout the process, the Group of
77 and China continued to show maximum flexibility on
various parts of the draft resolutions and their annexes,
including at the last stage, showing total flexibility with
regard to the high-level political forum and its annex,
even though there still remain several proposals in that
draft that the Group was not comfortable with.

We continue to insist that the voluntary national
reviews should be country-led and not structured so
as to act as a deterrent to countries. The idea of the
voluntary national reviews was to ensure that countries
felt free to report on their implementation of the
2030 Agenda, giving others the chance, through peer
learning, to gain or share their experiences, challenges,
gaps and achievements. Unlike what is constantly being
said of the Group of 77 and China with regard to the
participation of major groups, academia, the private
sector and other relevant stakeholders, the Group is
of the firm belief that they bring added value to our
processes. However, we believe that their participation
must be guided by the provisions set out in the Economic
and Social Council.

The Group was unable, however, to show the same
level of flexibility on three paragraphs in the text
pertaining to the Economic and Social Council and its
annex. Despite raising those concerns repeatedly, and

The Group of 77 and China continues to hope that
we will be able to address development in its entirety
and in all its three dimensions at all times, giving
each issue of development our undivided and equal

12/13

21-16715

25/06/2021

attention. For our part, we know that all are very much
interrelated and intertwined.
Mr. Schlaepfer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the engagement and the efforts
of the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives
of Austria and Senegal, who have definitely done
their utmost to reach a consensus. We regret that
such a consensus was not possible. Switzerland
would have liked to see the discussions take place in
a more constructive and solution-oriented atmosphere,
particularly in the final phase of the negotiations.
We would like to take this opportunity today to
clarify our position on certain aspects of resolution
75/290 A. First of all, we welcome the fact that the
review of the Economic and Social Council and highlevel political forum on sustainable development
continues to take place concomitantly, ensuring greater
consistency. However, we are disappointed with
certain aspects, including the fact that we were unable
to further streamline the work of the Economic and
Social Council. We are also disappointed that language
pertaining to the participation of stakeholders as well as
the references to human rights treaties and conventions
have been weakened.
Beyond that, the amendment (A/75/L.104)
unfortunately constitutes a missed opportunity to
strengthen the voluntary national review process. We
are pleased, however, that the Economic and Social
Council humanitarian affairs segment as well as the

A/75/PV.87

meeting on the transition from relief to development
will continue to alternate between Geneva and New
York, thereby maintaining a connection between the
two segments.
Finally, we welcome the fact that certain agenda
items, such as the discussions on certain geographical
contexts, have been moved from the management
segment to the new transition meeting. We regret,
however, that gender mainstreaming in the new
coordination segment was explicitly removed from
the text of the amendment considered this morning.
Retaining that language would have made it possible
to have more substantive discussions on this extremely
important issue.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the voting.
On behalf of the President of the General Assembly,
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
co-facilitators, Mr. Alexander Marschik, Permanent
Representative of Austria to the United Nations, and
Mr. Cheikh Niang, Permanent Representative of
Senegal to the United Nations, who ably and patiently
conducted the discussions and complex negotiations on
resolutions 75/290 A and 75/290 B, considered today.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 14 and 122.
The meeting rose at 11:10 a.m.

21-1671513/13
