United Nations

2428th

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Thursday, 4 December /975,
at 3.40 p.m.

7HlR7 IE7 H SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

Agenda item 22:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations/m/lduded):
(h) Other reports of the Security Council...........

1131

President: Mr. Gaston THORN
. (Luxembourg).

AGENDA ITEM 22
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(concluded): *
(b) Other reports of the Security Council
I. The PRESIDENT (illterpretation from French):
The General Assembly will continue consideration of
agenda item 22. In document A/I0413 the Security
Council recommends the admission of Surinam to
membership in the United Nations. A draft resolution,
in document A/L.781/Rev.1 and Add.I, has been circulated.
2. May I take it that the Assembly accepts the recommendation of the Security Council and adopts draft
resolution A/L781/Rev.1 and Add.l?
The draji resolution was adopted (resolution 34/3
(XXX)).

3. The PRESIDENT (illterpretation jhnll French):
I declare Surinam admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
The dele!fatioll of Sul'inam was escorted to its pla('('
ill the General Assembly hall.
4. The PRESIDENT (illterpretatioll jhnl1 Frellch):
On behalf of the General Assembly, it is an honour
and a pleasure for me to offer sincere congratulations
to the delegation of Surinam and to welcome it to the
United Nations.
5. Mr. KOOIJMANS (Netherlands): On behalfof the
Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I am
honoured and privileged to have the opportunity of
being the first to congratulate from this rostrum the
Republic of Surinam on its admission to the United
Nations and to welcome in this hall the delegation
of Surinam headed by Prime Minister Henck Arron.
It is fitting that the Netherlands representative should
be the first speaker on this happy occasion, since until
the day of its independence, 25 November 1975,
Surinam was united with the Netherlands and the
Netherlands Antilles in the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
* Resumed from the 2402nd meetlllg.

6. The ties between the Netherlands and Surinam
date back to the seventeenth century. Without dwelling
too long on the past, I might recall that the territory
of Surinam was taken from the British by a Dutch
fleet in 1667. Dutch sovereignty was confirmed by
the peace treaty of Breda of 1667 between England
and Holland. The same treaty legitimized the British
hold on Nieuw Amsterdam, later named New York.
7. The relationship between Surinam and the Netherlands as that of a colony with its metropolitan country came to a definitive end more than twenty years
ago with the adoption of the Charter for the Kingdom
of the Netherlands. That Charter entered into force
on 15 December 1954, and gave full autonomy and
equal partnership to the three parts of the Kingdom:
the Netherlands, the Netherlands Antilles, and
Surinam. The termination of the colonial relationship
was re~ognized by the General Assembly at its tenth
session when, on 15 December 1955, by its resolution
945 (X) it expressed the opinion that the cessation of
the transmission of information under Article 73 (e)
of the Charter was appropriate. During that session
of the General Assembly the Netherlands delegation
declared that each of the partners of the Kingdom
would be entirely free to leave the constitutional
framework of the Kingdom, if and when it should so
wish.
8. It was, therefore, fully consistent with this policy
that the Netherlands Government wholeheartedly and
fully co-operated with the Government of Surinam,
when it recently expressed its desire to dissolve
Surinam's ties with the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
I am happy to state that the consultations between the
two Governments that preceded Surinam's full independence took place in an atmosphere of traditional
friendship, genuine understanding, and wiIlingness
to reach mutually acceptable solutions on all points
~~hat were subjects of discussion.
9. It will be evident from what I said before that
the Netherlands welcomes Surinam as a newly-independent and sovereign State. The Government of the
Netherlands is pleased to have been able to take the
initiative in submitting the resolution which has just
been adopted unanimously. In this connection, I should
like to express my Government's appreciation to the
sponsors of that resolution and to all those States
which during the general debate in this thirtieth session
desired to welcome Surinam as a new meClber of the
world community.
10. Surinam has been an autonomous and selfgoverning country for more than 20 years. Diplomats
of Surinam, furthermore, have, as members of the
Netherlands foreign service, made a valuable contribution to the diplomacy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. For example, representatives of Surinam have
been members of the Netherlands delegation to the
United Nations ever since 1948. As another example
1131

A/PV.2428

1132

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

of Surinam's involvement in international affairs,
I wish to recall its participation in the work of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
11. The Netherlands Government is fully confident
that a close bond with Surinam will be maintained.
The two nations possess a common language. and
a continuing far-ranging co-operation in the economic
and technological fields has been provided for. Thus
a new relationship does not mean the rupture of an
old friendship. This is also underlined by the fact that
Her Majesty the Queen of the Netherlands was represented at the independence celebrations by her eldest
daughter. Crown Princess Beatrix. and her husband.
Prince Claus. As far as relations between Surinam
and Western Europe are concerned. there will remain
a strong connexion through the continuation of Surinam's association with the European Economic Community in a new context.
12. Surinam has now entered the United Nations.
It will be able to participate in the work of the Organization as a Member State in its own right. as a member
of the group of Latin American States, and as a member
of the large group of developing nations. Once more,
on behalf of my Government and of the Netherlands
delegation, I extend a warm welcome to Surinam.
13. The PRESIDENT (ill1erpretation ji"O/lI French):
I now call on Mr. Waldron-Ramsey of Barbados,
who will address the Assembly on behalf of the Group
of Latin American States.

14. Mr. WALJRON-RAMSEY (Barbados): I have
come to this podium to salute the Government and
the gallant people of the Republic of Surinam upon
their accession to complete independence and their
admission to membership of the United Nations.
Mr. President, in the name of the delegations of the
Latin American States, I beg your leave to congratulate
the delegation of Surinam, led by its Prime Minister.
Mr. Henck Arron.
15. The Republic of Surinam is a sister republic
located on the continent of South America. Its people,
history and culture reflect the richness of the diversity
and vitality of the nation and of the continent itself.
But there has always been another geo-political and
social dimension to the Republic of Surinam. for
Surinam has always kept open a window of spiritual
contact and communication on the panorama of
Caribbean experience. And, indeed, that factor has
helped to forge a special link between Surinam and
those of its neighbours which make up the Caribbean
community. And, further afield, a community of interests has always sufficed to provide an intimate fraternal
bond amongst the States of the whole region.
16. The Netherlands Government had exercised
a benign imperium over Surinam since 1667; but since
1954, the Government of Surinam, in its turn, has
enjoyed full internal self-government, while it remained
a full and integral part of the constitutional Kingdom
of the Netherlands. Today the cortstitutional nexus
which joined these two political entities together is
now formally broken, and the Republic of Surinam
stands here today in this Assembly in the resplendent
majesty of a sovereign State. And we, members of
this Assembly, rightly pay homage to this exercise
offreedom by the Government and people of Surinam;
for nothing is more deserving of respect than the

decision of an entity in tutelage to undertake the
direct assumption of plenipotentiary responsibility
and to don the mantle of sovereignty in the congregation of equals.
17. Nothing is more gratifying than to witness a
people which has recaptured its nationhood proclaim
from the tribune of the peoples of the community of
nations that it is willing and able to assume the obligations and responsibilities of a State Member of the
United Nations. consistent with Article 4 of the
Charter.
18. The delegations I represent today rejoice with the
people of Surinam in this their finest hour of glory.
And our jubilation will subside only when every
Territory on the continent of Latin America and the
region can proclaim its freedom within secure and
recognized boundaries and the sanctity of territorial
integrity.
19. I am happy to observe that the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. which shares a common language with
the Republic of Surinam. will continue its far-ranging
co-operation with the Government and people of
Surinam in the economic and technological fields.
Thus the new relationship between those two States
will be both dignified and rewarding. The Government
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands is to be congratulated further on the quality of the good stewardship
which it has maintained throughout the colonial
experience of Surinam. The Government of the Netherlands has always respected the right to self-determination of the people of Surinam.
20. Prime Minister Arron. on his part. is to be applauded for the peaceful and successful termination
of the colonial status of Surinam and his triumphant
march into this assembly of sovereign States today.

27.
I n
Pak
beh
28.
imp
nes
SafJ

25. A country 142.822 square kilometres in area,
with 400,000 inhabitants, the world's third-ranking
producer of bauxite, Surinam is a country possessing
all the qualifications for statehood as it comes onto
the international scene.

Co
now
tod
29.
Org
the
den
achi
yet
stru
the
that
peo
nati
mat
the
ofp
an a
30.
the
nece
has
in S
31.
ther
we
side
and
the
32.
look
peo
in ot
the
cons
nom
othe
just
that
stre
of it
33.
And
Eur
Rom
34.
a so
occa
the
its
to a
ofth

26. On this solemn historic and memorable day, when
the heart of the people ofSurinam beats with happiness,
the group of African States, that is to say, Africa,
wishes it every success as it sets out on its road of
independence.

35.
inde
uswi
will
the c

21. The Latin American States welcome Surinam
to our midst as a gallant sister-State. and extend the
hand offriendship and full co-operation to the Government and people of the Republic of Surinam.
22. The PRESIDENT (ill1erpretation ji'ol1l French):
I now call on Mr. Essonghe, the representative of
Gabon, who will address the Assembly on behalf of
the Group of African States.
23. Mr. ESSONGHE (Gabon) (interpretation ji"Oll1
French): It is with deep' satisfaction that, on behalf

of the Group of African States, I welcome the entry
of the Republic of Surinam into the great universal
family.
24. I congratulate the Netherlands. which, with
intelligence and generosity. has led Surinam to independence. It is my hope that the Netherlands will
fulfill its moral obligations by assisting Surinam as it
takes its first steps in independent life.

24281h meeling-4 December 1975

27. The PRESIDENT (il/terpretl/tioll./i"oll/ Frel/ch):
I now call on Mr. Akhund. the representative of
Pakistan. who will address the General Assembly on
behalf of the Group of Asian States.
28. Mr. AKHUND <Pakistan): This has been an
important year for the cause of freedom. It has witnessed the emergence of Mozambique. Cape Verde.
SafJ Tome and Principe. Papua New Guinea and the
Comoros as independent. sovereign States that have
now become Members of the United Nations; and
today. Surinam.
29. On behalf of the Asian States Members of this
Organization. I greet with special joy and satisfaction
the entry of Surinam into the community of independent States and into the world Organization. The
achievement of independence by Surinam represents
yet another step in the successful conclusion of the
struggle for independence which has characterized
the current era in history. Its admission here is a tribute
that we pay to the determination exhibited by the
people of Surinam in striving for the fulfilment of their
national aspirations. It does credit to the wisdom and
maturity of the national leaders of Surinam that. in
the face of admittedly difficult problems. the transfer
of power has taken place in a peaceful manner and in
an atmosphere of amity.
30. Credit also must be given to the Government of
the Netherlands. which had the wisdom to see the
necessity of ending colonial rule. and. accordingly.
has adopted forward-looking and constructive policies
in Surinam.
31. For any country arriving on the world stage
there will be problems. Surinam is no exception. but
we are sure that the rich cultural diversity. the considerable natural resources and the political wisdom
and experience of the people of Surinam will enable
them to overcome those difficulties.
32. The Asian States Members of this Organization
look forward to working with the Government and
people of Surinam in the United Nations as well as
in other bilateral and international forums. We wish
the pet'ple of Surinam all success in their efforts to
consolidate their freedom by developing their economic potential. We look forward to their joining
other Member States in the establishment of a more
just and equitable world order. and we have no doubt
that Surinam will make a valuable contribution to the
strengthening of the United Nations and the fulfilment
of its objectives.
33. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
And now. to speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States. I call upon the representative of
Romania. Mr. Datcu.
34. Mr. DATCU (interpretation from French): It is
a source of particular pleasure for me. on this solemn
occasion. to be able to offer to the representatives of
the Republic of Surinam. an' ') Mr. Henck Arron.
its Prime Minister. a warm and idendly welcome. and
to address to them the most cordial congratulations
of the Eastern European States.
35. The admission to the United Nations of the
independent and sovereign Republic of Surinam fills
us with sincerejoy. and we are convinced that Surinam
will make its full and most valuable contribution to
the cause of international co-operation in all fields of

1133

activity of the Organization while at the same time. in
its turn. reaping the fruits of that co-operation.
36. The presence of Surinam in our midst. as it joins
the five other States that have recently achieved independence and that we have already had the satisfaction
of welcoming to membership in the United Nations
during this anniversary session. serves only to confirm
once again the irresistible power of the historic process
of liquidating the last vestiges of colonialism on all
continents.
37. While we sincerely rejOice as we witness this
remarkable event. we must regretfully recall the fact
that the Vietnamese people was prevented at this
same session from taking its rightful place in the
United Nations.
38. Every step. like the one we are taking today.
brings closer and closer the day-not too distanton which the last peoples still living under the yoke
of colonialist domination will succeed in winning their
legitimate rights to freedom and to human and national
dignity. and in celebrating with us their victory. It is
the duty of this Organization and all its Members to
redouble their efforts and to intensify their struggle
in complete solidarity in order to make that day come
as soon as possible. As far as we are concerned. we
shall always remain in the forefront of this noble
struggle.
39. Inspired by these thoughts. I wish once again to
extend to the representatives of the new State Member
of the United Nations and to its Prime Minister our
heartfelt congratulations and to wish them all success
in building their country and also in the international
activities which they will undertake towards the
realization of the aspirations of peace. progress and
prosperity of the people of Surinam.
40. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Austria. Mr. Jankowitsch. to speak on behalf of the
Group of Western European and other States.
41. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): On behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
my delegation wishes to join preceding speakers in
congratulating warmly the Republic of Surinam on its
entry today to the United Nations. We are honoured
and privileged to welcome the delegation of the State
that has become the l44th Member of this Organization. We look forward with confidence to the significant
contribution which Surinam will undoubtedly make to
the important work of the United Nations. and to
close and constructive co-operation in all areas dealt
with by the United Nations.
42. The admission of an independent and sovereign
Surinam brings the United Nations. as was said before
this afternoon. one step closer to one of its most
cherished goals-true universality of its membership.
This session of the Assembly. with the admission so
far of six new Members. has been particularly fertile
and successful in this respect. In making this possible.
as far as Surinam is concerned. we wish to pay a high
tribute to the responsible and constructive attitude of
the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and of the leaders of Surinam. whose co-operation
has made possible the accession of that country to
independence in a peaceful and orderly fashion.
43. We are pleased to note the ties offriendship and
partnership between the two countries and we are

1134

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

confident that relations of such a nature between
the newly independent Surinam and the countries of my
region. Western Europe. will continue to grow in the
future.
44. Surinam. like other Caribbean nations. is heir to
peoples and civilizations of many continents-Africa.
Asia. Europe and the Americas. Its population speaks
many languages and practises a number of different
religions. This wealth and synthesis of cultures and
civilizations have brought about remarkable achievements in more than one field and constitute great
promise for the future of independent Surinam.
45. In conclusion. I should like. on behalf of the
Group of Western European and other States. once
again to extend to the Government and the people
of Surinam and to its delegation assembled here today
warm wishes for peace and prosperity in the future.
46. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
of Democratic Yemen. Mr. Ashtal. to address the
Assembly on behalf of the Group of Arab States.
47. Mr. ASHTAL (Democratic Yemen): On behalf
of the group of Arab States. I have the pleasant duty
warmly to welcome the Republic of Surinam to membership of the United Nations.
48. Indeed. it is gratifying to see that the first official
act of newly independent States is to seek membership in this world body. Contrary to any pessimistic
views about the United Nations. its viability and its
effectiveness. the sharp increase in the membership
of States in this Organization is an indication of the
fate of the peoples of the world in the United Nations.
49. Today. with the admission of the friendly State
of the Republic of Surinam. the United Nations is
coming ever closer to its goal of universal representation of all peoples-large and small. It is a happy
occasion to see the people of Surinam attain its independence and sovereignty in an orderly and smooth
manner. We trust that other Territories and peoples
still under colonial rule will be able to attain independence and enjoy membership in the United Nations.
50. I should like once again to welcome the delegation
of Surinam and wish its friendly people progress and
prosperity.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation ji'om French):
I call on the representative of Uganda. Mr. Kinene.
to speak on behalf of the Organization of African
Unity.

51.

52. Mr. KINENE (Uganda): Once again. and in less
than one month. we are gathered here to welcome
yet another fully-fledged Member of our Organization-the Republic of Surinam.

53. This is indeed a very happy occasion which
once again confirms that the days of colonialism are
numbered. It also once more confirms the inalienable
right of all peoples-large or small-to self-determination and independence. We are quite, sure that those
peoples still under colonial rule will defeat their
enemies and also join us here as Members of the
United Nations.
54. It is with this in mind that I have the great pleasure
and honour. on behalf of my President and the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.
AI Hadji Field Marshal Idi Amin Dada. his Govern-

ment and the people of Uganda. first of all to congratulate very warmly the Government and people
of Surinam on the occasion of the proclamation of
their independence on 25 November 1975. under the
leadership of Mr. Henck Arron. the Prime Minister
of Surinam. and secondly. to congratulate them on
the occasion of their admission to membership in the
United Nations.
55. May I take this opportunity to assure the peopk
of Surinam and their Government of the full support
of the people of Uganda and the entire continent of
Africa in their struggle for development and progress.
We are quite sure that Surinam will contribute positively to the fulfilment of the aims and objectives
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
56. In conclusion. my delegation has always maintained that any country which achieves independence
from colonialism always suffers from deep wounds
in its economy. Therefore. we appeal to all Members
of the Organization of the United Nations. as well as
other organizations. to· extend all possible assistance
to those countries which have achieved their independence recently-including the Republic of Surinamin order to enable them to safeguard their hard-won
independence and to build a new and better future.
57. The PRESIDENT: I now call on Ms. Bailey.
the representative of the United States. to speak as
the representative of the host country.
58. Ms. BAILEY (United States of America): Just
as we warmly supported Surinam's candidacy in the
Security Council. the United States has co-sponsored
whole-heartedly the resolution on the admission of
Surinam to membership in the United Nations. We
extend our enthusiastic greetings to Surinam as the
newest member of the United Nations.
59. As host country representative. my delegation
extends a warm welcome to Surinam's representatives
at this Headquarters. My delegation otTers a particularly cordial welcome and greeting to Prime Minister
Arron and Mrs. Arron. and the others members of the
Surinam delegation who have come to the United
Nations on this historic occasion. It is the sincere
hope of my delegation that this day marks the beginning
of even closer and friendlier ties between the Government of the United States and the Government of
Surinam as we engage in a common etTort to realize
the goals of the Charter of the United Nations.
60. Surinam's achievement of independence is a
tribute to the dedication and capacity of its elected
leaders and their ·commitment to the well-being of
their peoples. It is also a tribute to the progressive
policies of the Government of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
61. The United States and Surinam have historical
links which go back to the early colonial days of the
Western Hemisphere. In fact. in 1667 the colonies
of Surinam and Nieuw Amsterdam. as New York
was called at the time. were exchanged by the then
metropolitan Powers. The United States Consulate
in Surinam. established in 1790. was elevated to an
embassy on 25 November 1975. when Surinam became
an independent nation.
62. Surinam's diverse and capable population. its rich
natural resources and varied agricultural production.
along with a commitmer'lt to liberal trade policies.

P
T
ti

m
g

i

m
I
Y
w

th
N
A

to

70.

tio
he
shi
Un
71.
tha
me
sio

2428th meeting-4 December 1975

provide the basis for continued economic development.
The new Republic's long history of democratic traditions and self-government. including the establishment of a legislative council over a century ago. are
grounds for anticipation that Surinam will make
important contributions to the whole United Nations.
63. My delegation truly wishes Surinam all the
benefits of independence and of membership in the
United Nations. We look forward to a strong contribution from Surinam to the deliberations and activities
of the Organization. Once again. welcome. Surinam.
64. Before finishing. I would like to say something
more. I watched your delegation. Surinam. walk in.
I watched you as you proceeded down the aisle.
You walked very proudly. and I felt very proud to
watch you walk in. because you walked with something that men should walk with. It is called dignity.
Not one of you' looked back. You alllcoked forward.
And that is the only way a man should walk.
Mr. Mutuale Tshikankie (Zaire). Vice-President.
took the Chair.
65. Mr. GADGIL (India): This is a particularly happy
occasion for India. for we are today welcoming the
independent and sovereign nation of Surinam into
the Organization. On behalf of the Government of
India and the people of India. I would like to extend
our warm greetings and sincere good wishes to the
Government and the people of Surinam.
66. The attainment ofSurinam's independence is one
more milestone in the process of decolonization.
which has continued steadily over the years. bringing
freedom to a large number of countries in Asia. Africa
and the American continent. But that is not the only
reason why we rejoice with the people of Surinam.
For us in India it is a matter of particular gratification.
for our ties with the Caribbean. of which Surinam
forms an integral part. go back to the last century
when Indians were taken therf,: to develop what was
then a virgin country.
67. Geographically we are far apart. but we share the
same aspirations and the same cultural bonds. Like
India. Surinam enjoys a diversity of culture and religion which contribute to its national identity. The
regard and affection we have for the people of Surinam
was manifested in our decision to send a special envoy
to be present at the historic occasion when it became
independent. a few days ago.
68. We would like to take this opportunity to express
our satisfaction at the manner in which the administering Power. namely the Netherlands. discharged
its responsibility. paving the way for the eventual
independence of Surinam.
69. I would once again like to express our profound
JOy at Surinam's entry to the United Nations as a
sovereign independent State.
70. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (illterpretation jj'OIn French): It is a most pleasant duty to greet
here today. on behalf of Belgium and with its sponsorship. the entry of the Republic of Surinam to the
United Nations.
71. We must first of all note the exemplary fact
that the Government of The Hague and the Government of Paramaribo were able to prepare the accession of Surinam to sovereignty in perfect harmony.

1135

72. It is also a model of its kind to be able to note that
the representative who was elected by the majority
of the new Republic can represent his country here
with the representative of the opposition party sitting
beside him.
73. Belgium is all the happier since these developments have been carried out by a neighbouring and
friendly country. namely. the Netherlands. with which
we have so many ties that unite us. It is precisely
several aspects of the traditional and fruitful BelgianNetherlands relations which will in the future be
extended to Surinam if it so wishes.
74. First of all. Belgium and Surinam have a common
heritage and cultural potential since Dutch is spoken
in both countries. Even before the independence of the
Republic. on 4 June last. Belgium had signed a cultural
agreement with Surinam. In the course of the ceremonies organized on the occasion of the independence
of the new Member State of the Organization. my
Government had signed with it another agreement on
the abolition of visas. Furthermore. my Government
has examined at length every possibility of establishing
agreements between the two countries on technical
co-operation and. to that end. a Belgian mission has
gone to Surinam to study the problem.
75. The Belgian Minister for Foreign Affairs has on
several occasions. and in particular before the Parliament of our country. stated the intention of Belgium
to provide Surinam with technical assistance on the
basis of its priority needs in the fields of economic
and social development.
76. On the multilateral level. Surinam will continue
to benefit from its association. in a new context. with
the European Community. of which my country is an
active member.
77. Lastly. Belgium is pleased to be able to contribute to the development of Surinam through the
Lome Convention which extends its benefits to the
new Republic.
78. We extend. therefore. congratulations and
brotherly greetings to Surinam in the conviction that
the ties which unite our two countries will develop
to our mutual benefit and satisfaction and we look
forward to working together usefully within this
Organization.
79. Mr. CAESAR (Grenada): The admission of
Surinam to full membership of the United Nations is
yet another great step forward in the fulfilment by
the United Nations of the principle of universality of
membership and the upholding of the inalienable rights
of all colonized peoples to freedom and independence.
80. For Grenada. Surinam's attainment of independence and its admission to full membership in the
United Nations are great historic achievements which
merit our sincere and warm congratulations to the
Prime Minister. Mr. Henck Arron. and the Government and people of Surinam.
81. My delegation has been motivated to endorse
the statement of welcome which has already been
extended to Surinam on our behalf by the Ambassador
of Barbados in his capacity as Chairman of the group
of Latin American States because of the special and
excellent realtionship which exists between my Prime
Minister. Mr. Eric M. Gairy. and the Prime Minister

1136

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-Plenary Meetings

of Surinam, Mr. Henck Arron, as well as between
the Governments and peoples of Grenada and Surinam.
The existing excellent relationship between our two
Governments and peoples was clearly demonstrated
during Surinam's recent independence celebrations
which were attended by a delegation from Grenada
headed by none other than the Prime Minister, Mr. Eric
M. Gairy, himself.
82. During his brief but most pleasant stay in Surinam, Prime Minister Gairy had the great pleasure of
meeting the leaders of all the ethnic groups and was
particularly heartened by the spirit of oneness and
brotherly love which emanated from and highlighted
the entire independence celebrations, in the emotional
embracing of the leaders of all ethnic groups, thus
creating a sound spirit of nationalism. Grenada would
wish that this spirit of nationalism and brotherly love,
so touchingly demonstrated, would continue beyond
the independence celebration. as it is bound to be an
important factor in the consolidation of Surinam's
independence and in its contribution here at the United
Nations and to world peace.
83. In extending a warm welcome to our sister
nation of Surinam. I should also like to congratulate
the Administering Power. the Kingdom of the Netherlands. for the manner in which it has discharged its
responsibility with respect not only to ensuring the
exercise of the right of the people of Surinam to full
independence but also for the manner in which it
has encouraged the participation of the people in the
process of the decolonization of the Territory and in
negotiating the security of the people of Surinam.
84. Again. I take great pleasure. on behalf of my
delegation and particularly on behalf of the Prime
Minister and Government of Grenada. in congratulating the Prime Minister and the Government and
people of Surinam and in thanking them for the hospitality they extended to the Prime Minister during his
short stay.
85. The delegation of Grenada extends a warm
welcome on the admission of Surinam to full membership of the United Nations and looks forward to
working closely and co-operatively with it in the
achievement of peace on earth and goodwill towards
all men. which is the aim of all the peoples of this
Organization.
Mr. Thorn (Luxembourg) resumed the Chair.
86. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): Those delegations which happene:d because
of their alphabetical order to be at the sides of the
hall have had an unusually good opportunity to see
how the map of our Organization has been transformed
in the course of this session.
87. For my delegation it is most gratifying to have
had to move from one end of the General Assembly
hall to another so as to be able to welcome a new
Member State to the Organization. And we hope that
in the future. too. the Organization will be able to
generate this great internal movement which makes it
possible for us to welcome other States here whose
presence would complete the necessary universality of
the United Nations.
88. I should like to add the voice of my delegation
to those voices which have been raised here to welcome
Surinam. It is always a pleasure to greet the indepen-

dence of a people and welcome a new State to the
United Nations. The satisfaction is all the greater
when the new Member is. as in this case, a nation
with the same historical and geographical background
as that which I represent.
89. The occasion we celebrate today once again
confirms that independence is the only valid solution
and, in the long run, the only feasible one, for the
problem of colonialism and dependence. This confirms
us in our certainty that some day in the not too distant
future, colonialism will have been totally banished
from the Caribbean area.
90. We are bound to recognize the honourable
conduct of the Government of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, which has contributed to the happy culmination of the process which enables the people of
Surinam fully to exercise its right to self-determination.
91. The entry of Surinam into the United Nations is
a further encouragement to the endeavour to make
of our Organization a genuinely universal one. It
recalls to us the need to resolve promptly and in accordance with the almost unanimous will of the Assembly
the question of the admission of the representatives
of heroic Viet Nam.
92. We also trust that the United Nations will shortly
be able to welcome the People's Republic of Angola.
The independence of Surinam and its entry into the
United Nations coincide with the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution
1514 (XV). This is the time to proclaim our determination to persevere in our struggle against colonialism
in all its forms and manifestations. until we bring about
the emancipation of all the peoples still subject to
foreign domination. To them we renew today our
assurances ofCuba' s complete solidarity. In particular,
we transmit our message of solidarity to the people
of Angola and to the fighters of the Popular Liberation
Movement of A:tgola, which is struggling to consolidate
the independence of the country. and with untlagging
courage and determination is confronting the combined aggression of the imperialists and racists.
93. We are convinced that Surinam will make a
positive contribution to the common endeavour of the
Latin American countries and the Caribbean to establish a new international order which will enable their
peoples to consolidate their independence and promote
economic and so~ial development.
94. Barely a month ago. members of the Committee
on Co-operation and Development of the Caribbean
of the Economic Commission for Latin America.
meeting in Havana. stated our common wish to have
the complete and active participation of independent
Surinam. Consequently. it gives us profound satisfaction to welcome its entry into the United Nations
today. and we extend our warmest welcome to its
representatives and offer its delegation our willingness
to co-operate with. it in its future tasks within our
Organization.
95. Mr. ANWAR SANI (Indonesia): It is a particular honour and privilege for me. as the representative
of Indonesia. to extend. on behalf of the Government
and people of Indonesia. our warmest congratulations
to the Government and people of Surinam on the

..

1
;1
\:
I'

j'

i

2428th meeting-4 December 1975

admission of their country to membership in the
great family of the United Nations.
96. I am particularly happy to welcome the birth of
the new State. and its admission to the United Nations.
since Indonesia has special links with Surinam by
bonds of history and kinship. Both Indonesia and
Surinam have experienced centuries of colonial domination by the same Power. the Netherlands. And
partly because of this common experience many
thousands of Indonesians migrated during the decade
before the last World War from Indonesia to Surinam.
These people of Indonesian origin have integrated
themselves into the multi-racial society in Surinam
and have participated in the political. social and
economic development of the country. My delegation
is certain that the Surinamese of Indonesian origin
will continue to contribute to the progress and welfare
of the country. in loyal co-operation with their cocitizens.
.
97. My delegation would also like to congratulate
the Government and people of the Netherlands for
the role they played in the process of decolonization
in Surinam. and for their contribution towards the
emancipation of what was once a Dutch colony into
the independent and sovereign State of Surinam.
Member of this world organization.
98. In admitting Surinam to the Organization. the
United Nations has advanced one step closer towards
full universality. My delegation warmly welcomes
in our midst the delegation of the newest member
of our Organization under the leadership of Prime
Minister Henck Arron. We wish them every success
as they participate in our work. and my delegation
looks forward to co-operating closely with them.
99. Mr. CONSALVI (Venezuela) (interpretation
ji-OI1l Spanish): On behalf of the people and Government of Venezuela. it is a great pleasure and honour
for me to say a few words of welcome on the admission
to the United Nations of a new country from our
region.
100. Venezuela has awaited with interest and. at
times. with anxiety the hour of independence of
Surinam as we await the hour of independence of the
other Territories in our region which have not yet
acceded to it.
101. I welcome Surinam on behalf of the delegation
of Venezuela. and join preceding speakers in recognizing that the Government of the Netherlands has
shown flexibility and intelligence in guiding Surinam
along the road to independence.
102. In welcoming Surinam to this world organization I am perhaps anticipating by also welcoming
it. on behalf of Venezuela. to our specific regional
organizations. such as the Latin American Economic
System. I mention it because. as we are well aware.
Surinam is an important country in the production of
raw materials and because Surinam enters the United
Nations at a propitious time for countries which. for
more than a hundred years. were supplying raw
materials to the major countries of the affluent society.

t

s
e

103. On behalf of Venezuela. therefore. I welcome
Surinam and extend my promise to this young country
of Latin America our complete solidarity. co-operation
and goodwill.

1137

104. The PRESIDENT (i1ltC'l'pr('tat;onfml1l French):
I am very happy to see that the regional groups of this
Assembly have spoken with so much sympathy. conviction and warmth in welcoming Surinam.
105. I should now like to invite Mr. Arron. the
Prime Minister of Surinam. to address the General
Assembly.
106. Mr. ARRON (Surinam): I come to this forum as
the representative of the Government and people of
the Republic of Surinam. On 25 November 1975. our
country attained its independence and joined the ranks
of sovereign States. The General Assembly has just
unanimously admitted the Republic of Surinam as a
Member State of the United Nations. Consequently
we are grateful for this decision and deeply touched
by the warm welcome given to our country.
107. We wish to express our thanks as well to the
members of the Security Council for having recommended our admission to the General Assembly. Our
sincere appreciation also goes to those Members who
have sponsored our admission to the United Nations.
108. We avail ourselves of this opportunity to extend
our congratulations and best wishes to the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe. the People's
Republic of Mozambique. the Republic of Cape Verde.
Papua New Guinea. and the Comoros on their membership in the Organization. and we are honoured to have
been admitted with those countries during the thirtieth
session of the General Assembly.
109. Allow us. Sir. to express our congratulations
to you on your election as President. Coming ourselves from a small country. we are inspired by your
election. which reminds us of Victor Hugo's words:
"There is no such thing as a little country. The greatness ofa people is no more determined by their number
than the greatness of a man is determined by his
height" .
110. The 25th of November 1975 signifies for us an
end and a beginning. The end to our status as a partner
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the beginning
of our identity as an independent and sovereign State.
It is only fitting that we pay tribute to those courageous
men and women who made the supreme sacrifice
and whose bloody rebellion against enslavement
resulted in the abolition of slavery cn I July 1863.
Ill. We have been an autonomous country since
15 December 1954 as far as our internal affairs are
concerned. and we are confident that the experience
gained during all those years will enable us to participate in international affairs as a fully-fledged nation.
112. I avail myself of this opportunity as well to thank
you for the congratulations directed to the Government
and people of Surinam and for your statement that
the independence of Surinam marks an important
example of how independencf: can be achieved in
conditions of peace and security and in accordance
with the provisions of the Charterofthe United Nations
when there is goodwill and understanding by all
concerned. has deeply touched us. Surinam's independence is based on its people's own free will. by
mutual consent of the Netherlands and the Netherlands
Antilles.
113. May I inform the Assembly that. even after
Surinam's independence the Netherlands has under-

1138

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session-l'Ienary Meetings

taken subsequent and specific responsibilities as
regards our country's development. and will accept
any consequences resulting from this. This co-operation is based on the extension ofSurinam's economic
strength. on the creation of new jobs. and on the
improvement of the living conditions of the people.
A treaty for development co-operation between the
two countries was therefore signed on 25 November
last.
114. The Republic of Surinam is at the outset of a
new approach concerning the promotion of the social
and economic development of our country. Our raw
materials. our labour resources and the funds available
will be used exclusively for the economic growth of
the entire nation. This implies. among other things.
that in judging the utilization of our raw materials,
the Government will first and foremost take the line
that. as far as our nation is concerned. maximum
profits are to be made from the use of our natural resources. Wherever possible. the Government will offer
foreign entrepreneurs the opportunity. in combination
with the State. to take the exploitation of the raw
materials in hand. and in granting facilities to those
enterprises. demands will be made to such an exter.t
that finished products can be manufactured from the
raw materials found in our country.
! 15. Many countries are more or less in the same
boat as Surinam. They are not affiuent. On account
of a lack of funds. their resources can be utilized only
with the help of others. All these countries. the socalled developing countries. can be elevated only if
they mutually co-operate. We shall therefore join their
ranks in order to improve one another's chances in
life under the auspices of the United Nations. We shall
co-operate with the developed countries as well. since
we greatly appreciate any aid and co-operation without,
however. sacrificing our own dignity.
116. The Republic of Surinam is ready. together with
all nations. to establish and main~ain peace in the world.
Surinam will therefore contribute constantly to the
maintenance of universal aspirations for peace among
nations and in all cases concerned it will be a priori
against the use of arms. The division of the world into

military power blocs. as well as the arms race. will
be categorically rejected by Surinam. We are of the
opinion that the use of ever-increasingly sophisticated
weapons and the growing quantity of nuclear devices
for mass destruction can result in the ruin of mankind
and. joined by other countries. we shall strongly
oppose such actions. Dialogue and not violence. no
matter in what form. must be engaged in to find solutions to disputes. If ever Surinam should become a
party to any conflict. it would then try to convince the
other party of the fundamental meaning of a peaceful
solution. in contrast to useless bloodshed.
117. We fully realize that our admission to the United
Nations implies responsibilities and commitments.
which we are ready to undertake and perform. Our
attitude. both nationally and internationally. will be
based on the principles of the Charter and on the rules
of international law. We intend to establish friendly
and oeaceful relations with all nations. and whe.e such
relations exist they will be reinforced.
118. Thus we are ready to make our entry into the
world community on the basis of liberty. equality,
brotherhood and human solidarity. so that a future of
peace. justice and prosperity for all nations can be
built by mutual co-operation and understanding.
119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
My presidency of the General Assembly will not go
down in the history of the United Nations as one
marked by particular understanding for interruptions
of meetings and for congratulations following speeches.
which interrupt the work of the Assembly. However. I thought that the admission of Surinam to the
United Nations was important not only for that country
but also for the United Nations, which is celebrating
its admission. That is why I did not wish to interrupt
the congratulations. I should like in my turn to thank
the Prime Minister of Surinam and to associate myself
with the tribute which he paid to the delegation of
the Netherlands. as well as to thank all who have
taken part in this debate.

The meeting rose a/ 5./0 p.m.
