146

General Assembly-Forty•first Session

affecting vast areas of Africa, and to remain prepared to
provide assistance to affected countries at short notice, as
necessary;
17. Supports the establishment of effective earlywarning systems and national, subregional and regional
food security arrangements in developing countries to
combat future food emergencies;
18. Urges Governments to ensure and enhance the
participation of women in the formulation and implementation of national food policies. plans and projects, in view
of the importance accorded to food and the acknowledged
role of women farmers in food production, marketing and
family nutrition and in view of the consensus achieved on
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women;SO
19. Invites the World Food Council within its mandate:
(a) To assess the impact of economic adjustment policies in developing countries on the nutrition levels of lowincome groups and to suggest, where necessary, remedia!
measures in this area, including ways to stimulate the
provision of resources to alleviate the sufferings of these
groups;
(b) To assess the impact of the present agricultura!
trade situation in all its aspects and to maintain an active
interest in the progress and outcome of multilateral negotiations on agricultura! trade issues;
(e) To assist in accelerating the promotion of regional
and subregional food strategies by stimulating vigorous
follow-up action with ali parties concerned in order to implement the recommendations adopted at the regional and
interregional consultations organized by the World Food
Council in 1986;
(el) To stimulate progress in and contribute actively to
the implementation of the food policy and programme
components of the United Nations Programme of Action
for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990, particularly in increasing food production and
reducing hunger, and to assist African Governments in
implementing the mutually agreed food-sector priorities
through concrete and accelerated assistance in support of
food strategies and policies.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/192.

Special programmes of economic assistance

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the special
programmes of economic assistance, 51
Affirming the validity of the concept of special programmes of economic assistance and the need to enhance
their efficiency,
1. Takes note with appreciation ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General;
2. Endorses the recommendation made by the Secretary-General that special programmes of economic assistance should be limited to countries genuinely in need of
such assistance and to special circumstances falling out50 Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade Jor Women: Equality.
Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. 1, sect. A, paras. 174-188.
51 A/41/308-E/1986/67.

side the competence of the regular programmes of the
United Nations system;5 2
3. Also endorses the recommendation that the special
programme of economic assistance for a country should
be of limited duration and should be terminated after the
review mission and, where the special circumstances that
gave rise to the special programme of economic assistance
remain, any continuing assistance should then be channelled through the regular programmes of the system; 52
4. Recommends that efforts to transfer the implementation of the special programmes of economic assistance to
other United Nations bodies should be continued, if practicable;
5. Affirms that special programmes of economic assistance should be drawn up in consultation with the recipient Governments concerned and recommends that the
programmes should, as far as possible, be established and
reviewed through the field offices of the United Nations
system.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/193.

Assistance to Solomon lslands

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the devastation in Solomon Islands
caused by cyclone "Namu" from 17 to 19 May 1986,
which resulted in loss of life, destruction of housing and
extensive damage to the economic and social infrastructures and to the agricultura!, stock-farming, transport and
industrial sectors,
Concerned at the negative impact of this damage on the
development efforts of Solomon Islands,
Noting with appreciation the emergency assistance provided by severa! States, international and regional organizations, specialized agencies and voluntary agencies,
Noting the efforts of the people and Government of Solomon Islands to deal with the emergency situation and to
initiate a reconstruction and rehabilitation programme,
Affirming the need for prompt and concerted international action to assist the people and Government of Solomon Islands in carrying out the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the affected regions and sectors,
1. Expresses its gratitude to the States, programmes
and organizations of the United Nations system and intergovernmental, non-governmental and voluntary organizations that provided assistance to Solomon Islands during
the emergency;
2. Urges ali States to participate generously through
bilateral or multilateral channels in projects and programmes for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Solomon Islands;
3. Requests international organizations, in particular
the relevant organs and bodies of the United Nations system, regional organizations and voluntary agencies to continue and increase their assistance in response to the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development needs of
Solomon Islands;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps, in collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize the
financia!, technical and material assistance needed for im-

52 /bid.,

sect. 111.B.

V.

plementing the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development programme of Solomon Islands;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep the
question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of Solomon lslands under constant review and apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1987, of the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

41/194.

147

Resolutions adopted on the reports of tbe Second Committee

7. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
measures, in collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, to mobilize the
technical, financial and material assistance required for
the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of
El Salvador;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the
question of assistance for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of El Salvador under review, and to inform the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1987, on the progress made in the implementation of the
present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
8 December 1986

Assistance to El Salvador

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 41/2 of 14 October 1986
concerning emergency assistance to El Salvador,
Recalling its resolution 3440 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 on assistance in cases of natural disaster and other
disaster situations, resolution 36/225 of 17 December
1981 on strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to respond to natural disasters, and resolution
37/144 of 17 December 1982 on the Office ofthe United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Noting with satisfaction the support that Member States,
the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system have given to the efforts of the
Government of El Salvador to render immediate assistance to the population affected by the natural disaster,
Bearing in mind that, in recent years, the economy of El
Salvador has been adversely affected by various events and
natural disasters, such as the earthquake of 10 October
1986,
Considering that, despite the efforts of the Government
and people of El Salvador, the country's economic situation has not returned to normal,
Deeply concerned that El Salvador is experiencing serious economic difficulties directly affecting its development
efforts,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his efforts regarding immediate assistance to El Salvador;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to the States and organizations that have provided assistance to El Salvador;
3. Urges ali Governments to continue contributing to
the reconstruction and development of El Salvador
through bilateral and multilateral channels;
4. Appeals to ali States and appropriate organizations
ofthe United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the World Bank, to continue and
to increase their assistance in response to the
humanitarian, reconstruction and development needs of
El Salvador through existing mechanisms;
5. Invites regional and interregional organizations, as
well as non-governmental humanitarian organizations, urgently to consider the establishment of programmes of assistance to El Salvador and to implement them as soon as
possible;
6. Invites States and organizations concerned to examine the possibility of extending to El Salvador special assistance appropriate to its needs:

41/195.

Assistance to Uganda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions and its decision
40/453 of 17 December 1985 on assistance to Uganda,
Recognizing that the Government of Uganda, which
carne to power in January 1986, is facing the arduous tasks
of rehabilitation and reconstruction following years of
conftict that have resulted in tragic loss of life, ravaging of
the country's socio-economic infrastructure and uprooting of large segments of its population,
Taking into account the Emergency Relief and Rehabilitation Programme launched by the Govemment in February 1986 and the interim macro-economic measures announced in July 1986,
Noting that a special programme of economic assistance
has been formulated covering short-term emergency and
rehabilitation needs, including restoration of services such
as health, water and sanitation, education, housing and
roads, and rehabilitation of the agriculture and livestock
sectors, as well as productive industrial enterprises,
Recognizing that Uganda is not only land-locked, but
also one of the least developed and most seriously affected
countries,
Noting the appeals made by the Secretary-General for
assistance to Uganda,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-Generai, 53
presenting a special programme of economic assistance for
intemational funding, 54
Reaffirming the urgent need for further intemational action to assist the Government ofUganda in its continuing
efforts for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development,
Encouraged that the economic policies of the Govemment of Uganda and the support assistance provided by
the donor countries and international organizations have
airead y produced positive signs of economic recovery,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Uganda;
2. Also expresses its appreciation to those States and organizations that have provided assistance to Uganda;
3. Endorses the assessment and recommendations contained in the appendix to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

53 A/41/593.
54

lbid .. annex, se~t V
