III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

(XXX) of 11 December 1975 and 32/76 of 12 December 1977 concerning the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
Tlatelolco) 3 and its Additional Protocol I,
Taking into account that certain territories lying
within the zone of application of that Treaty which
are not sovereign political entities are nevertheless in
a position to receive the benefits deriving from the
Treaty through its Additional Protocol I, to which the
States that de jure or de facto are internationally
responsible for those territories may become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Kingdom of the Netherlands became parties to Additional
Protocol I in 1969 and 1971, respectively,
Recalling also with satisfaction that the United
States of America signed Additional Protocol I in
1977 and that the Government of that country has
decided to take the necessary steps for its ratification,
Taking note of the declaration made on 25 May
1978 by the President of the French Republic before
the General Assembly at its tenth special session,
devoted to disarmament, regarding the adherence of
his country to Additional Protocol 1,4
l. Invites the United States of America to make
every effort to ratify as soon as possible Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco);
2. Welcomes with satisfaction the declaration
made by the President of the French Republic on
25 May 1978 regarding the adherence of his country
to Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty
of Tlatelolco) and invites the Government of that
country to make every effort to adhere as soon as
possible to that Protocol;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 33/58 concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/59.

Chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons
A

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20
December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2827 A (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
3256 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3465 (XXX)
of 11 December 1975, 31/65 of 10 December 1976,
32/77 of 12 December 1977 and S-10/2 of 30 June
1978,
Recalling that in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly it affirmed
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068,
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Tenth

Session, Plenary Meetings, 3rd meeting, paras. 3-72.

p. 326.
Special

39

that the complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and their destruction represented one of the
most urgent measures of disarmament, which should
be accorded high priority in disarmament negotiations,11
Regretting that agreement on the complete and
effective prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons has not been
reached, despite the numerous appeals of the General
Assembly,
Convinced that the continuing arms race calls for
urgent disarmament measures and that the process of
international detente is conducive to the achievement
of progress towards general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Reaffirming the necessity of strict observance by all
States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925, 6
Convinced that the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction7 constitutes an important step
towards early agreement on the effective prohibition
of the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their elimination from the
arsenals of all States,
Recalling in that connexion the undertaking contained in article IX of the Convention to continue
negotiations in good faith with a view to reaching
early agreement on effective measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of
all chemical weapons and for their destruction,
Stressing the importance of early agreement on the
complete prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction, which would contribute to general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Noting the risk of continued development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons in the
absence of such agreement,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament, 8
Noting that drafts of a convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling
of all chemical weapons and on their destruction, 9
as well as other working documents, proposals and
suggestions, have been submitted to the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament and constitute valuable
contributions to reaching agreement,
5 Resolution
6 League of

S-10/2, para. 75.
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138, p. 65.
7 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/33/27).
9 See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission, Supplement for 1972, document DC/235, annex B, document
CCD/361; Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/9627), annex II, document CCD/420; ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27
(A/10027), annex II, document CCD/452; and ibid., Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), annex III, document CCD/512.

40

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session,

Taking into account the comments made on this
item and relevant documents submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session,
Noting also that sustained and intensive efforts in
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
have led to increased understanding in identifying
practical approaches towards the prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and towards their destruction,
Believing that future agreement on the prohibition
of chemical weapons should meet the objective of
complete, effective and verifiable prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of chemical
weapons, as well as provide adequate methods of
verification for the destruction of the stockpiles of
chemical weapons, and recognizing that arrangements
for verification should be based on a combination of
national and international arrangements,
Having in mind that agreement on the complete
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction
should not impede the utilization of science and technology for the economic development of States,
Desiring to contribute to an early and successful
conclusion of the negotiations on effective and strict
measures for the complete prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and for their destruction,
1. Urges all States to reach early agreement on
the effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on
their destruction;
2. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the United States of America to submit their joint
initiative to the Committee on Disarmament in order
to assist it in achieving early agreement on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of
all chemical weapons and on their destruction;
3. Requests the Committee on Disarmament, as a
matter of high priority, to undertake, at the beginning
of its 1979 session, negotiations with a view to elaborating an agreement on effective measures for the
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and for their destruction, taking into account all existing proposals and
future initiatives;
4. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, as well as to accede to or ratify
the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War
of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva
on 17 June 1925, and calls again for strict observance
by all States of the principles and objectives of those
instruments;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Committee on Disarmament all documents of the
thirty-third session of the General Assembly relating to
chemical weapons and to chemical means of warfare;
6. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
report on the results of its negotiations to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2826 (XXVI) of 16 December 1972, in which it commended the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction10 and expressed
the hope for the widest possible adherence to that
Convention,
Noting that article XII of the Convention provides
as follows:
"Five years after the entry into force of this
Convention, or earlier if it is requested by a majority
of Parties to the Convention by submitting a proposal to this effect to the Depositary Governments,
a Conference of States Parties to the Convention
shall be held at Geneva, Switzerland, to review the
operation of the Convention, with a view to assuring
that the purposes of the preamble and the provisions
of the Convention, including the provisions concerning negotiations on chemical weapons, are being
realized. Such review shall take into account any
new scientific and technological developments relevant to the Convention",
Believing that the availability of information as
appropriate on any new scientific and technological
developments relevant to the Convention could contribute to the work of the Review Conference of the
Parties to the Convention,
Bearing in mind that the Convention will have been
in force for five years on 26 March 1980 and expecting that the Review Conference called for in the
Convention will take place near that date,
1. Notes that, after appropriate consultations, a
preparatory committee of parties to the Convention is
to be arranged;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render the
necessary assistance and to provide such services, including summary records, as may be required for the
Review Conference and its preparation.
84th plenary meeting
I 4 December I 978
33/60.

Implementation of
resolution 32/78

General

Assembly

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its conviction that the cessation of
nuclear-weapon testing by all States in all environments
would be in the interest of all mankind, both as a
major step towards ending the qualitative improvement, development and proliferation of nuclear
weapons and as a means of relieving the deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences of
radioactive contamination for the health of present
and future generations,
Recalling the determination of the parties to the
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water11 and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 12
10 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.
1 1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1 2 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

480, No. 6964, p. 43.
