General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

20

35/117.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity, 22
Recalling its previous resolutions on the promotion of
co-operation between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity and the practical measures
taken for their implementation, in particular resolution
34/21 of 9 November 1979,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions, decisions and
declarations adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its thirty-third session and by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of that organization at its seventeenth ordinary session, which were held at Freetown from 18
June to 4 July 1980, 2 -1
Considering the important statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity before. the General Assembly, on 24 September 1980,2 4
pa~tlcularly on matters of concern to the two organizations,
Noting with satisfaction the continued co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity in areas of common interest,
Welcoming warmly the achievement of independence
by the people of Zimbabwe,
Deeply cons~ious of the special needs of the newly independent Afncan States, particularly with regard to the
consolidation of their national independence, their endeavours towards social and economic betterment and
the adverse impact on their economies of the current international economic situation,
Gravely concerned about the adverse effect on African economies of the current international economic
situation,
Recalling in this connexion the Lagos Plan of Action
for the l~plementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa, adopted at the
second extraordinary session of the Assembly of Heads
of ~tate and Government of the Organization of African
Unity, held at Lagos on 28 and 29 April 1980, 21
Noting_ with profound regret that the international
community has not given sufficient attention to the
plight of refugees in Africa, who now constitute over
half the population of refugees in the world,
Aware of the need for special economic and
emergency assistance programmes for a number of African States which face serious economic problems and
problem~ of displaced persons resulting from natural or
other disasters to enable them to pursue effective
economic development,
. Gra_vely concerned further at the deteriorating situat10n. 1n _southern Africa arising from the continued
do1:1ma,t1~>n of the peoples of the area by the minority
racist regime of South Africa and conscious of the need
to _provide increased assistance to the peoples of the
reg1~:m and to their liberation movements in their struggle
agamst colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
-----

"A/35/446.
"See A/35/463 and Corr.I.
"Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty-fifth Session.
Plenary Meetings. 8th meeting, paras. 2- 76. ·
"A/S-11/14, annex I.

Conscious ot its responsibilities to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
S_tate~ in southern Africa to help them to cope with the
s1tuat10n caused by the acts of aggression committed
against their territories by the apartheid regime of South
Africa,
Recognizing the importance of taking effective steps
to give the widest possible dissemination of information
relating to the liberation struggle of the peoples of
southern Africa,
Recognizing the need for continuous liaison, exchange of information at the secretariat level and technical co-operation on such matters as training and
research between the Organization of African Unity and
the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the high-level meeting held at
Nairobi from 5 to 7 June 1980 between representatives
of the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity and the secretariats of the United Nations
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 34 /21 on co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity.
Noting also with satisfaction the useful decisions and
propos~ls which emerged from the Nairobi meeting for
enhancmg co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity,2 6
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity and commends his efforts in strengthening such co-operation:
. 2. Notes with appreciation the increasing participation of the Organization of African Unity in the work of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies and its
constructive contribution to that work;
3. Commends the continued efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote multilateral cooperation among African States and to find solutions to
African problems of vital importance to the international community and notes with satisfaction the increased collaboration of various United Nations agencies in support of those efforts;
4. Reiterates the determination of the United
Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to eliminate colonialism.
racial discrimination and apartheid in southern Africa:
5. Approves the decisions, recommendations, proposals and arrangements contained in the conclusions of
the Nairobi meeting of representatives of the General
Secretar_iat of the Orga_nization of African Unity and the
secretariats of the United Nations and other organizations within the United Nations system, 2' in particular
the decision to hold periodic consultations to discuss
matters of mutual concern and to follow up decisions of
the Nairobi meeting;
_6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
wit~ the ~ecretary-General of the Organization of
Afncan Unity, to arrange for the next meeting between
representatives of the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity and the secretariats of the
United Nations and other organizations of the United
Nations system to be held at Geneva in April 1981. as
called for in the conclusions of the Nairobi meeting;
7. Recognizes the importance of continued close association by the United Nations and the specialited
"A /35/446. para J 1_

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

agencies, where appropriate, with the efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote social and
economic development and to advance intra-African cooperation in this vital field;
8. Reaffirms the determination of the United
Nations to work closely with the Organization of African
Unity towards the establishment of the new international economic order in accordance with the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and, in that regard, to take full account of the Lagos Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the
Economic Development of Africa in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade; 27
9. Reiterates its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts, on behalf of the international
community, to organize and mobilize special economic
assistance programmes for African States experiencing
grave economic difficulties, in particular fot newly independent African States and the front-line States, to
help them to cope with the situation caused by the acts
of aggression committed against their territories by the
apartheid regime of South Africa;
10. Calls upon all Member States, regional and international organizations and organizations within the
United Nations system to participate actively in the implementation of those special economic assistance programmes;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Organization of African Unity informed periodically of
the response of the international community to those
programmes and to co-ordinate efforts with all similar
programmes initiated by the Organization of African
Unity;
12. Requests the Secretary-General and the organizations within the United Nations system to ensure that
adequate facilities continue to be made available for the
provision of technical assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of African Unity as required;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with
regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and in this
connexion draws once again the attention of the international community to the need to contribute to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and
Apartheid established by the Organization of African
Unity;
14. Calls upon all Member States and organizations
within the United Nations system to increase their assistance to the ·African States affected by natural or
other disasters by mobilizing special economic and
emergency assistance programmes;
15. Further calls upon all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular the
specialized agencies, and non-governmental organizations to increase their aid to refugees in Africa;
16. Requests the Department of Public Information
of the Secretariat and all the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system to
generate publicity and intensify the dissemination of information on social and economic development matters
concerning Africa;
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.

21

17. Calls upon United Nations bodies, in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the
Special Committee against Apartheid and the United
Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to associate
closely the Organization of African Unity with all their
work concerning Africa:
18. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and expand their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity:
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution and on the
development of co-operation between the Organization
of African Unity and the organizations concerned within the United Nations system.

90th plenary meeting
JO December 1980

35/118.

Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having decided to hold a special commemorative
meeting'' on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Convinced that the Declaration has played and will
continue to play an important role in assisting the peoples under colonial domination in their struggle for freedom and independence, and in mobilizing world public
opinion for the complete elimination of colonialism in
all its forms and manifestations,
Reaffirming that all peoples have the right to selfdetermination and independence and that the subjection of peoples to alien domination constitutes a
denial of fundamental human rights and is a serious impediment to the maintenance of international peace and
security and the development of peaceful relations
among nations,
Reaffirming also the relevant provisions of the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.'"
Deeply conscious of the fact that twenty years after the
adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples the system of
colonialism continues to exist in several areas of the
world.
Mindful of the courageous struggle being carried out
by the peoples of southern Africa for freedom, selfdetermination, independence and equal rights,
Noting with satisfaction the achievement of independence in the last twenty years by a number of Trust
'"Official Records of the General Assemb/_1·, Thirty-fifth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 93rd meeting.
"Resolution 262'i (XXV) annex.
