A/71/826–S/2017/189

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
3 March 2017
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 36
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-second year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2274 (2016), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my predecessor’s report of 13 December 2016
(A/71/682-S/2016/1049). It also provides a summary of key political and security
developments and regional and international events relating to Afghanistan. The
annex to the present report contains an assessment of progress made towards the
achievement of benchmarks and indicators since the issuance of the report of 7 March
2016 (A/70/775-S/2016/218), in accordance with Security Council resolution 1868
(2009).

II. Relevant developments
3.
The Government continued to face significant political, economic and security
challenges. The President of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani, and the Chief Executive,
Abdullah Abdullah, continued to engage in bilateral discussions to improve their
working relationship. An investigation into the role of the First Vice -President,
Abdul Rashid Dostum, in the alleged illegal detention and abuse of a former
Governor of Jowzjan Province was launched. Several key government positions
remain vacant. The newly formed electoral management bodies took initial steps
towards implementing electoral reforms and preparing for future elections. The
Government also continued to advance its anti-corruption agenda. In parallel, the
implementation of the peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin advanced,
including the lifting of sanctions against Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, but there was no

17-03206 (E)

060317

*1703206*

A/71/826
S/2017/189

discernible progress on peace talks between the Government and the Taliban. There
was an increase in multilateral engagement at the regional level. The security
situation continued to worsen, with armed clashes between security forces and the
Taliban reaching a record high in 2016 and continuing at that pace in 2017. High
levels of violence against civilians continued to be recorded as a result, with a
significant increase in casualties among children and in internal displacements.
Service delivery remained challenging given the difficult security situation. The
economic situation remained fragile, with persistently low rates of economic growth
and low investment rates.

A.

Political developments
4.
Since the previous report, the President and the Chief Executive continued
their efforts to improve their working relationship. The two leaders discussed a
mechanism to consult on senior appointments, share power and delegate
responsibility among senior government officials.
5.
On 13 December, the former Governor of Jowzjan, Ahmad Ishchi, publicly
accused the First Vice-President of illegally detaining him for several days in late
November and alleged that he had been sexually abused while in custody. The
Government announced an investigation into the allegations, and, on 21 December,
the Attorney General formally named Mr. Dostum a suspect. The First Vice President has so far refused to comply with the Attorney General’s summons for
questioning. Prominent figures within the First Vice -President’s political party,
Junbish-i Milli, accused the Government of attempting to marginalize the ethnic
Uzbek community and organized demonstrations to protest the Govern ment’s
treatment of the First Vice-President.
6.
The President continued his outreach efforts to critics and opposition figures,
including two of the country’s largest political opposition groups, the Afghanistan
Protection and Stability Council and the High Council of National and Jihadi
Parties, as well as the Governor of Balkh Province, Atta Mohammad Noor.
Opposition groups maintained pressure on the Government to make appointments
and other concessions, but toned down their public criticism of the Pres ident and the
Chief Executive.
7.
The future of the seven ministers who were the subject of votes of
no-confidence in the National Assembly in November remained uncertain. Six
continued serving in their positions, while a Supreme Court decision on the
constitutionality of the votes of no-confidence remained pending. Several positions
within the Government remained occupied by acting officials, including the
Minister of Mines and Petroleum, the head of the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance, the Minister of Information and Culture, the Minister of Information
and Communications Technology and the Minister of Tribal Affairs.
8.
On 21 January, the Chairperson of the High Peace Council, Pir Sayed Ahmad
Gailani, died. At the time of his death, the Government was reportedly planning to
formulate a new Afghan national peace and reconciliation strategy.
9.
There has been no discernible progress towards a peace process between the
Government and the Taliban. The implementation of the peace agreement of
29 September 2016 with Hizb-i Islami Gulbuddin advanced with the removal of the
group’s leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, from the list of individuals sanctioned under
resolution 1267 (1999) on 3 February, following a request from the Government of
Afghanistan submitted on 13 December. Representatives of Hizb -i Islami Gulbuddin
continued negotiations with the Government on issues such as the release of
prisoners and accommodation arrangements for affiliates expected to return from

2/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

Pakistan. The prospect of Mr. Hekmatyar’s return to Kabul has been cause for
concern among his political rivals, who believe that a united Hizb -i Islami
Gulbuddin under his leadership could become the country’s largest political party.
Human rights advocates have expressed their concern about the agreement, given its
failure to fully address victims’ grievances and suspected human rights violations.
10. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) facilitated a
number of events in support of local peace initiatives during the reporting period to
address, inter alia, long-standing land disputes and other sources of tension and
conflict.
11. The Independent Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission, appointed in November 2016, took the initial steps
towards implementing electoral reforms and preparing for future elections. The
Independent Election Commission began its work, which included a technical study
on electoral constituencies for submission to the Government, proposals on voter
registration, the reallocation of polling centres and an electoral timeline. It also held
consultative meetings on electoral constituencies and voter registration with
stakeholders on 17 and 30 January. The Independent Election Commission publicly
reaffirmed its commitment to establishing polling centre -based voter lists, in
accordance with electoral law, and its spokesperson announced that electronic
national identification cards will not be used for voter registratio n. On 10 February,
the Independent Election Commission spokesperson announced that parliamentary
and district council elections would be held in 2018. The Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission reached out to electoral stakeholders, and, on 30 January,
signed a memorandum of understanding with civil society organizations that
outlines terms for their future cooperation.
12. The Independent Election Commission also commenced the recruitment
process for the position of Chief Electoral Officer. On 12 Janu ary, the Commission
recommended three candidates to the President in a letter signed by only four of the
seven commissioners. On 26 January, a spokesperson for the Chief Executive
publicly stated that the three nominees were unacceptable owing to their all eged
lack of qualifications and ties to previous commissioners. On 3 February, election
watchdog groups criticized the Government for its silence and called for a decision
preserving the independence of the Commission.

B.

Security
13. The overall security situation continued to deteriorate throughout 2016 and
into 2017. The United Nations recorded 23,712 security incidents, an almost 5 per
cent increase compared with 2015 and the highest number in a single year ever
recorded by UNAMA. While the fighting remained particularly prevalent in the five
southern and eastern provinces of Helmand, Nangarhar, Kandahar, Kunar and
Ghazni, where 50 per cent of all incidents were recorded, the conflict spread in
geographical scope, with increasing Taliban activities in northern and north-eastern
Afghanistan, as well as in Farah in the west. The Taliban continued to put pressure
on the Government’s control of the provincial capitals of Farah, Kunduz, Lashkar
Gah, Helmand Province, and Tirin Kot, Uruzgan Province. International and Afghan
air support and the deployment of Afghan special forces remained critical to the
holding of these cities. In late November, the Taliban captured the Ghorak district
administrative centre of Kandahar Province, bringing to 14 the total number of
districts claimed by the Taliban to be under their control. In addition, the control of
a number of districts has been contested, with some reports claiming an increase in
the percentage of Afghan territory under Taliban influence. The fighting evolved
further in character as the number of armed clashes between the Taliban and

17-03206

3/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

Government security forces increased by 22 per cent in 2016, accounting for 63 per
cent of all security incidents, the majority of which were initiated by the Taliban.
Improvised explosive device attacks continued to decline in 2016, however, and
were 25 per cent lower than during the previous year.
14. Between 18 November 2016 and 14 February 2017, the United Nations
recorded 5,160 security-related incidents. This represents a 10 per cent increase
compared with the same period in 2015 and a 3 per cent increase compared with the
same period in 2014. The number of armed clashes recorded in January 2017
increased by 30, compared with January of 2016, and reached 1,877, the highest
number recorded by the United Nations for that month. Improvised explosive device
attacks increased by 11 per cent compared with the same period in 2016. The
Taliban also increased the pressure in Helmand Province, including through heavy
fighting in the district of Sangin in late January and early February.
15. On 10 January, an improvised explosive device detonated at the residence of
the Governor of Kandahar during a dinner he was hosting for visiting diplomats and
dignitaries, killing 13 civilians, including 6 diplomats from the United Arab
Emirates, and injuring 19 others. On 15 February, the Ambassador of the United
Arab Emirates, who was injured in the attack, died from his wounds. No group has
claimed responsibility for the attack.
16. The Afghan security forces continued to face significant challenges, in
particular regarding operational capacity. Shortcomings in the areas of command
and control, leadership and logistics, and high attrition rates, have a significant
impact on morale, recruitment and sustainability. The intensifying conflict resulted
in increasing casualties among both the security forces and the Taliban.
Re-enlistment and retention rates are too low to compensate for the losses incurred
through increased casualties and desertion. By February, the numbers of army troop
members and Afghan National Police officers stood at 86 per cent and 94 per cent of
projected levels, respectively.
17. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) maintained
its presence in southern Nangarhar Province, as well as in Kunar and Nuristan
Provinces. Notwithstanding the clearing operations of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, with the support of international military forces, by the end of
2016, the group reportedly returned to the areas from which they were cleared.
18. During the reporting period, there were 21 incidents involving United Nations
personnel, including seven incidents of intimidation, one improvised explosive
device-related incident, seven criminal related incidents, and the theft of one United
Nations vehicle.

C.

Regional cooperation
19. During the reporting period, there was a marked increase in bilateral
diplomatic outreach between Afghanistan and its neighbours. Bilateral relations
between Afghanistan and Pakistan continued to be strained, however. In the wake of
the suicide attack perpetrated in Kandahar City on 10 January, Afghan officials,
including National Security Adviser Hanif Atmar and Chief of Police of Kandahar
Province Abdul Razziq, publicly blamed the attack on foreign actors.
Demonstrations were held outside the embassy of Pakistan in Kabul and outside its
consulates in Kandahar and Herat, at which protestors called upon the Government
to cut diplomatic ties with Pakistan. The recently appointed Chief of Army Staff of
Pakistan, General Javed Bajwa, placed a telephone call to his Afghan counterpart
and to the President and the Chief Executive of Afghanistan, on 31 December 2016.
General Bajwa also called the President on 15 January to offer condolences over the

4/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

Kandahar attack of 10 January and to discuss cooperation on security issues.
Bilateral tensions increased again, however, following a series of attacks in
Pakistan. Senior Pakistani officials blamed some of the attack s on insurgents based
in Afghanistan. Following those incidents, Pakistan closed its border with
Afghanistan to all traffic and conducted cross-border shelling, targeting suspected
militants on Afghan territory.
20. On 9 and 10 January, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
Hekmat Karzai, led an Afghan delegation to Tashkent for the first round of an
Afghanistan-Uzbekistan political dialogue. On 11 January, the Chief Executive led a
high-level delegation to Tehran. During the visit, he met with the President of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, and discussed support for Afghanistan on
security and political issues. On 17 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Salahuddin Rabbani, led a delegation to the United Arab Emirates, subsequent to the
Kandahar attack of 10 January. Subsequently, the President of Afghanistan visited
the United Arab Emirates on 11 and 12 February to extend his condolences to the
families of the victims of the attack. From 6 to 8 February, Mr. Rabbani vis ited
Moscow, meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
Sergey Lavrov, to discuss cooperation on a range of issues, including economic and
security matters. The two sides reaffirmed the common position that the Taliban
should be involved in constructive dialogue towards a peace process.
21. There was an increase in multilateral engagement at the regional level. The
sixth “Heart of Asia” ministerial conference was held in Amritsar, India, on
4 December. At a trilateral meeting held in Moscow on 27 December, China,
Pakistan and the Russian Federation discussed the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan. A spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
objected to the exclusion of Afghanistan from the mee ting. Participation at the
following meeting, held in Moscow on 15 February, was expanded to include six
countries, including Afghanistan, India and Iran (Islamic Republic of). Following
the meeting, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federatio n issued a
statement noting that participants had agreed to accelerate their efforts to support
the Afghan peace process and announcing that the Central Asian republics would be
invited to attend the next regional meeting on Afghanistan.
22. Economic cooperation also increased during the reporting period. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan, Abdulaziz Kamilov, visited Kabul on 23 and
24 January, and, during that visit, a bilateral economic road map was announced,
under which annual trade between the two countries is projected to grow from
$429 million in 2016 to $1.5 billion in 2017. Mr. Kamilov met with the President
and the Chief Executive of Afghanistan and signed five memorandums of
understanding with his counterpart in Afghanistan, Mr. Rabba ni.

III. Human rights
23. The human rights situation deteriorated further in 2016 and into 2017, with the
continued growing toll of the fighting on the civilian population. On 6 February
2017, UNAMA released its annual report for 2016 on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. It found that civilians increasingly suffered the consequences of the
conflict in Afghanistan, with the highest number of civilian casualties in a single
year documented by UNAMA since 2009. UNAMA documented 11,418 civili an
casualties (3,498 dead and 7,920 injured), a 3 per cent increase compared with 2015.
Conflict-related violence also destroyed homes, livelihoods and property, displaced
thousands of families and restricted access to education, health and other services
throughout the year. UNAMA attributed 61 per cent of all civilian casualties to

17-03206

5/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

anti-government elements and 24 per cent to pro-government forces, of which
20 per cent was attributed to Afghan national security forces, 2 per cent to
international military forces and 2 per cent to pro-government armed groups.
Ground engagements between pro-government forces and anti-government elements
remained the leading cause of civilian casualties, accounting for 4,295 casualties
(1,070 dead and 3,225 injured), followed by the detonation of improvised explosive
devices, complex and suicide attacks and targeted and deliberate killings.
24. UNAMA has documented an increase in attacks carried out by ISIL-KP
targeting civilian government administrations, tribal elders and pl aces of worship. The
mission attributed 899 civilian casualties (209 dead and 690 injured) to ISIL -KP in
2016, compared with 82 civilian casualties (39 dead and 43 injured) in 2015. The
majority of these casualties resulted from a pattern of deliberate sec tarian attacks
against the minority Shia Muslim community. ISIL-KP claimed responsibility for
three separate attacks on 23 July, 11 October and 21 November 2016 that targeted
members of the community living in Kabul.
25. Anti-government elements continued to perpetrate deliberate attacks targeting
civilian government officials, including women, during the reporting period. On
21 December, the Taliban claimed responsibility for a complex attack against the
home of a member of parliament in Kabul, in which ei ght civilians were killed and
seven others were injured. In addition to the attack by anti -government elements on
the residence of the Governor of Kandahar Province on 10 January, on the same day,
the parliamentary administration compound in Kabul was hit by a suicide attack, for
which the Taliban claimed responsibility and in which 34 civilians were killed and
75 others were injured. On 7 February, 20 civilians were killed and at least
40 injured in a suicide attack outside the Supreme Court in Kabul.
26. Children continued to suffer disproportionately from violence. During 2016,
the country task force on monitoring and reporting documented 1,707 verified
incidents of killing and maiming, resulting in 3,512 child casualties (923 dead and
2,589 injured), a 24 per cent increase compared with 2015. In the fourth quarter of
2016, the task force verified 440 incidents that had resulted in 1,009 child casualties
Of the 268 dead were 200 boys, 66 girls and 2 undetermined and, of the 741 injured,
520 boys, 216 girls and 5 undetermined. With respect to the recruitment and use of
children by the parties to the conflict, the task force documented 57 incidents
involving the recruitment or use of 91 boys in 2016. The majority of those children
were recruited or used by anti-government elements.
27. On 4 December 2016, at the request of the Minister of Justice, UNAMA
released a comprehensive assessment of juvenile rehabilitation centres in
Afghanistan which measured compliance with United Nations international
standards for the treatment of juveniles deprived of their liberty. In the assessment,
UNAMA noted positive trends in juvenile rehabilitation centres in Afghanistan,
while also outlining the critical need to improve in -detention education and postrehabilitation care for young Afghans to help them to re-enter society. UNAMA is
now supporting the Ministry of Justice in the implementation of those
recommendations. As at 31 December 2016, 122 boys were being held in the adult
maximum security detention facility in Parwan on national security-related charges,
including for association with armed groups.
28. The targeting of health and educational facilities and workers continued. In
2016, UNAMA verified 119 conflict-related incidents targeting health services or
health-care workers which resulted in 23 civilian casualties (10 dead and 13 injured)
and 42 civilian abductions, consistent with figures documented in 2015. In addition,
UNAMA documented the occupation and use of 23 medical facilities for military
purposes. In the last quarter of 2016, the country task force on monitoring and
6/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

reporting, using its own methodology, documented 31 verified incidents targeting
health facilities and health-related personnel. In 2016, UNAMA verified 94 conflictrelated incidents targeting education facilities and education-related personnel,
representing a 20 per cent decrease compared with 2015, which resulted in
91 civilian casualties (24 dead and 67 injured) and negatively impacted children’s
access to education. UNAMA continued to record the use of educational facilities
for military purposes by parties to the armed conflict. In 2016, it documented the
use of 42 educational facilities, mainly by Afghan security forces, which occupied
or used 34 schools.
29. Violence against women remained prevalent. On 17 December, five female
contractors of a security company operating at Kandahar International Airport were
killed on their way to work by unidentified armed men. In addition, UNAMA
documented the execution of a woman by anti-government elements in Badghis
Province on 15 December and two additional incidents involving the lashing of
women in Ghazni Province for alleged “moral crimes”. On 25 December,
anti-government elements beheaded a woman in Sari Pul Province after she had
reportedly openly criticized the practices of the Taliban. On 26 January in Farah
Province, a group of Taliban fighters killed a 50 -year-old woman when they failed
to locate her sister, an Afghan National Police officer, who was their intended target.
On 1 February in the Faizabad district of Badakhshan Province, armed assailants
killed an 18-year-old young woman, reportedly for her refusal of a marriage
proposal from the Taliban’s shadow governor. The United Nations continued to
support 11 centres for the protection of women and five family guidance centres
providing life-saving and essential services to women in need in nine provinces, out
of a total of 37 such centres.
30. During the reporting period, the provincial administrations continued to
establish gender and women’s affairs committees mandated with mainstreaming
concrete gender equality initiatives in the work of departments in their respective
provinces. Committees are now operational in at least 12 provinces. On
5 December, the Government publically launched its strategy and action plan for the
elimination of violence against women for the period 2016 -2020. On 9 January, a
joint commission comprising members of the lower and upper houses of the
National Assembly approved the revised text of the law on the elimi nation of
harassment against women and children. The law is awaiting the endorsement of the
President. Discussions on funding for the implementation of the national action plan
for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), however,
remained inconclusive. At the same time, the National Security Council has initiated
the drafting of a strategy for countering violent extremism, and consultations with
various stakeholders are under way.
31. On penal reform, in January, an annex to the current Penal Code of 1976 was
approved by the National Assembly and endorsed by the President. It criminalizes
land usurpation, for the first time, as well as incorrect asset declarations and illicit
enrichment. The revised Penal Code was approved, in principle, by the Cabinet of
Ministers in September. The Penal Code is currently under review by the High
Council on Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption before it will be submitted to the
National Assembly.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and the coordination
of development assistance
32. The economic situation remained fragile in Afghanistan. The most recent
World Bank estimate of the 2016 growth rate stands at 1.2 per cent, representing a
17-03206

7/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

modest increase from 2015 but still marginally lower than earlier projections. The
Government continued its fiscal reforms, reporting in December that it had
exceeded the International Monetary Fund targets for domestic revenue collection in
2016, with an increase of 34 per cent in nominal value and 27 per cent in real terms,
compared with 2015. Investor concerns about security and the degree to which the
country provided a business-enabling environment, however, continued to
negatively affect investor confidence.
33. The national budget for the Afghan fiscal year A.H. 1396 (A.D. 2016/17) was
approved by the National Assembly and promulgated on 23 January. The national
budget of $6.4 billion was reduced by 7.7 per cent relative to the previous year’s
budget. The largest reduction, of over $415 million, was in the security sector, as a
result of fuel procurement costs for both the Ministry of the Interior and the
Ministry of Defence having been taken “off budget” and bilaterally procured and
supplied. Further reductions were made to the development budgets for health and
economic governance, as well as for infrastructure, although the latter sector is
expected to receive more than half of development expenditure for 2016/17. The
budget for development projects self-funded by the government was also reduced by
8 per cent relative to the previous year’s budget.
34. The United Nations country team initiated its midterm review of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework. In discussions convened subsequent
to the meeting held in Brussels in October 2016 on the implementation of the Self Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework, a number of donors in Kabul
indicated that they were similarly engaged in strategic planning or review exercises
and agreed to coordinate discussions with a view to developing shared contextual
analyses. Such discussions began in Kabul on 19 January, with emphasis placed on
the importance of service delivery in a context of declining access, the role of
extractive industries in development, linkages between humanitarian and
development initiatives, challenges to job creation, engagement with civil society
organizations and the reliability, handling and interpretation of data.
35. The Government continued to pursue its anti-corruption agenda. On
29 January, the new permanent premises of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre were
inaugurated in Kabul. To date, the Centre has tried six first -instance cases, of which
three have had their convictions affirmed on appeal, including a complex
$360,000 embezzlement case involving nine accused. On 9 January, the
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre trial court convicted a major general of the Ministry
of the Interior on charges of bribery and sentenced him to 14 years’ imprisonment.
On 15 February, a district Police Chief was convicted of money-laundering and
sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. Prosecutors with the Centre recently
indicted the Deputy Minister of Urban Development on embezzlement charges
involving hundreds of millions of dollars. His trial is pending. Consultations on the
drafting of the national anti-corruption strategy and anti-corruption law to reform
government prevention and oversight institutions continued.
36. The Cabinet of Ministers approved the independent land authority’s propo sed
land management law on 7 December 2016. It will be submitted to the National
Assembly for its endorsement when it reconvenes on 6 March 2017. The draft law
provides for the criminalization of land usurpation, strengthening the role of the
authority in land registration and titling and providing greater security of land
tenure for women.
37. The Government continued its efforts to improve governance at subnational
levels. The Independent Directorate of Local Governance took steps to restructure
all its capacity-building, monitoring and evaluation programmes. On 24 January, a
new capacity-building strategy was put forward for internal government
8/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

consultations. The merit-based recruitment of 34 gender specialists and
34 monitoring and evaluation specialists commenced, with a view to mainstreaming
gender perspectives in administration at the local level. The specialists are to be
based out of the offices of provincial governors. In 2016, as part of the
Government’s efforts to ensure merit-based civil service recruitment, all new
appointments were made through a merit-based process, bringing the total number
of merit-based appointments to 53 district governors (14 per cent) and five deputy
provincial governors (15 per cent). A total of 20 mayors (12 per cent) were
appointed directly by the President.
38. To bolster the number of women officers in the Afghan National Police,
250 new women recruits were given training in Sivas, Turkey, with the support of
the United Nations Development Programme. The recruits fi nished their four-month
training programme on 5 January and were assigned to posts within the Afghan
National Police. Nevertheless, the total number of women police officers within the
police force remains below 2 per cent.

V. Humanitarian assistance
39. The humanitarian situation further deteriorated in 2016 and into 2017, with
record numbers of new, conflict-induced internal displacements, a situation
compounded by the return of more than 620,000 refugees and undocumented
Afghans from Pakistan. The number of newly internally displaced persons in 2016
was recorded as 651,751 in 32 of 34 provinces, with more than 45 per cent of them
displaced between October and December. This is the highest number of internally
displaced persons recorded in the region, with 220 districts recording conflictinduced displacement and a 38 per cent overall increase compared with 2015. To
date in 2017, 12,863 persons have been newly displaced, with 17 of 34 provinces
already recording some level of forced displacement. The U nited Nations and
non-governmental organizations provided humanitarian assistance, including cash,
health services and supplies, shelter, food and non-food items, to the displaced
populations.
40. The situation was further exacerbated during the second half of 2016 by the
surge in the number of refugees returning through the voluntary repatriation
programme of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). As at 31 December, a total of 370,102 Afghans had registered as
refugees returned from Pakistan, 2,290 returned from Iran (Islamic Republic of) and
185 returned from other countries. UNHCR suspended activities at encashment
centres for the winter period on 15 December. At a tripartite meeting of
Afghanistan, Pakistan and UNHCR on 15 February 2017, it was decided to resume
the repatriation programme on 1 April. According to the results of extensive
monitoring, returnees spent their reintegration cash grant ($400 per person on
average) on meeting their immediate needs. Typically, cash grants were expended
within two to three months.
41. The deportation and return of undocumented Afghans from Pakistan also
increased significantly during the second half of 2016, with more than
214,000 arrivals, compared with 34,000 for the first six months of the year, for a
total of 248,189 arrivals in 2016. This trend continued in 2017; as at 11 February,
8,300 undocumented Afghans had returned from Pakistan, close to the figure for the
entire first quarter of 2016 (9,335 arrivals). The rate of arriv als remained steady
from the Islamic Republic of Iran, averaging 30,000 to 40,000 per month. This trend
also continued in 2017, with 39,151 undocumented Afghans returning from the
Islamic Republic of Iran as at 11 February 2017. Of those from Pakistan, 7,5 63 had

17-03206

9/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

spontaneously returned and 737 had been deported. Of those from the Islamic
Republic of Iran, 20,912 had spontaneously returned and 18,239 had been deported.
Returnees from Pakistan continue to cite increased policing and uncertainty over
their status in Pakistan, including fear of eviction, as the main reasons for leaving.
The numbers of returnees are anticipated to increase when the UNHCR repatriation
programme resumes.
42. Many of the newly internally displaced and returnee Afghans in Afghanistan
remained vulnerable to secondary or repeated displacement owing to the growing
severity and reach of the conflict and a rise in commodity prices, as well as a
scarcity of services and jobs in areas of high returnee settlement, in particular in the
Baghlan, Kabul, Kunduz Laghman and Nangarhar Provinces. Although the large
urban centres of Jalalabad and Kabul became a destination of choice, in particular
among undocumented returnees, the absorption capacity in urban settings, in
particular in terms of access to land, health care and education, was limited. A
policy framework for returnees and internally displaced persons that addresses
issues such as harmonization of support, free choice of settlement, the provision of
identity cards and an action plan for returnees and internally displaced persons was
adopted on 14 February.
43. The migration of Afghans to Europe decreased in 2016. Approximately
42,000 of the 362,000 arrivals by sea were Afghans, accounting for 12 per cent of
arrivals. This is a significant decrease compared with 2015, when Afghans
accounted for 21 per cent of an estimated one million arrivals. At the same time, the
number of returnees from Europe significantly increased during 2016, with
6,864 returnees assisted by the International Organization for Migration (IOM),
compared with 1,419 in 2015. Between 1 November 2016 and 11 February 2017,
IOM provided assistance to 1,045 voluntary returnees from Europe. During the
autumn, a number of bilateral readmission agreements were signed between the
Governments of several European countries and the Government of Afghanistan. In
addition, the Government and the European Union agreed upon a joint way forward
on migration issues which included provisions on readmission and return.
44. In 2016, Afghanistan continued to host a significant number of refugees from
Pakistan who fled military operations in North Waziristan that were launched in
2014. By the end of 2016, the number of those refugees stood at 125,000. Most
refugees reside in host communities with tribal affinities, although one camp for
approximately 20,000 individuals was established in Khost Province. Humanitarian
partners focused interventions on promoting self-sufficiency and addressing the
needs of the most vulnerable. In early 2017, an agreement was reached between
refugee elders and representatives of the federally administered tribal areas of
Pakistan which resulted in the return of a small number of refugees to Pakist an. The
majority of refugees have stated their intent to remain in Afghanistan, pending
further assurances of their protection and the availability of reintegration assistance
in their areas of origin in Pakistan.
45. Constraints on humanitarian access continued to be recorded and were
primarily owing to insecurity. In total, 200 incidents affecting non -governmental
organizations, the United Nations and other international humanitarian
organizations were registered in 2016, compared with 255 in 2015. Overal l, in 2016,
15 aid workers were killed and 26 injured, compared with 66 killed and 91 injured
during the previous year. A total of 121 aid workers were abducted in 2016.
Incidents against aid workers increased again in January 2017, with 42 incidents
reported, compared with 17 in January 2016. Health workers and facilities in
Afghanistan continue to be affected, with 29 incidents occurring during January
2017 countrywide. On 8 February, national staff from the International Committee
of the Red Cross travelling in Jowzjan Province came under attack and six were
10/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

killed. The overall decrease in security incidents is largely attributed to enhanced
security measures and a reduced humanitarian footprint. Polio eradication efforts
were particularly challenged by security and access constraints. Accessibility
improved in eastern Afghanistan following dialogues regarding access, and the
number of inaccessible children was reduced from 73,355 in the August 2016
subnational immunization campaign to 17,488 in the Decemb er campaign.
46. Owing to the number of vulnerable Afghan returnees returning to areas of
recent or historic conflict, the United Nations and mine action partners provided risk
education on mines and explosive remnants of war to returnees. Since January,
16,391 returnees have received this education. In addition, in the period between
1 November 2016 and 31 January 2017, mine action partners, coordinated by the
Mine Action Service, have declared 37 communities mine-free. This enables
approximately 10,000 individuals, across 12.05 km2, to move freely within their
community to pursue their education and conduct agricultural and business
activities. However, it is estimated that 3,635 minefields, 318 battlefields and
59 contaminated firing ranges remain, which affects 1,527 communities, in addition
to the continued threat from pressure-plate improvised explosive devices.
47. On 21 January 2017, the Government and the United Nations launched an
appeal for $550 million for the humanitarian response plan, which ai med at meeting
the critical humanitarian needs of 5.7 million people. This is a 13 per cent increase
owing to the increasing population displacements as a result of the continued and
expanding conflict. Overall, some 9.3 million people are in need of human itarian
assistance. In 2016, the humanitarian response plan was 83.8 per cent funded.
Overall humanitarian funding reached $535.4 million in 2016. Of that,
$284.1 million of the requested $339 million designated for activities envisaged in
the humanitarian response plan was received.

VI. Counter-narcotics
48. After a decline in 2015, poppy cultivation and opium production rose again
during the reporting period. On 24 December, the Ministry of Counter -Narcotics,
with support from the United Nations, released the full report of the Afghanistan
opium survey for 2016. As previously reported, an increase in poppy cultivation of
10 per cent compared with 2015 and a 45 per cent increase in opium production is
noted. The increase is largely attributed to a larger yield per hectare and the fact that
poppy cultivation areas subject to eradication decreased by 91 per cent. Between
1 November 2016 and 31 January 2017, Afghan law enforcement authorities
conducted a total of 517 counter-narcotics operations, which resulted in the seizure
of 1,076 kg of heroin, 23,600 kg of morphine, 15,370 kg of opium, 4 kg of
methamphetamine, 266,933 kg of hashish, 686 K-Tablet (synthetic drug) tablets,
32,024 kg of solid precursor chemicals and 10,924 litres of liquid precursor
chemicals. In addition, 583 suspects were arrested, 25 heroin processing
laboratories were dismantled and 126 vehicles, 39 weapons, 102 mobile telephones
and seven radios were seized. One member of the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces was killed and six were wounded in the course of these operations.
49. A new law on countering narcotics, which was approved by the Council of
Ministers in 2016, is now with the National Assembly. On 27 January, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime released the first assessment of the synthetic drug
situation in Afghanistan, in which the Office indicated that methamphetamine use is
becoming established practice among opiate users. Not only are methamphetamines
increasingly being seized by law enforcement in Afghanistan, but there is also
evidence of manufacturing facilities in the western part of the country.

17-03206

11/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

50. The 13th meeting of the policy consultative group was held on 1 and
2 February 2017 in Vienna. The more than one hundred participants from
30 countries and 11 organizations discussed the four pillars of the Vienna
Declaration, namely regional cooperation and initiatives, illicit financial flows,
precursor chemicals and drug demand reduction. The 12th meeting of senior
officials of the triangular initiative between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran (Islamic
Republic of) was held on 3 February in Vienna to take stock of progress made and
explore future cooperation in jointly addressing drug trafficking. The three countries
renewed their commitment to make joint planning fully operational and intensify
border controls, including developing mechanisms for border meetings among
commanders of border provinces and the counter-narcotics police to exchange
information and intelligence, and to hold regular meetings of t he heads of counternarcotics entities in the three countries.

VII. Mission support
51. Between 1 November 2016 and 31 January 2017, UNAMA conducted
195 road and 16 air missions, as well as 580 reverse outreach missions, during
which district representatives visited UNAMA field offices.

VIII. Observations
52. Afghanistan continues to face a range of complex challenges. Worsening
conflict has resulted in record levels of civilian casualties and internally displaced
persons. The rising numbers of returning refugees and undocumented Afghans has
put further strain on social and economic conditions. The Government also
continues to face both internal and external political challenges. Addressing all of
those challenges will continue to require the determined resolve of the Government.
In that regard, a cohesive working relationship between the President and the Chief
Executive will remain vital.
53. I welcome the continuing steps taken to further implement electoral reforms
and move towards the preparations for parliamentary elections. The Government’s
commitment, at the highest level, to holding credible and transparent parliamentary
elections is heartening. As important as electoral reforms are, so too is fostering
public trust in the reforms, institutions and the democratic exercise.
54. The Government has made efforts to improve its fiscal management, including
revenue collection. For the first time, infrastructure spending received more than
half of development expenditure this year. In the longer term, a balance between
infrastructure development and adequate investment in human capital is vital to
promote social development and public confidence in the State. The country’s large
youth population represents both a challenge, in terms of the p rovision of
employment, and an important opportunity for the country’s future.
55. The Government has advanced its agenda to fight corruption, in particular
through the operationalization of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre. It will be
important to build on this achievement in order to fully realize the Government’s
broader anti-corruption agenda and to promote public and donor confidence in its
institutions.
56. The conflict has intensified yet again, with increasing numbers of armed
clashes and complex attacks. The Afghan security forces, with the support of
international forces, have demonstrated resilience in the light of intensifying combat
operations. Continued international support for Afghan security forces, in
12/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

accordance with the commitments made during the summit of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization held in Warsaw in 2016, remains essential. Strong political
leadership, effective measures to enhance command and control structures,
operational capacity and morale are all critical to ensuring the sustainability of the
Afghan security forces in the coming year and beyond, given the high, and
increasing, casualty rate.
57. Civilians continue to pay a heavy price for the conflict. UNAMA recorded the
highest number of civilian casualties in a single year, partly as a result of escalating
ground engagements. The rising number of children killed and injured is
unacceptable. I call upon all parties to the conflict to take urgent steps to halt the
killing and maiming of civilians and stress the need for accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law. The full implementation of
the national civilian casualty prevention and mitigation policy is of the utmost
urgency. Attacks on health-care facilities, educational facilities, health-care workers
and educators must cease.
58. Displacement reached its highest levels in 2016. More returns, including
refugees and undocumented Afghans, are expected from Pakistan this year. Many of
the newly internally displaced and returnee Afghans in Afghanistan remain
vulnerable to secondary or repeated displacement, which has worrisome
implications for those groups which are at risk of being trapped in prolonged
poverty. I welcome the proposed changes in the policy of the Government of
Afghanistan on displacement and returnees. Medium- and long-term programmes
will be required to absorb and integrate the large number of returnees who have
already arrived and will continue to arrive in order to ensure their successful
economic and social integration. I commend the Government for its engagement and
dedication in addressing the issue and urge international partners to support its
efforts.
59. The worsening security situation and its impact on civilians have deepened the
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan. Given the extraordinary humanitarian needs,
strong international support and adequate funding to the national humanitarian
response plan for 2017 is needed.
60. The toll of the conflict on civilians also underscores the urgency for a politi cal
solution to the conflict. Peace remains the imperative. The implementation of the
peace agreement between the Government and Hizb-i-Islami Gulbuddin is ongoing.
Progress on the agreement is important to demonstrate the willingness of the
Government and the people of Afghanistan to establish an equitable peace. Equally
important for a peace process to take firm hold will be the demonstrated
commitment of the Government to upholding its international obligations to ensure
accountability for past abuses by all parties to the conflict and to ensure that the
rights of victims remain central.
61. I regret that there has been no tangible progress towards direct talks between
the Government and the Taliban. The role of regional countries remains vital in any
process, given that they can make important contributions to creating an
environment that would enable the pursuit of peace efforts. I call upon all countries
involved to maintain their efforts. In that regard, the importance of a constructive
relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan is recognized by all. I encourage
Member States to support efforts to establish direct talks between the Government
and the Taliban.
62. Noting the continued importance of supporting political processes in
Afghanistan and monitoring the security situation, I request the Security Council to
extend the mandate of UNAMA, which is set to expire on 17 March 2017, for a
further 12 months. In so doing, I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to
17-03206

13/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

a sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set out in the final report of the
Tripartite Review Commission on the United Nations in Afghanistan, submitted to
the Security Council in September 2015. I note the effective manner in which the
existing mandate was discharged throughout 2016, in particular the mission’s good
offices functions and engagement on critical human rights issues and donor
coherence, as well as support for the strengthening of national institutions and
capacities in priority areas, as requested by the Government. I call upon Member
States to continue to provide the support required in order to maintain our
engagement and activities throughout the country.
63. I thank all United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their continued dedication to fulfilling
our commitments in support of the people of Afghanistan under very challenging
conditions.

14/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

Annex *
Progress achieved against benchmarks

I.

Security
Benchmark: sustainable Afghan security institutions and processes capable of
ensuring peace and stability and protecting the people of Afghanistan.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increase in the number of national  • As of November 2016, there were 160,667 personnel serving in the
police and national army personnel
Afghan National Army and 7,660 personnel serving in the Afghan Air
mentored, trained and operational
Force, adding to a total of 168,327 personnel, a figure 26,673 below the
according to an agreed structure
end-state objective for 2016. As of November 2016, 887 female
personnel were serving in both the Afghan National Army and in the
Afghan Air Force. As of November 2016, there were 147,635 personnel
serving in the Afghan National Police, 9,365 below the end -state
objective. As of November 2016, 2,635 female personnel serve in the
Afghan National Police.
• According to reports it is estimated that the actual strength is likely as
much as 20% lower for the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
than the figures given above, as a result of the so-called ghost
soldiers/police officers.
• In the course of 2016, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
Resolute Support (RS) Mission has continued to train, advise, and assist
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
• In 2016, the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Interio r developed
the National Military Strategy spanning a period of five years. It foresees
an extensive reform of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
The National Military Strategy supports and fosters the Afghan National
Strategic Planning System, which is comprised of the National Threat
Assessment, National Security Policy, National Security Strategy, and
the National Campaign Plan.

II.

Peace, reintegration and reconciliation
Benchmark: national dialogue and regional engagement to pursue constructive
and inclusive process to foster a political environment conducive to peace.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Development and implementation
of inclusive national and regional
processes to enhance peace,
reintegration and reconciliation
efforts

• On 11 January 2016, the Quadrilateral Coordination Group (QCG)
consisting of Afghanistan, China, Pakistan and the United States met for
the first time to discuss the Afghan peace and reconciliation process in
Islamabad. Parties confirmed mutual efforts to facilitate an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan and the region. Three further QCG
meetings were held.

Note: The present annex is being circulated in English only.
* The present annex is being issued without formal editing.
17-03206

15/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• On 21 September 2016 in New York, on the margins of the 71st UN
General Assembly, India, Afghanistan and the United Sates held a round of
trilateral consultations at which they reaffirmed shared interests in
advancing peace and security in the region, as well as countering terrorism.
• On 22 September 2016, a peace agreement was signed between the
Afghan Government and Hizb-e Islami Gulbuddin (HIG). On
6 November 2016, the Afghan government and the HIG Joint Executive
Commission for the implementation of the peace agreement officially
started its work.
• On 20 November 2016, a HIG delegation met with President Ghani to
discuss the release of HIG prisoners, refugee repatriation and land
distribution. Two days later, a HIG delegation visited Pul -e-Charkhi
prison in Kabul and met HIG prisoners. All issues regarding the
implementation of the peace agreement continue to be addressed by the
Joint Executive Commission.
• There were four meetings convened by Pugwash in 2016 related to peace
and security in Afghanistan; 23-24 January 2016 in Doha, Qatar on
“Peace and Security in Afghanistan”; 5 September 2016 in Kabul,
Afghanistan on “moving towards peace in Afghanistan”; 22 November
2016 in Islamabad, Pakistan on “Pakistan-Afghan relations” and;
13 December 2016 in Kabul, Afghanistan on “peace in Afghanistan”.
Increased ability by Afghan
authorities to gather and provide
substantiated, updated and accurate
information to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011)

• In 2016 the Government continued to provide substantiated, updated and
accurate information to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
• On 7 October 2016, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team submitted their Seventh report, pursuant to resolution 2160 (2014),
concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities
constituting a threat to the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan.
The report substantively built on information gathered and provided by
the Afghan authorities.
• On 13 December 2016, the Afghan Government submitted a request for
the delisting of (QDi.088) Gulbuddin Hekmatyar from the United
Nations ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions List in order to support a
signed peace agreement with the Hizb-i-Islami Gulbuddin. On 3 February
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar was delisted.

Increased public support for the
peace process through engagement
at the community level and with
civil society

• On 20 July 2016, independent Ulema from 15 districts of Baghlan
province held a gathering in support of the role of religious figures in
peace and reconciliation. Around 225 people participated in the
gathering, including 150 ulema, as well as tribal representatives,
Provincial Council members, Government officials, and civil society. At
the conclusion of the gathering, a 10-point resolution was adopted
declaring the ulema’s full support for peace and reconciliation based on
the Islamic principles. The event was supported by UNAMA.
• On 9 August 2016, 40 youth activists, including 11 women, from Balkh,
Sar-e-Pul, Jawzjan and Samangan provinces came together in Mazar -eSharif for a regional conference on peace and reconciliation. The
conference adopted a declaration calling on the Government and the

16/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

international community to involve youth in the peace process. The event
was supported by UNAMA.
• In 2016, the Steering Committee of the Afghan People’s Dialogue on
Peace, supported by UNAMA, finalized the 34 provincial road maps for
peace. Seventeen of these provincial road maps were approved by the
Steering Committee during the year and will be used for peacebuilding
advocacy and initiatives by Afghan civil society actors across the
country.
• Between September-December 2016, workshops were conducted by
UNAMA working in tandem with the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission (AIHRC) in all eight regions of the country aimed at
building civil society capacity in peace and reconciliation processes
through their strengthened advocacy for adoption of the
recommendations contained in provincial road maps for peace.
• In 2016, UNAMA field offices carried out half a dozen local peace
initiatives, offering mediation support to foster Afghan -led facilitation,
mediation and reconciliation efforts on a provincial and district level.
These included consultation, gatherings and jirgas with ulema, tribal
representatives, Provincial Council members, Provincial Peace Council
members, Government officials, and youth and women rights activists.
• On 26 October 2016, the annual Global Open Day event in Kabul on
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
under the theme “Women and Violent Extremism in Afghanistan”, was
organized by UNAMA and UN-Women alongside 12 similar regional
events across the country.

III.

Governance and institution-building:
Benchmark: extension of Government authority throughout the country
through the establishment of democratic, legitimate, accountable institutions,
down to the local level, with the capacity to implement policies and to be
increasingly capable of sustaining themselves.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased ability by Afghan
authorities and independent
electoral institutions to manage and
conduct genuine and periodic
elections, with due regard to
women’s participation and
constitutionally guaranteed quotas

• In June 2016, the Ministry of Finance announced the Government’s
intention to allocate USD 31 million for the upcoming elections, of
which USD 21 million is in-kind in the form of secondment of civil
servants and teachers as polling staff.

17-03206

• On 25 September 2016, a new election legislation merging the Election
Law and the Law on Structures, Duties and Authorities of the Independent
Election Commission (IEC) and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC) were published in the official Gazette. The new law
was passed by legislative decree, and partially incorporated
recommendations of the Special Electoral Reform Commission. The IEC
was also tasked to prepare a technical study on Wolesi Jirga and Provincial
Council constituencies within three months of its “establishment”.

17/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In October 2016, at the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, the Afghan
Government committed, in connection with the Self-Reliance Through
Mutual Accountability Framework deliverables, to move towards
“credible, inclusive and transparent elections,” based on the
Government’s pledge to “implement in 2017 the essential electoral
reforms and prepare for elections to further restore trust and confidence
in the electoral process and its institutions.”
• On 22 November 2016, President Ghani appointed 12 new
commissioners to the IEC and the ECC, including three women. The
commissioners were appointed through a selection process that was open
to civil society and the international community, in consultation with
political figures, and following interviews by President Ghani, Chief
Executive Abdullah and other stakeholders.
• On 12 December 2016, the IEC initiated the selection process of the
Chief Electoral Officer. On 12 January the Independent Election
Commission recommended three candidates to President Ghani, in a
letter signed by only four of the seven commissioners. On 26 January, a
spokesperson for the Chief Executive publicly stated that the three
nominees were unacceptable due to their alleged lack of qualifications
and ties with previous commissioners.
• In December 2016, the IEC commenced initial discussions on voter
registration options, and started preparation of packages to assess and
reallocate polling centers.
• In December 2016, President Ghani established a multi-agency technical
committee on delimitation of electoral boundaries which included the IEC.
• On 9 April 2016, President Ghani requested continuous UN electoral
assistance for the next elections. In response, a Needs Assessment
Mission (NAM) was deployed in country from 11 to 19 May 2016, which
recommended key decisions to be made. Upon the adoption of new
election legislation and the appointment to the IEC and ECC, a desk
study updated the NAM in January 2017. From 10 to 27 February 2017, a
team was deployed to start discussions to formulate a project to provide
electoral support, with concrete areas of support to be confirmed. UNDP
continues to provide technical assistance through a modest Proj ect
Initiation Plan as a bridge towards more comprehensive support based on
a request.
Establishment of a Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee and
development of anti-corruption
benchmarks

• In continuation of the Government’s commitment to strengthen the
oversight role of the Independent Joint anti-corruption Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee (MEC), the Presidential Decree No. 115 declared
MEC as an independent institution and obliged all government entities to
regularly report on their implementation of MEC recommendations.
MEC also issued its New Strategy (2016 to 2018) to actively work with
Government institutions to implement anti-corruption reforms.
• MEC published two special reports. The first one focuses on
vulnerabilities to corruption in the Ministry of Public Health and the
second report discusses the vulnerabilities to corruption in the context of
fuel and gas supply and import to the country.

18/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• MEC also released its Tenth Six-Month Report, covering the period of
January to July 2016. The report discussed, among other things, progress in
the payment of pensions and benefits to retirees by the Ministry of Labor,
Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled; and the establishment of a Procurement
Review and Appeal Committee in line with the Procurement Law.
• As of December 2016, out of the total of 601 MEC recommendations
since 2010, 201 were fully implemented, 196 partially implemented, 23
irrelevant and 181 pending implementation.
Empowerment of anti-corruption
institutions to oversee a whole-ofGovernment approach to anticorruption

• The Afghanistan Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (AEITI)
released its 4th Reconciliation Report in February 2016, covering
Government revenues from the oil, gas and mining industries from 2012
to 2013 and is currently preparing its 5th report. AEITI is responsible for
Afghanistan’s compliance with the requirements for its membership in
the Extractives Industries Initiative (EITI) a global standard to promote
the open and accountable management of oil, gas, and mineral resources.
• As part of the Government’s increasing efforts to implement its
anti-corruption agenda and Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework (SMAF) commitments, the anti-corruption plans of the five
revenue-generating ministries (i.e. Ministry of Finance; Ministry of
Mines and Petroleum; Ministry of Commerce and Industries; Ministry of
Transport and Civil Aviation; and Ministry of Communication and
Information Technology) have been formulated and submitted to the
Cabinet in October 2016 for review.
• In September 2016, the Secretariat of the High Council on Rule of Law
and Anti-corruption started consultations with stakeholders on the
drafting of the national anti-corruption strategy. Subsequently, the Office
of the President took over consultations on the formulation of the
national anti-corruption strategy. To advance the government’s fight
against corruption, UNAMA together with the international community
has facilitated the stakeholders anti-corruption working group to include
relevant government partners, particularly the High Council Secretariat
as well as civil society, in following up on the government’s
anti-corruption commitments in the previous international conferences
(i.e., Brussels and London anti-corruption conferences). UNAMA also
facilitated donor anti-corruption working group meetings for a
consolidated position of the international community and coherent
support to the government in this area.
• Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework (SMAF)
deliverables called for a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between
Government and Civil Society which was signed in late 2015. Though
there were limited activities under the MoU in 2016, the existence of the
MoU itself was an enabling factor in Afghanistan becoming a member of
the Open Government Partnership (OGP) in December 2016. At the
London Anti-Corruption Summit in May 2016, Afghanistan committed to
increase access to information and support civil society participation.
UNAMA has continued to liaise with the Administrative Office of the
President on further steps of the government in implementing OGP
commitments, particularly providing necessary support to enable civil
society’s participation In the process.

17-03206

19/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• Afghanistan improved its ranking in the Transparency International ’s
Corruption Perceptions Index 2016, placing it in 169th position with a
four-point increase in the score (from 11 to 15). The Government
attributed this to its establishment of anti-corruption bodies.
• In the course of 2016, the government and judicial institutions designed,
established, developed and made operational the Anti-Corruption Justice
Center (ACJC) with national jurisdiction, which has already adjudicated
seven anti-corruption cases and is formally investigating dozens of high level cases.
Annual publication of asset
declarations of public officials

• In line with commitments in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework (SMAF), nine senior state officials, including
the President and the Chief Executive Officer, 25 Cabinet ministers, and
26 provincial governors registered their assets with the High Office of
Oversight and Anti-corruption (HOOAC). Asset verification and
publication have not started yet.
• On 4 May 2016, the High Office of Oversight and Anti-corruption
(HOOAC) proposed strict sanctions on public officials who fail to
register their assets. This proposal entailed dismissal of 15 Provincial
Governors for failing to comply. However, the HOOAC’s proposal has
not been adopted nor implemented.

Increased capacity of civil servants
at the central, provincial and
district levels to discharge
functions and deliver services

• In an effort to improve the quality of service delivery in the public
service, the Civil Service Institute trained 2,572 civil servants in
computers applications, English language, human resource management
and admin/finance management. The number of staff trained represents
89 percent of the target number of 2,879. Out of the 2,572 trainees,
1,488 were from the central Government and 1,084 from the provincial
administrations. Women represented 30 per cent of the participants.
• In 2016, 106 staff from IDLG attended various capacity trainings in India.
The trainings were organized by the Indian Government Civil Service
Institutions, in line with the MoU signed between the Independent
Directorate for Local Governance and the Indian Government.

Increased transparency and
effectiveness of civil service
appointments

• As part of the Government’s efforts to ensure merit-based civil service
recruitments all new appointments were appointed through a merit-based
process led by the Independent Directorate of Local Governance (IDLG),
bringing the total number of merit based appointments to; 53 (14%) out of
383 district governors, and 5 (15%) out of 34 deputy provincial governors.
In addition, 20 (12%) out of 165 Municipal Mayors were appointed
through a competitive process led by the President and the IDLG.

Strengthened civil service reform
supported by a comprehensive
approach to capacity-building and
donor-funded technical assistance

• On 9 August 2016, the President appointed his Senior Advisor on
Strategic and Public Relations as the new Chairman of the Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission (IARCSC).
However, he was unable to assume this position, leaving the IARCSC
without substantive leadership. To address this gap, the President
appointed the deputy head of the Administrative Office of the President
to manage IARCSC’s operational functions.

20/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• The revised civil service law, which was formulated in 2015, continues to
undergo review, due to the protracted bureaucratic processes involved.
These two developments have adversely impacted the implementation of
civil service reforms and capacity building
Implementation of the subnational
governance policy and
development of subnational
regulatory, financing and budgetary
frameworks

• In line with commitments in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework (SMAF), in January 2016, the Independe nt
Directorate of Local Governance (IDLG) launched consultations with
national and subnational institutions and with civil society, with support
of UNAMA, on the draft revised Subnational Governance Policy.
Subsequently, comments from all 34 provincial administrations and
selected government ministries, as well as civil society networks were
received and incorporated. Later in the process, the donors provided
consolidated comments to the draft policy. The draft policy is currently
awaiting Cabinet review. The gap created by the delayed appointment of
the IDLG leadership has impacted the Policy’s approval and dialogue at
the highest political level.
• The guidelines for annual provincial planning were developed. Their
function is to orientate provincial level authorities in the planning process.
• Local Administration Law amended and submitted to the Lower House.
The process was sponsored by IDLG, the Office of the President and
technically led by the Ministry of Justice. This law, once enacted, will
regulate the affairs related to subnational governance administrative units,
including provincial departments, district offices and municipalities.
• In 2016, the draft Municipal Law has been in an ongoing review process
between the Office of the President, IDLG, the Ministry of Justice, Kabul
Municipality and other stakeholders. A timeframe for the finalization of
the draft law has not been identified, yet. In addition, the Municipal
outreach framework and Municipal Advisory Board guidelines were
developed and endorsed and the solid waste management guideline
developed and implemented.

Development and publication of
criteria for administrative
boundaries

• National and international institutions continue to use the 2009 internal
boundary data set, as stipulated by the Independent Directorate of Local
Governance and the Geodesy and Cartography Head Office.

Establishment of adequate
infrastructure for functioning
Government institutions, especially
at the subnational level

• Citizen’s Service Centers were constructed in four provinces (Bamyan,
Daikundi, Paktya and Panjshir).
• 13 Provincial Governor’s Offices (PGO) were equipped with internet
infrastructure to improve IT management systems in the PGOs.
• 11 Municipalities were provided with internet connections to enable
communication with their constituents.

Establishment of credible and
accessible judicial and penal
systems that respect and uphold the
human rights of all citizens

17-03206

• The National Anti-Corruption Justice Center (ACJC) was established and
operational from June 2016. The ACJC conducted six trials, so far, resulting
in the conviction of 16 individuals, including individuals charged with bank
embezzlement, land grabbing, bank employees, a senior prosecutor and a
General at the Ministry of Interior. Trials were held open to the public and in
a transparent manner for individuals on major corruption charges. Three of
the six trials were affirmed on appeal before the ACJC. Upcoming cases
include at least two Major Generals of the Ministry of Interior, the Deputy
21/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Minister for Urban Development. Further dozens of cases are currently
undergoing formal ACJC prosecutor investigations.
• The Afghanistan Independent Bar Association recorded 2677 lawyers in
Afghanistan, of which 712 are female.
• On 18 April 2016, implementing a request of the Central Prison
Directorate, UNAMA released a comprehensive review of prison health
services in 31 of 34 Afghan provincial prisons to assess compliance with
the Mandela UN international minimum standards of treatment. The
report concludes that progress has been made in several key areas but
substantial work remains to be done. Pursuant to a recent agreement with
the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH), prisoners in nearly all Afghan
provincial prisons have free access to basic health services either through
MOI prison clinics or referrals to MOPH civil hospitals. UNAMA
continues to work with national and international counterparts to
implement the report’s practical recommendations.
• The newly revised Penal Code was drafted in line with commitments in the
Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework (SMAF). The
draft legislation, which is still to be considered by Parliament, incorporates
crimes in over 50 special laws; and is now consistent with United Nations
Convention against Corruption, The Convention against Torture and the
United Nations Transnational Organized Crime Convention, as well as
modern best practices. The new draft Penal Code defines crimes of
violence against women; and incorporates crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide according to the Rome Statute.
• The Supreme Court and Attorney General Office advanced efforts
combatting corruption in their own institutions. Both instituted strategies
and action plans to counteract corruption under the guidance of the Second
Vice President and the High Council of Rule of Law’s Justice Committee.
• On 23 October 2016, UNAMA released the first comprehensive
assessment of formal and informal dispute resolution mechanisms, which
aim to resolve high-stakes conflicts over access to irrigation water. The
report’s key finding is that while the recently enacted Water Law
provides a comprehensive regulatory scheme, water users continue to
rely predominately on local “water masters” to resolve disputes
traditionally. The report was presented to the responsible Afghan
ministries, who are now supported by UNAMA in the implementation of
the recommendations made in the report.
• On 4 December 2016, following the direct request of the Minister of
Justice, UNAMA released a comprehensive assessment of Afghanistan’s
juvenile rehabilitation centers (JRC’s) to measure compliance with UN
international standards for the treatment of juveniles deprived of their
liberty. The report found positive trends in Afghanistan’s JRCs while also
outlining a critical need to improve in-detention education and postrehabilitation care for young Afghans to help them re-enter society.
Continued international support is required for rehabilitation
accommodation improvements, especially in JRCs that were not custom built and fit for purpose. UNAMA is now supporting the Ministry on the
implementation of the recommendations made in the report.

22/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

IV.

Human rights
Benchmark: improved respect for human rights of Afghans, in line with the
Afghan Constitution and international law, with particular emphasis on the
protection of civilians, the situation of women and girls, freedom of expression
and accountability based on the rule of law.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Reduction in the number of
incidents of unlawful use of force
and intimidation of civilians,
through compliance by relevant
actors with international law

• Between 1 January and 31 December 2016, UNAMA documented
11,418 civilian casualties (3,498 dead and 7,920 injured). Although
civilian deaths decreased by two per cent in 2016, civilian injuries
increased by six per cent and the overall civilian casualties increased by
three per cent compared to 2015. The number of incidents resulting in
civilian casualties increased by 12 per cent in 2016. UNAMA attributed
61 per cent of all civilian casualties to Anti-Government Elements and
24 per cent to Pro-Government Forces (20 percent to Afghan national
security forces, two per cent to international military forces and two per
cent to pro-Government armed groups). Ten per cent of all civilian
casualties resulted from cross-fire between Anti-Government Elements
and Afghan national security forces thus could not be attributed to a
specific party. Five per cent of civilian casualties resulted from
unattributed explosive remnants of war. Ground engagements between
Pro-Government Forces and Anti-Government Elements remained the
leading cause of civilian casualties, accounting for 4,295 (1,070 deaths
and 3,225 injured), followed by detonation of improvised explosive
devices with 2,156 civilian casualties (700 deaths and 1,456 injured).
• The conflict severely impacted Afghan children in 2016, with UNAMA
recording 3,512 child casualties (923 dead and 2,589 injured), a 24 per cent
increase over 2015 and the highest number of child casualties recorded by
UNAMA in a single year since 2009. This disproportionate rise in child
casualties across Afghanistan in 2016 resulted mainly from a 65 per cent
increase in civilian casualties from explosive remnants of war — most of
whom were children.
• The Civilian Casualty Avoidance and Mitigation Board (CAMB) had
been transferred from international military forces to the Afghan
authorities on 26 January 2016 as advised by UNAMA. The board now
functions as a focused mechanism for identifying areas for improving
civilian casualty mitigation efforts. The CAMB drafted the national
Civilian Casualty Prevention and Mitigation Policy that was approved at
the deputy-ministerial level and further established a working group on
2 October 2016 to draft an action plan for its implementation. At its
quarterly meeting on 15 November 2016, the CAMB focused discussion
on devising plans by relevant ministries for implementation of the
Civilian Casualty Prevention and Mitigation Policy once it has been
endorsed by the National Security Council.
• The Government established a senior-level Protection Working Group
that held its first meeting on 30 June 2016 to facilitate a policy -driven
dialogue on existing protection of civilian concerns and supporting
implementation of improved practices to reduce civilian casualties.
• In 2016, the Ministry of Defence drafted rules of engagement to prevent
harm to civilians during operations against anti-government elements.

17-03206

23/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• In its annual report for 2016, the Taliban claimed to document
5,232 civilian casualties between January and December 2016, of which
“Americans and the stooge administration” caused 71 per cent
(3,836 civilian casualties — 1,504 dead and 2,332 injured);
Daesh/Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province,
unidentified gunmen and local infighting caused 17 per cent (1, 127
civilian casualties — 380 dead and 747 injured); and Taliban caused 12
percent — namely 249 civilian casualties (120 dead and 149 injured. In
2016, the Taliban also established a “civilian casualty committee” under
their military structure to investigate civilian casualty incidents in which
their fighters were involved.
Improved awareness by Afghans of
their rights and by the Government
of its obligations

• Although the Government made little tangible progress in 2016 in
meeting the commitments set out in its 2015 National Plan on the
Elimination of Torture, the Government did renew its commitment to
ratify the Optional Protocol on the Prevention of Torture with a new
timeline of the end May 2017.
• In May 2016, the National Assembly took action on Presidential
Legislative Decree 76, issued in 2015. It rejected Article 10, a
preventative detention measure that allowed the National Security
Directorate to request the Supreme Court to intern or hold a person
deemed likely to commit a national security crime for up to one year. The
Assembly approved the remaining parts of the decree, thus retaining the
amendments of the Criminal Procedure Code which allow for extended
detentions by national security officials up to 10 days. T he decree also
gives prosecutors the discretion to extend that detention from 15 to 60
days. Thus, a judge’s review and order is not required until 70 days have
passed, in violation of both the Afghan constitution and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, art. 9, to which Afghanistan is a
party.
• In its November 2016 “Report on Preliminary Examination Activities in
Afghanistan”, the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court set out its determination that “there is a reasonable basis to believe
that the war crimes of torture and related ill-treatment ha[d] been
committed by Afghan government forces, in particular the intelligence
agency (National Directorate for Security), and the Afghan National
Police, since 2003.” In assessing its jurisdiction over these cases under
the complementarity principle, the Court noted the Government’s failure
to respond to multiple requests for information from the Prosecutor since
2008.

Improved impact of, and support
for, legal and policy measures to
combat violence against women
and girls

• On 31 January 2016, the President inaugurated a dedicated fund to
sponsor emergency services for women survivors of life -threatening acts
of violence, such as medical treatment and temporary accommodation.
Actual functioning of these services, however, has so far been limited by
inadequate contributions to the fund.
• On 11 June 2016, the Government approved the strategy and action plan
on the elimination of violence against women for the period 2016 -2020,
which was publicly launched on 5 December 2016.

24/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• With the aim of creating a protective, violence-free environment for
women employed in the Afghan National Police, the Ministry of Interior
on 11 July 2016 established a complaint mechanism to prevent and
respond to sexual harassment against women police; however the
mechanism has not yet become fully functional. UNAMA serves as one
of four international organizations that have been requested to provide
technical support to the complaint mechanism.
• On 9 November 2016, the Wolesi Jirga approved a law on the elimination
of harassment for women and girls. On 25 December 2016, the Meshrano
Jirga reviewed the law and proposed amendments to the text to be agreed
upon by a joint commission comprised of members of both houses.
• Based on findings stemming from questionnaires with 178 government
employees (113 women) and focus-group discussions carried out with
19 ministries and the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, on
25 October 2016, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs launched the report
“Workplace obstacles: Analysis and Recommendations” in which it
highlighted the persistence of work-related harassment and determined
other workplace obstacles hampering the presence and expansion of
women workers in government institutions. The report provides a basis
upon which efforts can be made to address them.
Improved awareness of, and
support for, legal and policy
measures related to combating
impunity and furthering transitional
justice

• In 2016, UNAMA closely monitored Government peace and
reconciliation initiatives, such as the activities of the High Peace Council
in adopting its five-year strategy and the peace agreement between the
Government and Hezb-i-Islami (Gulbuddin). The Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission and transitional justice civil
society groups have voiced concerns over the provisions on judicial
immunity in the peace agreement and called for the rights of victims to
be respected in the peace process.
• In October 2016, a letter from the UN High Commissioner for Human
Rights to the President in October 2016 expressed concerns about the
peace agreement and reminded the Government of Afghanistan’s
international obligations not only to hold accountable persons responsible
for grave violations of human rights and international humanitarian law
violations, but also to respect the rights of victims and their families,
without which peace and reconciliation are not sustainable.

Government fulfilment of reporting
requirements on international
human rights covenants and
conventions and implementation of
the recommendations from the
Human Rights Council Universal
Periodic Review of Afghanistan

17-03206

• In April 2016, pursuant to its obligations Article 20 of the UN
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading
Treatment, Afghanistan submitted its Second Periodic Report to the
UN Committee against Torture. The Report was submitted under the
simplified reporting procedure and consisted of a set of replies to queries
raised in the “List of Issues” adopted by the Committee Session in 2010.
Afghanistan’s Second Periodic Review will be considered by the 60th
Session of the UN Committee against Torture.

25/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

• Also in 2016, Afghanistan ratified Protocol V to the 1980 Convention on
Certain Conventional Weapons on Explosive Remnants of War, which
sets out obligations concerning the removal of unexploded ordnance from
the battlefield. Ratification should be followed by the implementation of
direct measures to ensure the marking, clearance and/or destruction of
explosive remnants of war in affected territories under its control.
• The Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting (created to
implement the “Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism” on grave
violations of children’s rights in situations of armed conflict) noted
significant progress from the Ministry of Interior with regard to
expansion of Child Protection Units in Afghan National Police
recruitment centres, with 16 additional Units inaugurated in 2016,
bringing the overall total to 21 throughout the country.
• On 28 July 2016, the President issued a directive for the establishment of
a national committee to investigate and report on underage recruitment
by Afghan security forces. While widely seen as a positive step, the
initiative is based on self-reporting by the government.
• The Ministries of Interior and Education and the National Directorate of
Security issued directives during the year to strengthen the protection of
children. On 18 June 2016, the Ministry of Interior issued a directive
prohibiting media exposure of children arrested on national security
charges. On 4 June and 4 July 2016, respectively, the Ministry of
Education propagated two directives to all security-related ministries
highlighting Afghanistan’s commitment to the Safe Schools Declaration
and calling on the security forces to stop using schools for military
purposes. On 2 July 2016, the National Directorate for Security issued a
directive instructing that children no longer be held in its detention
facilities and the cessation of transfers of children to its maximum
security prison. As of 15 December 2016, the National Directorate of
Security had transferred 42 children to juvenile facilities throughout the
country.
Increased capacity and commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan
and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as the
Afghan national human rights
institution, to respect, protect, fulfil
and promote human rights

• In December 2016, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission held a national conference for the adoption of the National
Action Plan for Protection of Human Rights Defenders in Afghanistan.
This pivotal initiative promises to consolidate and strengthen efforts by
civil society and international actors such as the EU and its partners to
improve protection of human rights defenders in Afghanistan.
• In response to allegations in the media of widespread abuse of children
by Afghan police in the southern region of the country, in January 2016
the Attorney-General’s office tasked the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission offices in Kandahar, Uruzgan and Helmand
provinces to present information to it and refer cases of sexually abused
children. While widely seen as a positive step, the initiative is based on
self-reporting by the government.
• With regard to the practice of bacha bazi (“boy play”), the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission led efforts during the year to
prohibit and criminalize the practice, resulting in the production of final
draft legislation in March 2016. In parallel, definitions and both

26/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

protective and punitive measures linked to the practice have been
included in the language of the revised penal code, as well as the Child
Act, which remained under review.

V.

Economic and social development
Benchmark: Government policies supported by the international community
that promote sustainable economic growth and contribute to overall stability.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

National priority programmes are
designed and implemented with
international support and endorsement

• In preparation for the 4-5 October Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan the Government developed the new Afghanistan
Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF), and which will
serve as the overarching guidance for new National Priority
Programs. The ANPDF replaces the Afghan National
Development Strategy concluded in 2013.

• Progress has been made on the preparation of five out of
11 NPPs. In October, the Government inaugurated the Citizens’
Charter Afghanistan Project, the first phase of the 10 -year
Citizens’ Charter NPP. In line with commitments in the SelfReliance through Mutual Accountability Framework (SMAF),
the Government presented the concept papers of four other NPPs
to the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan in October 2016:
Women’s Economic Empowerment, Urban National Priority
Program, National Infrastructure Plan, and the Comprehensive
Agriculture Development Plan.
More equitable distribution of
development assistance and Government
expenditure throughout Afghanistan

• The implementation of the Provincial Budgeting Policy was
piloted in four ministries: Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of
Education, Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development,
and Ministry of Irrigation and Livestock. Relevant
comprehensive guidelines for concerned Government agencies
for effective implementation of the Policy were issued by the
Ministry of Finance (MoF) on 22 March 2016. As a follow-up to
the pilot and as part of the Provincial Budgeting Policy
implementation, a total of US $34 million (US $1 millio n for
each province) was allocated in the 2017 national budget for
development projects.

• The Wolesi Jirga (Lower House of the Afghan Parliament)
rejected the 1396 Budget (2017) on 21 December 2016, citing
imbalance in the allocation of funds among the provinces and
low execution rate of the development budget. This resulted in a
regular consultation between the Parliamentary Finance and
Budget Committee and the Ministry of Finance that resulted in
some amendment to the draft budget. The budget was eventually
approved by Parliament on 16 January 2017.

17-03206

27/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased revenue collection and
sustainable growth based on Afghan
resources

• The Government’s ongoing initiatives, including anti-corruption
efforts, contributed to higher than expected revenue collection in
2016. The revenues were reported at USD 2,4 billion compared
to IMF projected revenues of USD 2,04 billion. The achieved
revenue collection represents therefore a 20 per cent increase
amidst low economic growth, currency devaluation, worsening
security, and deteriorating trade relations. Most of the in revenue
collection is attributable to effective collection of non-tax
revenues and arrears, as well as revenues from ministries
(Ministry of Urban Development Affairs and Ministry of
Agriculture Irrigation and Livestock) and Da Afghanistan Bank.
However, tax collection decreased for large and small tax payers
by 8 per cent and 5 per cent respectively, while for medium tax
payers tax collection increased by 16 per cent according to the
preliminary report of the Ministry of Finance.

• The World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators have recorded
Afghanistan’s drop in ranking on the ease of paying taxes, where
Afghanistan’s rank dropped 13 places. Afghanistan’s rank
dropped one place, now ranking 183 of the 190 countries on the
index. There was a major reform of the taxation system in 2016,
which saw a doubling of the base business tax from two to four
per cent, while a number of indirect taxes were also implemented.
According to business owners, these new tax reforms are making
it more difficult for them to keep their businesses profitable.

• In addition to a decline in Afghanistan’s rank on the ease of paying
taxes, the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators survey recorded
a deterioration in Afghanistan’s rank on six of the remaining
indicators used to assess the business and growth enabling
environment in the country. The most significant declines were
measured in the areas of starting new businesses, access to credit
and amenities such as electricity. Afghanistan’s overall ranking in
the Doing Business Indicators survey, comprising a composite of
all ten indicators, dropped by one place.

• The World Bank estimated the GDP growth for 2016 in
Afghanistan at 1.2 per cent, but projected a better growt h rate
for 2017 at 1.8 per cent. However, with population growth rates
between 2 per cent and 3 per cent, this rate of economic growth
would seem insufficient to maintain income levels, suggesting
that poverty levels will increase.

• On 13 December 2016, the Objections Review Directorate in the
Ministry of Finance Afghanistan Revenue Department in the
Ministry of Finance presented a report of a Taxation Working
Group to donors. The aim of the report, which was developed in
line with a commitment in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework (SMAF), was to identify challenges
in tax collection that arise from the various exemptions provided
to donor-funded initiatives, and to establish a mechanism for
resolving questions. Consultations on the report will proceed in
2017, in line with SMAF commitments.

28/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189

VI.

Regional cooperation
Benchmark: sustained and effective regional coordination in support of
prosperity, peace and stability.

Indicators of progress

Improved coordination of regional
bodies and increased regional
investments

17-03206

Metrics

 •

On 8 April 2016, in the 24th Leading Committee in Ashgabad,
stakeholders signed the Investment Agreement on the TAPI
Pipeline. On 23 April, in Almaty, Afghanistan, Tajikistan,
Kyrgyzstan, and Pakistan finalized the project implementation
documents and made the final decision for putting the CASA
1000 in action.

•

On 25 April 2016, the Afghan Foreign Minister met with the
Foreign Minister of Turkmenistan to discuss developments
regarding the TAPI project, expanding bilateral trade and the
need for peace, stability and security in the region.

•

On 12 May 2016, in Tursunza de Tajikistan, Afghanistan’s Chief
Executive, Pakistan’s Prime Minister, Tajikistan’s President, and
Kyrgyzstan’s Prime Minister jointly inaugurated the CASA1000 project.

•

On 16 May 2016, during the state visit of the Chief Executive to
China, seven bilateral Cooperation Agreements were signed
between both countries.

•

On 23 May 2016, in Tehran, President Ghani, the President of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Indian Prime Minister
witnessed the signing of the Agreement on the Establishment of
a Trilateral Transport and Transit Corridor. Its aim is to facilitate
the flow of commerce between the three countries, potentially
extending into Central Asia.

•

On 4 June 2016, in Herat Province, the Afghan President and the
Indian Prime Minister inaugurated the $290 million Salma Dam
hydroelectric power project.

•

From 23 to 24 June 2016, in Tashkent, the Afghan President attended
the 16th Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). He had bilateral
meetings with the Russian President, the Uzbek President, the Kazakh
President, and the Kyrgyz President.

•

On 19 July 2016, in Pakistan, representatives from Afghanistan,
Pakistan and UNHCR met for the 27th Tripartite Commission
Meeting. They signed the extension of the existing Tripartite
Agreement governing voluntary repatriation until 31 December 2016.

•

On 3 August 2016, in Urumqi China, the Inaugural High Level
Military Leader Meeting on Quadrilateral Cooperation and
Coordination Mechanism in Counter Terrorism took place and was
attended by representatives of the Armed Forces of Afghanistan,
China, Pakistan and Tajikistan. It was agreed to establish the
“quadrilateral mechanism” to coordinate and support each other,
including in the areas of intelligence sharing, anti-terrorist
capability-building, and joint anti-terrorist training.

29/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics

 •

30/34

On 5 August 2016, in Tehran, the Afghan Deputy Foreign
Minister attended the third political consultation meeting
between Afghanistan and Iran. Both sides emphasized
strengthening, consolidating and extending formal relations
between the two countries and exchanged views on mutual
cooperation in security and regional affairs, transit trade,
economy, cultural relations, consulate and refugee affairs and
extending interministerial relations and cooperation.

•

On 7 September 2016, senior officials of Afghanistan and Iran
attended a cross-border ceremony in Shamtigh in Iran to mark
the completion of the Iranian part of the planned Khaf-Herat
railway.

•

From 14 to 15 September 2016, the Afghan President visited
India and met with the Indian Prime Minister. The two leaders
discussed the regional situation and expressed grave concern at
continued use of terrorism and violence in the region.

•

On 4 October 2016, in Brussels, President Ghani, Chief
Executive Abdullah and Foreign Minister Rabbani participated
in a side event to the Brussels conference on Afghanistan
focused on Regional Economic Cooperation in Afghanistan.
The high-level event focused on movement of energy, goods
and data. It further identified 11 priority projects.

•

From 18 to 19 October 2016, in Tashkent Uzbekistan, the
Afghan Foreign Minister attended the 43rd session of the
Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). In the margins, an extradition agreement
with Uzbekistan was signed.

•

From 3 to 4 November 2016, the Chief Executive attended the
15th Shanghai Cooperation Organization Head of Governments
Summit in Bishkek. Afghanistan’s Permanent membership in
the organization was discussed.

•

On 16 November 2016, in Baku, the Lapis Lazuli route
agreement was finalized by Afghanistan, Turkmenistan,
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey. It needs to be signed by heads
of states.

•

In 2016, there were four meetings of the 6+1 group, which
includes Afghanistan, China, India, Iran, Pakistan, Russia and
USA. The meetings were held on 4 February in Berlin, on
6 June in Istanbul, on 22 September in New York and the last
one on 2 December in Amritsar, India.

•

In 2016, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process — supported by
UNAMA through facilitation and the provision of good offices —
held several meetings between participating countries and
organizations to further confidence-building measures. On
4 March, in Delhi, a meeting of the Regional Technical Group of
Trade, Commerce and Investment Opportunities Confidence
Building Measure was held. On 10 March, in Tehran, a meeting
17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics



of the Regional Technical Group of the Education Confidence
Building Measure was held. On 3 April, in Kabul, a meeting of
the Regional Technical Group of the Counter-Terrorism
Confidence Building Measure was held where seven activities
were prioritized for 2016. On 6 September, in Ashgabat, a
meeting of the Regional Technical Group of the Regional
Infrastructure Confidence Building Measure was held. On
9 December, in Astana, a meeting of the Regional Technical
Group of the Disaster Management Confidence Building
Measure was held to review the implementation of activities in
the 2016 Action plan.
• In 2016, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, which was
co-chaired by Afghanistan and India, held three Senior
Officials’ Meetings. On 26 April, in Delhi, a Senior Officials
Meeting was held setting the theme “Addressing Challenges,
Achieving Prosperity” for the 2016 Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process. On 23 September, a Senior Officials’ meeting was held
on the margins of the General Assembly in New York. On
3 December, the last Senior Officials’ meeting of 2016 was held
in Amritsar. UNAMA supported the Afghan Government in
these meetings to help the process move forward.
• On 4 December 2016, in Amritsar, the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process Ministerial Conference was held with support of
UNAMA. President Ghani and Prime Minister Modi inaugurated
the conference. The Amritsar declaration focuses on the
importance of regional collaboration in countering security
threats common to the region, and to capitalize on economic
opportunities. The declaration also calls for the development of
a regional approach to counter radicalization, exploration of how
to strengthen the growth of Small and Medium Enterprises in the
region, as well as to continue the process of developing the
Regional Counter Terrorism Strategy as per the 2015 Islamabad
Declaration.
• On 27 December 2016, a trilateral meeting of Pakistan, China
and Russia took place in Moscow with a focus on Afghanistan.
In addition to expressing concern about the rise of extremist
groups and agreeing on continued efforts towards an Afghanowned and Afghan-led peace process, both Russia and China
stated that they will increase efforts for delisting members of the
Afghan Taliban from the UN sanctions lists.

17-03206

31/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189

VII.

Partnership between the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community
Benchmark: coherent support by the international community for Afghan
priorities within an Afghan-led coordination framework.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Increased percentage of aid aligned with  •
the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and Government priorities

In line with its current Aid Management Policy, the Government
considers assistance delivered through on-budget mechanisms to
be 100 per cent aligned with Government priorities, and in 2016
donors continued to retain the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework (SMAF) commitment to deliver at
least 50 per cent of Official Development Assistance (ODA)
through such mechanisms. Donors also continued to adhere to
the SMAF commitment to align 80 per cent of ODA overall with
Government priorities. The Ministry of Finance Aid
Management Directorate continues to collect data on, and to
discuss alignment of, Official Development Assistance through
the annual Development Cooperation Dialogues process, but did
not publish data on overall alignment of aid in 2016, as new
National Priority Programs are still being developed under the
framework of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework (ANPDF).

Improved accountability of procurement
and contracting on behalf of the
Government and the international
community

•

The National Procurement Authority (NPA) expanded the
“Coalition of Reform”, mainly consisting of partners from civil
society, private sector, the Government and international
development partners. Under this framework, the NPA approved
more than 2,000 large and medium contracts worth AFN
250 billion (US$ 3 billion), resulting in AFN 18.3 billion
(US$ 270 million) worth of savings. It also blacklisted about 100
companies who failed to meet the requirements of transparency
and accountability.

Strengthening of the Joint Coordination
Monitoring Board in support of the
Kabul process and as a means of regular
review of progress on Afghan priorities
and mutual commitments

•

Co-chaired by the Minister of Finance and UNAMA’s SRSG,
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board met twice in
Kabul, on 4 April and 4 September, to review and advance
Government preparations for the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan, and to review progress on joint commitments under
the Self-Reliance through Mutual Accountability Framework
(SMAF). The meetings featured remarks by President Ghani,
Chief Executive Abdullah, and updates from a number of
ministers and senior Government officials, as well as
stakeholders from the Afghan private and civil society sectors.
Civil society representatives voiced concern over the quality and
pace of reforms, perceived corruption within the justice sector
and the shrinking space for civil society and human rights
defenders due to insecurity. International partners addressed the
gathering on a range of subjects featuring both highlights of
reform, development progress and areas for improvement.

•

Much of UNAMA’s efforts in the area of donor coordination in
2016 focused on facilitating the preparations for the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan in October. In addition to the Joint

32/34

17-03206

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics



VIII.

coordination and Monitoring Board meetings, regular
discussions took place in existing fora chaired by the Ministry of
Finance and UNAMA and involving the major donors. The
issues discussed included efforts in the areas of anti-corruption,
revenue generation, poverty and economic growth. In advance of
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, UNAMA worked with
Government and donors to elaborate a new set of “deliverables,”
or priority reform commitments, under the Self-Reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework (SMAF). In follow-up to the
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, UNAMA continues to
work with partners to facilitate progress on these commitments
through regular working-level fora in Kabul.
•

UNAMA also technically assisted Afghan civil society in the
preparation of their position papers and statements for the J CMB
meetings held in April and September 2016 and the Brussels
Conference in October, and advocated for civil society
representation in all these three meetings.

•

UNAMA further provided technical advice to the Civil Society
Working Committee (CSWC) in the selection of the 10 delegates
to the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan; facilitated briefing/
consultations between SRSG/DSRSG with 10 civil society
delegates to the Conference; as well as consultations between
civil society and Ministry of Finance; provided technical
assistance to CSWC in following up in the aftermath of the
Conference, especially where this Committee undertakes the
steps to start with monitoring the implementation of Government
and International Community’s Brussels commitments.

Counter-narcotics
Benchmark: sustained trend in the reduction of poppy cultivation, narcotics
production and drug addiction.

Indicators of progress

Metrics

Decrease in poppy cultivation, narcotics  •
production and addiction rates

17-03206

Opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan increased by ten per
cent in 2016 with a total area under cultivation estimated at
201,000 hectares over the area of 183,000 hectares cultivated in
2015. Opium production in 2016 was estimated at 4,800 tons,
representing a 43 per cent increase over the 3,300 tons produced
in 2015.

•

In 2016 opium prices increased in all regions of Afghanistan. At
almost US$ 0.9 billion or the equivalent of roughly 5 per cent of
Afghanistan’s estimated GDP, the farm-gate value of opium
production increased by 57 per cent in 2016 with respect to past
year (not adjusted for inflation).

•

Helmand remained the country’s major opium poppy cultivating
province, followed by Badghis, Kandahar, Uruzgan1,
Nangarhar, Farah, Badakhshan, and Nimroz. In 2016, the
33/34

A/71/826
S/2017/189
Indicators of progress

Metrics



number of poppy-free provinces in Afghanistan decreased from
14 to 13. Opium poppy cultivation in Jawzjan, in the Northern
region lost its poppy-free status, which it had regained in 2008.
The average opium yield amounted to 23.8 kilograms per
hectare, which was 30 per cent higher than in 2015.

Increase in effective interdiction and
counter-trafficking efforts

•

In 2016, Afghan law enforcement authorities conducted a total
of 2,192 counter-narcotics operations which resulted in seizures
of 4,759 kg of heroin, 47,048 kg of morphine, 48,022 kg of
opium, 66 kg of methamphetamine, 686 MDMA tables,
352,171 kg of hashish, 72,231 kg of solid precursor chemicals,
15,034 Litres of liquid precursor chemicals. In addition to drugs,
these operations led to the dismantling of 57 heroin and eight
methamphetamine manufacturing laboratories, arrest of 2,548
suspects and seizure of 485 vehicles, 212 weapons, 347 mobile
phones and seven radios.

Increase in licit agriculture and related
private capital investment in areas
previously used for poppy cultivation

•

In spite of the 10 per cent increase in poppy cultivation and
43 per cent production in 2016, there was a positive progress
noted in licit crop production and productivity. According to the
Ministry of Commerce and Industries, trade figures increased by
20 per cent of which most were the export of not only dry fruits
but vegetables and fresh fruits such as pomegranates, grapes and
apples. These fruits were exported to Pakistan, United Arab
Emirates and India.

•

A survey of the Afghan Chamber of Commerce and industries
(ACCI) indicates that the grape production increased by at least
20 per cent in Parwan, Samangan, Sar-e-Pol, Jawzjan, Herat and
Kandahar provinces in 2016. In Parwan, the production of
grapes was doubled while in Samangan the production increased
from 7,000 tons in 2015 to 9,000 tons in 2016. Kandahar grapes
were valued at US$ 2.3 million and were mostly exported to
Pakistan, India and UAE.

•

A report by Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock
(MAIL) indicated a nine and a half per cent increase in
cultivation and production of wheat in Afghanistan. The report
identified the harvest of four and a half million tons of wheat of
which more than three and a half million tons were produced
from irrigated land and around 850,000 tons from rain fed fields.
The report also highlights the improved techniques used for the
production of vegetables in Afghanistan but the lack of capacity
and quality outputs remains a constraint in marketing the
productions in the region and beyond.

34/34

17-03206
