UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
,OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

U>N Ll&RARY

1877’”

MEETING:

21 JANUARY

1976

JUN 191986

!JN/&bt (JogE%';B3bl

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1877) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

.. .. .. ... . ... ... .. .. ... .. ... .. ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .

The Middle East problem including the Palestinian question..

.. .. .. ... .. ...

1

S/PV. 1877

.*

‘NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with’figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supp@wnts of the Officicil Recwrds of the Security Council. The date
,of the document indicates’ the,supplement
in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964,) are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions mu.l
Decisions of the Swurity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1877th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 21 January 1976, at 3 p.m.
Pwsidmt:

(United

Mr. Salim A. SAiIM
Republic of Tanzania).

(United

Prc’sent: The representatives
of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

The Middle
question

of the agenda

Adoption

including

the Palestinian

of the agenda

The Middle East problem ‘including
Palestinian question

Emirtrtes),

Mr.

Sdirrm

(Yemen

Arab

2. The PRESIDENT:
I have also ,received letters
from the representatives of Algeria, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen, Hungary, Poland and
Tunisia, in which they ask to be invited, in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
I propose, if there is no objection, to invite those
representatives
to participate
in the discussion,
in
conformity with the usual practice and with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of
procedure. There being no objection,
I shall invite
those representatives to take the ,places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the usual
understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when they wish to address the
Council.

agenda (S/Agenda/l877)

East problem

Arub

At the irn*itcrtion
c.f the President,
Mr.
Rahcri
(Aigericr).
Mr. Gro.wv (Boiguricr),
Mr. Snid (Czechosimwkitr),
Mr. Ashtd (Dernocrcctic.
Ymwn),
Mr. Hoiicli
(Hrrngury),
Mr. Jaroszek
(Poirnd)
crnd Mr. Driss
(Tunisia)
took the plm*c~.s rt~scmwl for them ot thr side
of the Coruwii chnmbei.

the

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the deci$ions taken by the Council [187&h-187&h
meetings],
I invite the representatives of Cuba, Egypt, the German
Democratic
Republic, Guinea, India, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Mauritania,
Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Sudan, the United
Arab Emirates, the Yemen Arab Republic and Yugoslavia, in conformity with the usual practice and with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion without the right to vote. In accordance with
the decision taken by the Council [/87&h
mvting],
I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in the discussion.

3. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan
Arab Republic):
It is
significant that the Security Council cites the “Palestinian question”
in its resolution
381 (1975) and
has decided to invite the Palestine Liberation Organizatiqn (PLO) to paiticipate
in the debate on an equal
footing and with the same rights as those conferred
on a Member State under rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Council. That decision
correlates with the decisions, resolutions and practices
adopted by the General Assembly and other international bodies in the past two or three years.
4. General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and
3237 (XXIX),
in recognizing the ‘inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people and in inviting the PLO
to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer,
demonstrate clearly that correlation.

At the irr,‘itcrtion
of the Pwsidcnt,
Mr. Abdei Megrtici
(Egypt),
Mr. Shwuf
(Jnrdm).
Mr. Aiiuf (Syricrn Arcrh
Republic)
und Mr. Khrrddorrnti
(Piriestinc~
Libercrtion
Orgcrnimtion)
took pi~~c~c~s at the Sewrity
Cotrncil
tcrhie;
Mr.
Ahrrctin
(C&XI),
Mr.
Fioriu
(Gmnm
Dwwcrtrtic
Republic),
Mrs.
Jemne
Martin
Ci.wP
(Grrincw).
Mr. Jaipui (Indira),
Mr. AI-Shaikhiy
(Iwq),
Mr. Bishcm
(Kmvrit),
Mr. El Htrssen (Marrritcrnitr),
Mr. Zaimi (Morocco),
Mr. Jmuri (Qotcrr). Mr. Bmmiy
(Saudi
Amhi(
Mr. Mdmi
(Sudm),
Mr. Ghnhnsh

5. The Council’s
decision reflects the profound
change; and developments in the attitude of the United
Nations and of international
public opinion, as well as
I

the universally favourable response concerning the
restoration of the inalienable
national rights of the
Palestinian
people. This decision by the Security
Council articulates
its position that the Palestine
question in fact forms the essence and the core of
the problem under discussion.
_I;:_
.:..
6. Owing to the invitation of the representative& of
the Palestinian people to occupy their rightful place
and participate in the debate, the Zionist represe’ntatives have deliberately chosen to remain absent from
this crucial discussion. This absence aims at sabotaging
the Council’s work and paralysing its action. The
Zionist representatives wage a dramatic propaganda
campaign against the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole, employing the pro-Zionist and proimperialist American mass media.

issued the Balfour Declaration of 2 November 1917,’
pledging British support for the Zionist goal. The
Balfour Declaration, pledging British support for the
establishment
of a Jewish national home in Palestine,
is an illegal document defying international
law and
basic human rights. It can only be termed a blatant
conspiracy against the Palestinian people.
12. The decision in 1920 by the San Remo Conference-which
was dominated by the big colonialist
Powers-to
assign the Mandate for Palestine to
Britain, provided an additional proof of the ZionistBritish conspiracy. Sir Eric Drummond,
SecretaryGeneral of the League of Nations, in his description
of the Mandate, wrote: “It was not made by the
League, it was rather made by the British Govemment in collusion with the Jews.” By its incorporation
of the Balfour Declaration,
the Mandate became a
tool for implementing
the Zionist goal of establishing
a Jewish State in that part of the Arab homeland
which was inhabited by an overwhelming majority of
Arabs.

7. However, we hope for a just and courageous
action to be taken by the Council to rectify the historical
injustice committed
against the Palestinian
people.
The United Nations, including the Security Council,
must fin& a just solution to the Palestinian tragedy,
that may be traced back to the partition of Palestine.
Members of the Security Council, by objectively
studying the Palestine question from its beginning to
the present, will perform a great service to the cause
of peace and justice.

13. The British administration
of Palestine-mainly
in the hands of Zionists-was
geared to the implementation of the British Zionist policy of transforming
Arab Palestine into a Zionist State. Throughout the
period of the British Mandate, the Arabs of Palestine
opposed the British occupation,
which threatened
their very existence, and actively struggled to bring
about a termination
of the Mandate and to establish
their independent, democratic State.

8. Recorded history tells us that Jews have enjoyed
tolerance in the Arab-Moslem
States of the Middle
East and North Africa where they found a safe
refuge from persecutions
in Europe.
However,
zionis?,.
inspired by racial superiority,
religious
excluslvlty
and territorial
expansionism,
caused a
rupture in the amicable relations between the Arabs
and Jews in the area.

14. One of the methods employed and supported by
the British administration
to strengthen the economic
status of the Zionist establishment in Palestine and to
undermine the Palestinians’ economic and social status
involved the transfer of Arab lands to the Jews. This
transfer created a large class of unemployed
agricultural workers, because those lands;once transferred
to the Zionist land agencies, became the inalienable
property of the Jewish immigrants.
Under the law of
those Jewish national agencies, no non-Jew was
allowed to be employed on Jewish-owned lands.

9. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, the
Zionist movement was created. Reacting to adverse
social, economic and political conditions under which
Jews were living in eastern and central Europe, and
influenced
by nineteenth-century.
European colonialism, Zionist leaders set as an objective for themselves the establishment of a Zion&t State in Palestine
where all Jews of the world ‘would be gathered.

15. British policy was designed to destroy the basis
of the Arab people’s economy. Exaction of’very high
taxes, imposition of very high interest rates, forcing
the prices of agricultural products down, creation of
such economic conditions in Palestine where Arab
industry could not compete with the Jewish industry,
imposition
of high levels of customs on imported
products to protect Jewish industry and other econom.ic
devices placed the Arab people under severe economic
strains.

10. Whereas Palestine has been inhabited by hardworking Arabs, lovers of the soil, who buil! towns and
villages on’ their lands and who converted the desert
into green farms, the Zionist leaders have deceived the
Western public into thinking that that country was an
empty wasteland and that no indigenous people had
been living there for thousands of years. For many
centuries Palestine has been an Arab land like any other
part of the Arab homeland.

16. The British administration
of Palestine rejected
the Arab complaints and harshly quelled Arab protests,
strikes, demonstrations
and armed uprisings against
the Zionist designs in Palestine and against the British
pro-Zionist policy. The Palestinians presented many
moderate and reasonable proposals for Je+vishiArab

11. The Zionist movement undertook many efforts to
take advantage of any opportunity to win the support
of Western Powers in its endeavour to convert Arabinhabited Palestine into an exclusively Jewish State.
Britain, the most powerful super-Power at that time,
2

sion to. membership
questionable.

peaceful coexistence and for the establishment
of a
democratic
representative
Government
in which
Moslems, Christians and Jews would enjoy equal
rights and bear equal. responsibilities
as equal
citizens. Those proposals were rejected because the
Zionists viewed them as threats to their single-minded
goal of establishing an exclusive Jewish State.

Nations

remains

22. The Zionist policy of expansionism has not been
restricted to Palestine. It revealed its true expansionist
nature by waging the 1956 and 1967 wars, occupying
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, the Egyptian Sinaiand the Syrian Golan Heights. This Zionist aggression and occupation resulted in the displacement
of
hundreds of thousands of inhabitants of these lands.
forcing them to start a new refugee life far away from
their homes and lands.

17. Thruughout
the period of the Mandate, Britain
created such military, social, political, economic and
demographic conditions in Palestine as ensured Zionist
success in the future Arab-Zionist showdowns. When
the Mandatory Power viewed the prevailing conditions
as ripe for a Zionist take-over of the country, it declared
its intent to terminate the Mandate and to request the
Genera1 Assembly of the newly established United
Nations to decide the future of the Arab people in
crhsentitr

in the United

23. In view of the racist policies of oppression,
expulsion, imprisonment
and murder of Palestinian
Arabs pursued by the Zionist regime, the Arab people
of Palestine have ever since been determined, through
political and armed struggle, to liberate their land from
Zionist occupation
and to realize their inalienable
rights, beginning with their right to return, their right
to self-determination
and their right to sovereignty on
their national soil.

.

18. The unjust partition resolution-resolution
181
(II) of 29 November
1947-was adopted against the
wishes of the people of Palestine. The special session
of the Genera1 Assembly of 51 Member
States
demonstrated
a strategic manoeuvre, led by the imperialist Powers, to legalize the creation of the racist
Zionist regime. This session occurred when the
majority of the third-world countries of Asia, Africa
and Latin America were still fighting to liberate
themselves from the colonial yoke. Representatives
voted for partition under formidable
pressures and
humiliating
threats from the imperialist
Powers.
Without those pressures, the outcome of the session
would have been very different.

Peace in our part of the world can never be
achieved so long as the Palestinian problem continues
to exist.‘This
problem can be solved only when the
Zionist regime withdraws from all the occupied Arab
lands and the legitimate nationaf rights of the Palestinian people are recognized and restored. The restoration of those rights is central to any solution of the
Middle East problem. Restoration of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians calls for the establishment of
a democratic secular State in Palestine including all
the Palestinians-be
they Moslems,
Christians or
Jews-with
equal rights and responsibilities.
24.

19. The General Assembly had no legal authority to
approve partition;
it violated international
law and
contradicted the Charter, which recognizes the right
of peoples to self-determination.
This decision inflicted
a paramount
idustice
upon the Arab people af
Palestine.

25. The scandalous Zionist record of defiance of
the United Nations is well known. In spite of the fact
that the Zionist entity was ,admitted conditionally
to
the United Nations, and that it bases its existence on
a United Nations resolution, the Zionist entity has
shown nothing but contempt for the Organization and
internatibnal
public opinion. This defiant attitude is
reflected in the declaration- by Levi Eshkol, following
the war of June 1967, in which he stated that Israel
would never execute the General Assembly’s decisions
even “if the United Nations votes by 121 votes to 1”.

20. Instead of taking 56 per cent of Palestinian tertitofy,.as specified in the Genera1 Assembly resolution,
the Ziunists forcibly seized 81 per cent of Palestine’s
land, causing the dispossession
and expulsion of
hundreds of thousands of Christian and Moslem Arabs
from their homes and lands.
2 i . The imperialist Powers sought a &J jrrre recognition of Israel by ensuring the admission of the Zionist
regime to membership In the United Nations. However+ it shbuld be recalled that General Assembly
resolution 273 (III) of 11 May 1949 stipulated that the
membership af the Zionist regime within the United
Nations was conditional
upon its acceptance of and
compliance
with the preceding resolutions. of the
General Assembly, particularly
those concerning the
partition of Palestine and the resettlement
of the
Palestinian refugees in their homeland. It is clear, on
the basis of the aforementioned
resolution, that as
long as the Zionist regime has not complied with the
General Assembly resolutions, the legality of its admis-

26. In July 1967 ‘Goida Meir stated: “If a resolution
is passed ncit to our liking, so what? After all, it is
not a tank firing at you.”
27. An Under-Secretary
in the Israeli
Foreign
Ministry was reported as having declared, in February
1968: “What does a United Nations resolution amount
to? Ninety votes, ninety speeches. What else?”
Recently,
Mr. Herzog attacked the United
Nations and reaffirmed the Israeli attitude to all
United Nations resolutions when he declared: “Any
Council resolution regarded as inimical to Israel’s

28.

3

_.I

’

interests will join hundreds of other United
resolutions in the waste-paper basket.*’

Nations

34. The Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned
Countries held at Lima in 1975 also
condemned Zionism -as a threat to world peace and
security, and called upon all countries to oppose that
racist and imperialist ideology. Finally, General Assembly resolution 3379 (XXX) of 10 November 1975
formally condemned Zionism as “a form of racism and
racial discrimination”.
That formal condemnation ,by
the General Assembly,
in equating Zionism with
racism, significantly points to the racist character of
Zionism. It is high time that the international
community,
inside and outside the United
Nations,
denounced and exposed this racist and reactionary
ideology.

29.. Since 1947, for a period. of almost 30 years, the
Zionists have refused to comply with United Nations
resolutions, decisions and appeals. The United Nations
has repeatedly condemned Zionist actions in Palestine
and in the occupied Arab territories. However, Israel
continues its arrogant disregard of the wishes and decisions of the international
community.
30. What should be the international
communitv’s
answer to the stubborn Zionist defiance? We must
find the appropriate answer. Platonic resolutions have
been : consistently
and contemptuously
ignored by
Israel and its protectors. In fact, the Zionists plot to
gain time while creating facts in the area; Bertrand’
Russell pointed out that every Israeli aggression is also
an experiment to discover how much more the world
will -tolerate. Every time Israel defies the United
Nations
without
receiving
any punishment,
the
authority of the Organization
is further eroded. The,
international community must take effective measures
by imposing appropriate sanctions against the racist
and aggressive Zionist entity, which was illegally
granted home and membership in the United Nations
and which persists in disregarding the overwhelming.
will of the United Nations. This membership must be
questioned.

35. From its inception Zionism envisaged a Jewish
State which was to be exclusively Jewish. Palestine
was populated by Arabs, but that fact was deliberately
ignored. Zionists spoke in terms of “people without a
land to a land without people”. That attitude has
continued to exist to the present time. A Jewish writer,
Aubrey Hodes, in his book Didogw
with Ishmnel,
writes: “Ben-Gurion..:
despised the Arab way of life
and warned publicly against the danger that Israel
would become another Levantine country”.4
36.

Michael

Armed

Bar-Zohar,‘in his book Ben-Gurion:
The
provides the following
eloquent

Prophet,

picture:

31. The ‘General Assembly, in its resolution 1904
(XVIII) of 20 November 1963, proclaimed fhe.United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination.
This Declaration affirmed
that :‘any doctrine of racial differentiation
or superiority is scientifically
false, morally condemnable,
socially unjust and dangerous”.
The Assembly also
warned against “the manifestations
of racial discrimination still in evidence in some areas of the world,
some of which are imposed by certain Governments
by means of legislative,
administrative
or. other
measures”.

“While this might be called racialism, the whole
Zionist movement actually was based on the prin-.
ciple of a purely Jewish community
in Palestine.
When various Zionist institutions
appealed to the
Arabs not to leave the Jewish State but to become an
integral part of it, they were being hypocritical”;”
37. -According to the Zionist ideology, the estabiishment of the Jewish State was from the outset base.d
on displacement
of the Arabs. The idea that Arabs
do not really count as people remains prevalent today.
A Zionist song describes East Jerusalem in these
terms: “The market-place is empty. None goes down
to the Dead Sea by way of Jericho”. The reference is
to the market-place which is empty of Jews and to the
fact that no Jew travels down to the Dead Sea by.
way of Jericho. In their view, Arabs do not exist.

32. In application
of these principles the General
Assembly, in its resolution 3151 G (XXVIII)
of 14 December 1973, condemned,
inter dia, the unholy
alliance between South African racism and Zionism.
The World Conference of the International
Women’s
Year held in Mexico in 1975, called for the elimination
of, “Zionism,
crpcrrthcitt
and racial discrimination
.. ..
in all its forms”.2*
”

38. Thousands of examples, practices and quotations
can be used to illustrate the racism underlying the
Zionist movement
and the Israeli establishment.
These examples confirm the vicious anti-Arab propaganda and the equally vicious glorification
of
militarism that cultivates hatred and racial aggression.
R. J. Maxwell-Hyslop,
a Member
of Parliament,
referring to a visit to the region after the 1967 war,
declared in the House of Commons on 18 October
1973:
‘/

33;. Furthermore, the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government .of the Organization
of African Unity,
held at Kampala in 1975, declared ‘that
“The racist regime in occupied Palestine and the
racist regimes in Zimbabwe and South Africa have
a common imperialist origin, f0rming.a whole and
having the same racist structure and being organically linked in their policy aimed at repression of
the dignity and integrity of the human being.“”

“After.lunch,
the chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the Knesset spoke with great internperance and at great length to us about the Arabs.
4

I

-When he drew breath I was constrained to say,
‘Doctor Hacohen, I am profoundly
shocked that
you should speak of other human beings in terms
similar to those in which Julius Streicher spoke of
the Jews. Have you learned nothing?’
I shall
remember his reply to my dying day. He smote the
table with both hands and said, ‘But they are not
human beings, they are not people, they are
Arabs’ “b

“Israel is a State, therefore, in which if upartheid
is not as blatant or as territorially
visible as in South
Africa, ‘Jews’ are nevertheless ‘more equal than
others’. . . . If ‘racism’ is a form of government or
a structure of society in which’nationa!
rights and
responsibilities
are officially legislated upon the
basis of creed, colour or ethnic derivation, then the
Zionist character of much ‘basic’ Israeli Jaw
qualifies”.

39. In the opinion of Mahunoim, the official magazine
of the Israeli Army Rabbinate, it is impossible for the
Jews to Jive together with the Arabs. The following
quotation, from an article published in April 1969,
articulates that point of view:

43. Mr. Alfred Lilientha!,
a well-known American
author, and lecturer and editor of Middle Emt
Puxpectirva man of the Jewish faith-criticized
the racist philosophy of Zionism in a White Paper
dealing with Zionism and racism. He said:
i

“It is impossible to Jive together with the Arabs
over prolonged periods, for their consciousness,
prayers, desires and vision are oriented towards
Mecca, whereas the Israeli’s are toward Jerusalem.
Only those facing Jerusalem represent the true sons
of the land, whereas those facing Mecca are true to
Arabia. The situation is clear, and its outcome is
clear. Either the Arab element ceases to worship
.Mecca and starts worshipping
Jerusalem,. or it
returns to Arabia and leaves the‘sons of Zion to fulfil
their destiny unhindered.
Those who will disturb
shall be expelled.”

“It is strange indeed how the fallacious obsession of a vanquished foe should have come to
dominate the philosophy of the survivors. In im-.
posing nazism on country after country, Hitler
proclaimed ‘You are not a German, -you are a Jew.
You are not a Frenchman; you -are a Jew. You are
not a Czech, you are a Jew.’ And Zionism simitarly
speaks to the Jews ofthe Diaspora as it continuously
seeks their involvement in the political problems of
the Middle East. How far apart, then, is the Aryan
racism and the Zionist racist reality?”

40. A statement
from an Israeli Defence Force
booklet dramatically
points out the racist character of
Zionism: “One may and, in keeping with Halakha, one
must in fact, kill- them. In no case should one trust
an Arab even if he gives the impression of being
civilized”.

44. Professor Israel Shahak, chairman of the Israel
League for Human and Civil Rights, recently published
several articles and a book on the racism of Israel:
Mr. Shahak’s writings describe the’ oppression of
Arabs in Israel,.as we!! as the racist aspects,of zionism.
Mr. Shahak states in his article of 11 May 1975 in
Pi-Htr’Ato,
weekly student paper at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem:

41. In keeping with the racist Zionist dogma incorporated in the Proclamation
of the establishment
of
the State of Israel in 1948,’ this racist State “will be
open for immigration
of Jews” and for the regathering
of exiles. Thus, any Jew anywhere in the world may
claim citizenship and enjoy special ethnic and religious
privileges. According to an amendment to that citizenship law adopted in 1971, the exercise of that right does
not necessitate immigration
to Israel. The racist
“Law of Return”
gives every Jew, regardless of
prese.nt citizenship,
the right to emigrate to Israel,
and a!! States are prohibited from preventing Jewish
emigration.
In addition,
the “Law of Nationality”
grants automatic citizenship. At the same time, Arabs
and other non-Jews are denied that privilege. Palestinians whose ancestors lived in Palestine for thousands
of years are reduced to second-class citizenship..

‘!It is my considered opinion that the State of
Israel is a racist State in the full’meaning
of this
term. In this State, people are discriminated against
in the most permanent and illegal way and in the
most important areas of life, only because of their
origin. This racist discrimination
began in Zionism
and is carried out today mainly in co-operation
with the institutions of the Zionist movement. . . . In
the State of Israel, one who is’not a Jew is discriminated against because he is not a Jew. . . . The
first step consists in admitting the truth. The State
of Israel is a racist State, and its racism is a necessary
. consequence of the racism of the Zionist movement.
Facts are facts. After this, we can debate, if we wish
to do so, why such a racism is forbidden against
the Jews and becomes a good deed when it is carried
out by Jews”.
”
:
,-*.,
45. ,Finaily, I would. like to refer to a l,etier wrrtten
by two individuals, Marty Blatt and Yarr Avoray, who
describe themselves as “Israeli and American Jews”.
Their letter, published
in The Christitrn
Sc’*imcc~
Monitor. on 13 January 1976, once again demonstrates
the racist character of Zionism:

42. Many prominent Jewish thinkers and intellectuals
oppose Zionism, exposing its fallacies while condemning its inherent racism. Recently Rabbi Elmer
Berger, President of American Jewish Alternatives to
Zionism, cited many examples of racism in Zionist
policy in a famous letter to an Arab ambassador. He
said: ‘,
5

“Zionism is fundamentally a racist political movement because it advocates a Jewish State on a
territory the population of which is far from being
totally Jewish. A State could contain a Jewish
majority
without having to be a Jewish State.
Israel is a Jewish State not because it has Jews
‘living in it but because the State is controlled by
Jews, whereas non-Jews,
namely,
Palestinian
Arabs, are being deprived of both individual
and
national rights. Such deprivation
of Palestinian
rights is extremely serious since it is legally based
and not a result of day-to-day practice. The Law of
Return automatically
grants Israeli citizenship to
all Jews across the world while denying the same to
those Palestinians who either fled or were driven
from their homes.

“From the moment when the United Nations
passed the partition resolution, in November 1947,
until the departure of the British forces from
Palestine in May 1948, when the Israeli State was
formally established,
the Zionists, aided by the
Stem gang, went to work to persuade the Arabs to
leave the areas which were to form the Israeli
State. To reinforce this argument that such Arabs
would have no place in Israel, the Stern gang, as
some of you will remember, selected a few villages
such as Deir Yassin to stage a massacre of the
Arab inhabitants to create a general state of panic
and hence an exodus of the Arab population.
So
that by May 1948, when Britain formally and finahy
abandoned its responsibility
for Palestine, more
than 300,000 Arabs had been evicted from their
homes and farms and had become the first instalment of that hapless, hopeless, homeless group of
suffering humanity known today as the Palestine
refugees.”

“No wonder that Moshe Dayan admitted: ‘It is
not true that the Arabs hate the Jews for personal,
religious, or social reasons. They consider us-and
justly, from their point of view-as
Westerners,
foreigners, invaders who have seized an Arab
country to turn it into a Jewish State.’ (Le Mom&,
weeklysection,
Y-16 July 1967)

48. The Special Committee
to Investigate
Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied
Territories
confirmed
the
following
violations
committed
by the Zionist
authorities: collective and area punishment; deportation and expulsion;
ill-treatment
of prisoners and
civilians; destruction and demolition
df houses and
buildings; confiscation and expropriation
of property;
and looting and pillaging.

“The hysterical attitude of the organized Jewish
community
in America is obscuring the real issues
involved. Some are insidiously trying to cover up
the true nature of Zionism as described above.
“We clearly and unambiguously
see the need to
oppose anti-Semitism
and all other forms of racism.
At the same time, we suggest that all people who are
sincerely concerned about peace and social justice
in the Middle East critically re-examine the history
and meaning of the Zionist endeavo.ur”.

49. It is important
to note that these racist and
terrorist actions by the Zionist movement are consistently covered up by an active propaganda campaign American and western mass media join forces
with the Zionists to attempt to cover up the atrocities
committed
by the Zionist movement
against the
Palestinians.
General Carl von Horn, in. his book,
Sol&ring
fbr Pccrw ,8 points out the distortion
of
facts by the Zionist movement. He writes:

46. Now, what should the United Nations do? What
should the Security Council do? What should the world
do with a racist movement and with a racist entity?
Should they be treated differently from nazism and
trparth&i?
The world is now asking what difference
exists between the racist regime in South Africa and
the racist regime in Palestine. An .honest decision is
needed. A courageous action is demanded, and history
at last will judge.

“We are amazed at the ingenuity of the falsehoods
which distorted the true picture. The highly skilled
Israeli information service and the entire press combined to manufacture a warped, distorted version
which was disseminated with professional expertise
through every channel to their own people and their
sympathizers and supporters in America and the
rest of the world. Never in all my life had I
believed the truth could be so cynically, expertly
bent”.

47. History
repeatedly
teaches us that racism
inherently involves terrorism. Zionism, which is both a
racist and terrorist movement, has committed atrocities
against the Palestinian
people. During the British
Mandate as well as in the succeeding.period,
Zionist
terror organizations
massacred thousands of Arab
men, women and children, while destroying villages
without any military necessity. Subjected continually
to repressive measures and inhuman laws and regulations that violate elementary
human rights, Arabs
today experience illegal imprisonment
and torture. In
an address to the annual Conference of the American
Council for Judaism on 2 November 1967, Anthony
Nutting spoke of the forced mass exodus of the Arabs
from their homes:

50. While it may be our fate to face the challenge of
Zionist colonialism
and to bear its atrocities and
aggressions, sometimes we wonder if these people are
really the survivors of Bergen-Belsen,
Auschwitz or
Treblinka.
51. The relations between this racist movement of
Zionism and the imperialist Powers reflect another most
disturbing facet of Zionism. Zionism, from its very
beginnings,
has identified
itself with colonialist
6

Zionist racist entity and United States imperialism.
However, we are truly confident that small countries
will stand together in solidarity and resist any kind of
pressure. We shall never abdicate or capitulate and
we shall never remain silent in the face of this aggressive policy of intimidation.
We shall never betray
our cause or disappoint our Palestinian
and Arab
brothers. On this occasion I should like to return to
an issue that I mentioned
earlier in the General
Assembly. Our problem is with the United States
Government
and establishment
rather than with the
American people and nation. We hope that one day in
the near future the American people will stop to
consider the sufferings inflicted upon the Arab nation
by the United States governing establishment.
We are
fully convinced that the people of the United States
will know the truth one day and will understand the
very nature of Zionism and discover the true dimensions of the catastrophic United States involvement in
the Middle East.

interests. Since its creation Israei has supported the
forces of colonialism and neo-colonialism.
Seeking to
guarantee the continuation
of their policy of aggression and expansionism
at the expense of our Arab
peopfe, the Zionist leaders joined their fate with the
forces of imperialism and in particular with the British
Empire in the past and the United States of America
in the present. United States imperialism has bolstered
the Israeli economy, supplying it with conventional
and sophisticated
weapons. We, the Arabs, have
suffered and continue to suffer from this unholy
alliance between the Zionist regime and the formidable
American might.
52. The unjust and unlimited United States commitment to the Zionist cause constitutes the main obstacle
to the formulation
of a just and lasting peace in our
region. Relations between the United States establishment and Zionism have even become embarrassing
to many Americans. The United States authorities are
particularly sensitive to any developments that could
potentially challenge the Zionist entity. Some of those
authorities-and
I do not exaggerate-view
this
defence of Zionist interests as more important than the
defence of their American interests. Because of this
uniimited support of Zionism, the United States has
created hostile and bitter relations with all the Arab
nations and with the Arab leaders. Because of this commitment, the United States threatens and insults the
United Nations. Responsible United States authorities
employ strong language and take “tough measures”
against the countries of the third world. In reality the
United States, together with the Zionist regime,
desires a return of the third world to a subservient
position of obedience and allegiance. The United
States continues to pressure and blackmail
many
small countries and is reported to be threatening
substantial punitive cutbacks in aid to nations opposing
United States policy on the Middle East, particularly
its position regarding the Palestinian problem.

55. Before concluding, I should like to reiterate my
delegation’s position concerning resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 .(1973). Because these resolutions have been
bypassed by events and developments
both inside
and outside the United Nations, they are irrelevant as
a framework for any just and lasting solution to the
Middle
East question.
Genera1 Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237 (XXIX),
reaffirming the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, along with
resolution 3379 (XXX),
condemning
Zionism as a
racist movement,
and resolution 3376 (XXX), proposing means designed to enable the Palestinian people
to achieve their national rights, reflect profound
changes and developments in the attitude of the United
Nations and of international
public opinion and call
for a review of the entire question and the method of
dealing with it.
56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Sudan. In accordance with the
established practice, I request the representative
of
Egypt to withdraw temporarily
from his place at the
Council table in order that it may be taken by the
representative of the Sudan. I now invite that representative to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

53. For many years since the revolution of 1 September 1969 in Libya, and especially since 1972, my own
country, the Libyan Arab Republic, has experienced
those external pressures. Those pressures are aimed at
us in order to make us change our political stand
concerning the Palestine question and to prevent us
from both opposing and exposing United States involvement in the Middle East area. We have been
consistently
subjected to political
and diplomatic
pressures, propaganda wars, direct and indirect threats
and, finally, refusal by the United States authorities
to supply Libya with spare parts and materials. In
spite of the fact that contracts were signed for those
needed materials, including transport aircraft, and
prices paid in cash, the United States authorities
reneged on the fulfilment of those contracts. We are
most grateful that we are not economically
dependent
on the United States. Economic pressures cannot
alter our beliefs.

57. Mr. MEDANI
(Sudan): Before expressing the
views of my delegation on the item on the agenda,
I should like to associate myself and my delegation
with those who have expressed their condolences on
the death of Chou En-lai, Vice-Chairman
of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
and Premier of the State Council of the People’s
Republic of China. The great loss, sorrow and grief
of the people of China on Premier Chou En-Iai’s death
are deeply shared by the Government and people of
my country. Mr. Chou En-lai’s historic visit to the
Sudan and 14 other States in Africa in 1964 contributed
tremendously
to the growing friendly and excellent
relations existing between our two countries and

54. As I stated earlier, we deplore this cynical
approach dictated by the unholy alliance between the
7

between China and many countries in the continent of
Africa. It is an excellent example, of co-operation
among the nations of the third world. The people of
the’sudan, I am sure, have lost a great friend.

nance of international
peace and security which is
entrusted to the Council by the Charter of the United
Nations. It is indeed gratifying to see the overwhelming
and almost unanimous support of the members of the
Council of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians-a
prerequisite to a lasting peace and settlement in the
Middle East.

58. Mr. President, it is a happy coincidence that
you personally are presiding over the Security Council
debate on the Middle East and the Palestinian question..Your personal association with the decolonization
process at home and at the. United Nations, your
diplomatic
skills and your dynamic leadership: are
widely acclaimed and recognized. Your country is
the home and host’of the Liberation Committee of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and many liberation movements. The United Republic of Tanzania,
under the able and lustrous leadership of Mualimu
Julius Nyerere, has carried faithfully and silently its
noble mission against colonialism,
imperialism
and
racism. For these reasons, we are delighted to see you
in the chair when the Security Council is discussing
the question of Palestine and the Middle East.

62. However, the negative attitude of Israel to al!
constructive efforts of the international
community
and theSecurity Council is well known to all of us-the
ruthless and barbaric air raids on refugee camps in
Lebanon, the establishment
of five new settlements
on the Golan Heights, and now the boycott of the
Security Council’s debate and a numberof attempts to
block all constructive efforts of the Council.
63. Michael Adams reported
Wnshington Post that:

on 28 July 1975 in Thp

“With more than 50 settlements already established and with the process of colonization
accelerating throughout the occupied territories,
many
Israelis are easily unaware of the inconsistency
between what their Government is saying and what
it is doing about reaching a political settlement
with the Arabs. Lord Caradon, who visited Israel
last month to explore the possibilities of such an
agreement, has called these 50 settlements ‘50 signposts to destruction’ *‘.

59. Security Council resolution 381 (1975) which
calls for a debate on the Palestinian question and
the Middle East, is a historic resolution. The decision
of the Council on 12 January 1976 to invite the representative of the PLO to participate
in the debate
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council is a reflection of the growing
international
support and recognition of the legal and
inalienable rights ‘of the Palestinians, and of the fact
that the PLO is,the only authentic representative of
the people of Palestine, a fact which has been reaffirmed in various summit meetings of the League of
Arab States, OAU, the non-aligned movement, the
Islamic Conference, the General Assembly, and many
international
organizations.
My delegation is deeply
gratified to see the representative
of the people of
Palestine taking. his rightful place in the Security
Council on an equal footing with all other Member
States, and would like here to extend to him our warm
welcome and congratulations.

Mr. Adams went on to say:
“They are also 50 classic examples of the way the
State of Israel has been constructed;
but if the
objective is to ensure the survival of the State
itself, the Israelis will sooner or later have to abandon
these outposts beyond their borderseven
if it
means reversing the course of Zionist history.”
64. It is the same conclusion reached by David BenGurion himself after matry years of damage, suffering
and injustice that he had inflicted on the Palestinians
and neighbouring Arab States. He said at last in his
later years:

60. Furthermore,
Council resolution 381 (1975) and
the invitation to the PLO representative to participate
in the debate have put the questions of the Middle
East and Palestine- in the right perspective for the
first time. It is .a ,recognition
that the problem of
Palestine is the core of the conflict in the Middle
East, and that lasting peace and settlement cannot
be achieved without the recognition of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians and the establishment of the
independent Palestinian authority.

:‘As for security, military
defensible borders,
while desirable, they cannot by themselves guarantee [Israel’s] future. Real peace with our neighbours-mutual
trust and friendship-that
is the only
true security.”
65. The friends of Israel and its sponsors should at
least follow the advice of Ben-Gut-ion and make it
understand that its security. is not in occupation and
the establishment of new settlements. Unlimited
support to Israel will certainly lead Israel to further
aggression and war that may endanger the international
peace and security of the whole world. This cannot be
bett r explained than by the statement of former
Senii tor J. W. Fulbright, when he said-and
I quote
from The Washington Post of 7 July 1975: “We are

61. The aforesaid actions and resolutions of the
Security Council were achieved very late. However,
they ‘provide the Council with a good opportunity
to
reach a constructive
and objective resolution, confirming the new realities in international
relations,
and in the Middle East in particular.
By so doing,
they give the Council an opportunity
to exercise its
primary function and responsibility
for the mainte8

.” .

providing the material means for an Israeli policy that
is beyond our control-a
policy that, by all indications,
is carrying both Israel and the United States towards
a major new crisis.”

ber 1975 that President Ford said to Joseph Alsop:
“Most Americans are willing to take great risks. to
preserve the State of Israel, but they are not willing
to take great risks to preserve Israel’s conquests.”

66. My delegation shares the view expressed in this
debate ‘that resolution 242 (1967) is vague, defective
and inadequate to achieve a lasting peace and settlement in the Middle East. The 1973 war’of liberation
is a ,product of, that inadequate resolution. .Indeed,
Security Council resolutions 338 (1973) and 381(1975),
and the invitation
to the PLO to participate in this
debate, indicate that additional measures are needed
to achieve a lasting peaceful settlement.

72. The General Assembly has already adapted itself
to the changing circumstances
and realities in the
Middle East. It reaffirmed at its twenty-ninth session
the inalienable. rights of the Palestinian
people in
Palestine, including the right to self-determination
and
to national independence
and sovereignty, and the
inalienable right of the Palestinians to return to their
homes and property from which they had, been -displaced and uprooted; the Assembly emphasized also
that full respect for and realization of those inalienable
rights. -were indispensable
for the,, solution of the
question of the Middle East as a’whole.i”

67. General Assembly
resolutions
3236 {XXIX),
3237 (XXIX)
and 3375 (XXX) have laid down the
basic conditions for peace in the Middle East. They
suggest that the framework established nine years ago
is insufficient
to meet the necessary conditions of
peace in the Middle East. That is only natural, because
everything is subject to change-individuals,
nations
and organizations are subject to change and progress.
However, theZionist
entity does not like to see any
change in the framework decided nine years ago, which
Israel itself has consistently refused to comply with.

73. It is the firm opinion of my delegation that if
Israel does not respect this and withdraw from all
occupied Arab territories,
then peace will continue
to be threatened in the area and consequently in the
world as a whole. Yet, Israel does not take advice.
It remains for the members of the Council to shoulder
their great and historic responsibility
and take the
necessary measures to implement
General Assembly
resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376 (XXX).

68.’ It is most regrettable to my delegation
that
such an intransigent attitude should find support in the
words of certain representatives.
The representative
of the United States said: “Changes imposed on the
parties and unacceptable to any one of them, however
great the good will, will not work” [1876th meeting,
prrrct. 61. How could such a statement be valid while
Israel is persisting in boycotting the Security Council
debate in spite of the many appeals made,to it?

74.’ I wish to recall the words of Mr. John Scali,
United States representative
to the United Nations
two years ago, when he referred to efforts in the
Security Council to solve the Middle East question.
He then ,said that those efforts were “a testimony of
mankind’s continuing hope that this great international
Organization
can .move towards its most important
goal as the guarantor of. peace.” Let us sincerely
hope so.

69. The main theme which has been established in
the current debate of the Council, confirming
the
General Assembly resolutions,
reflects that resohition 242 (1967) isinadequate.
It is silent on the rights
of the Palestinians,
it denies the Palestinians their
right of self-determination
and their right to a homeland in Palestine, while one cannot argue for a stotrrs
yuo that is as dead as Caesar.

75. Mr. President, 1 thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to speak. Your presidency for this month
is not .an easy task, but our confidence in you is
limitless and I wish you all success.
76;. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
the Sudan for the tribute he paid to my country and my
President and for the very kind words he addressed
to me personally. The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. In accordance with the established
practice, ,I request the representative
of Jordan to
withdraw temporarily from the Council table in order
that his ,pIace may be take’n by the representative of
Bulgaria. I invite that representative to take that place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

70. The Sudan Foreign Minister,
in his statement
during the thirtieth session of the General Assembly,
said that President Woodrow Wilson, “outraged by
the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916 and the Balfour
Declaration of 1917,... tried to put justice and high
principles
into a map of treachery and doubledealing.“Y The Sudan Foreign Minister added: “That
is a part of the American tradition which has been
abandoned completely.
The opposite is now the
case.“y

77,. . Mr.

GROZEV
(Bulgaria) (interpretdon
jkm
On behalf of the delegation of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Security Council for the opportunity you have given me to participate
in the prese’nt debate on the Middle East problem
including the Palestinian question. 1 should also like
most sincerely to congratulate you, the representative
Russitrrl):

71, Yet the Palestinian quetion has to be considered
within the context of those lofty American traditions,
if. a genuine and lasting peace is to be established
in the Middle East. On this subject, it is encouraging
to read in The Nm* York Tinws Mogrrzine of 14 Decem9.

of the friendly United Republic of Tanzania, as the
President of the most responsible body of the United
Nations, the Security Council. The fact that you
occupy this post at a time when the whole of the
Middle East question is being discussed is promising.
In you we see a consistent and dynamic defender
of the rights of peoples to self-determination,
Moreover, as Chairman of the Special Committee
on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to
Colonial Countries and Peoples for over four years,
you have earned a reputation as a consistent and
relentless fighter for the unreserved and unconditional
implementation
of the sacred right of peoples.

to the creation of their own State, and the guarantee
of the security and the right to independent existence
and development of all States in the region.
81. We are certain that if al! the members of the
Security Council take into account those essential
conditions for the establishment
of a durable peace
and if they manifest the necessary responsibility,
realism and goodwill, the present session of the Council will, as a direct result, lead to the creation of
favourable conditions for the resumption of the work
of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East
and to the guaranteeing of its success.
82. It has already been stressed during the debate that
there are now real possibilities for a comprehensive
political
solution to the Middle East problem.
A
lengthy debate during the thirtieth session of the
General Assembly pinpointed
the crucial fact that
an overwhelming
majority of Member States already
have a clearer understanding of the substance of the
Middle East conflict as well as of the ways and means
for its radical solution.

78. The delegation
of the People’s Republic
of
Bulgaria has expressed the desire to participate in this
debate on the basis of the principled position and the
profound conviction of our Government that the time
has come to consider a political settlement of the
Middle East crisis that would eliminate once and for
a!! this protracted and constant source of tension
and conflict. The interest of our country in establishing
a just and durable peace in that area of the world is
more than clearly understandable.
This is in keeping
with the sacred vocation of the Bulgarian people to
build their future in conditions of peace and security.

83. First and foremost-and
this, in our view, is of
crucial importance-the
fact is almost universally
recognized that the Palestinian question is one of the
key problems in the Middle East crisis and that, without
the exercise of the legitimate rights of the Arab people
of Palestine, it will be impossible to find a just and
durable solution to the conflict. There was a ‘time
when some thought it heresy merely to mention- the
rights and interests of the Palestinian people. They
were satisfied merely with seeking a solution to the
problem through Pharisaic charity and handouts to the
Palestinian refugees. Now the same people merely
refer to the interests of the Palestinian people. Unfortunately, they do not yet want to recognize that
the Palestine problem is first and foremost a political
problem and that it is precisely the legitimate interests
of the Arab people of Palestine ihat require ,the
unconditional
recognition
of its national rights, including its right to independent statehood.

79. The Middle East, as members know, is directly
adjacent to the Balkans and to our country. The solution of the Middle East problem is consequently
closely connected with the security of the region where
we live. Therefore, in the joint Greek-Bulgarian
communiqui of 14 January, issued on the occasion of the
visit to Greece of the Foreign Minister of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, Petar Mladenov, the following
was stated:
“Both parties have expressed their concern about
the Middle East crisis and have stressed the need
to establish a just and durable peace. On the basis
of the principle of self-determination
of peoples,
as well as on the basis of the stipulation that the
seizure of territory by force is unacceptable in international relations, both parties .have stressed the
need to liberate all Arab tqrritories occupied in 1967
and the need for a solution taking into account the
legitimate
rights of all peoples in the region,
guaranteeing the national identity and the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine.“,

84. These rights have already been recognized and
reaffirmed by the overwhelming
majority of States in
the world as well as by the two most recent sessions
of the General Assembly. What is more, the need was
reaffirmed for the participation of the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, the PLO, in the
consideration
of all aspects of the question at all
stages and in all international
forums for a political
settlement of the Middle East crisis.

80. The Bulgarian delegation welcomes the initiative
of the Security Council in holding .a yide-ranging
debate on the Middle East crisis. The present debate
proves again the imperative need to take a decisive
step forward to establish a just and durable peace in.
the Middle East. To achieve this, it is essential that
three basic problems, which are the crux of the conflict
and which are organically interlinked,
be solved: the
withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab territoiies
occupied in 1967; the exercise of the legitimate rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right

85. In this connexion an import-ant-and,
I would
say, decisive-step
forward has already. been taken.
The legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian
people, namely, the PLO, is participating in the work
not only of the General Assembly but also of the
Security Council. A logical consequence thereof should
be the participation
of the PLO in the work of the
existing international
negotiating machinery on the
10

essence a violation of this principle. The ruling circles
of Israel and their patrons hope to undermine
the
unity of the Arab peoples and to thwart their sincere
wish to achieve a political settlement of the Middle
East conflict. on the basis of the principles of the
Charter and the relevant decisions of the Security
Council and General Assembly of the United Nations.

Middle East problem, the Geneva Peace Conference,
from the very beginning and on an equal footing.
Those who do not understand or who pretend not to
understand
the historic significance
of this fact
manifest either an unpardonable
political
shortsightedness or a reluctance to promote, in the final
analysis, the establishment
of a durable peace in the
Middle East.

90. The real interests of ail the Arab peoples without
exception require the frustration of the hopes and
wishes of the Israeli occupiers and their patrons. The
Arab countries and peoples have once more reaffirmed
their goodwill, their desire for peace and their constructive approach to a settlement to this protracted crisis.
This position has found broad support and was praised
by the United Nations in both the General Assembly
and the Security Council. It is high time for Israel
to desist from its obstructionist
and unreasonable
policy, to show the necessary realism and to prove by
its actions that it in fact wishes peace and goodneighbourly relations with the Arab peoples.

86. I should like to take this opportunity.
on behalf
of the Bulgarian delegation, mosidordiaiiyto
welcome
the representatives of the PLO and to pledge to them
the full and unreserved co-operation and support of the
Government
and the people of Bulgaria for the just
cause of the heroic Arab people of Palestine, a cause
which cannot fail to achieve victory.
87. The experience of virtually the last three decades
shows that a durable peace in the Middle East cannot
be based on a mere truce among individual countries
or groups of countries in the region. This approach
led and will continue to lead, if it continues to be
applied, to an illusory calm and ultimately to renewed
armed confrontations.
The establishment of a just and
durable peace in the Middle East undoubtedly requires
the implementation
of the well-known resolutions of
the Security Council and those adopted at the twentyninth and thirtieth sessions of the General Assembly
on the Middle East and the Palestine question. However, it is essentiai to apply these resolutions in ail of
their parts and to ail the parties to the conflict. Moreover, we cannot take into account and insist on the
implementation
of the well-known Security Council
resolutions alone, as is done by some bearing a large
share of responsibility
for the non-implementation
of
these resolutions to date, and completely forget and
disregard the relevant General Assembly resolutions
which express the view and the will of the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United
Nations.

91. The absence of Israel from the present debate,
as well as a number of recent events in that region
which are g direct result of the Israeli policy of aggression and provocation, does not attest to either realism
or goodwili. The support which this course that was
charted by Israel receives from certain States is not in
keeping with the requirement for a change in Israeli
policy in order to eliminate obstacles to peace in the
Middle East.
92. The attempts to limit the scope of the present
debate in the Security Council and to limit the framework of negotiations at the Geneva Conference, as
well as attempts to sidestep some of the key problems
of the Middle East crisis, can only lead to negative
results and to the maintenance and strengthening of
the positions of imperialism and Zionism in the Middle
East.

88. The essence of the Middle East conflict requires
a total solution to the problem. Therefore, any partial
settlement disregarding the key problems could not
lead to durable results. Consequently,
the sink clntr
/roll for the achievement of progress towards a peaceful
settlement of the crisis remains the unconditional
and
total withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from ail the
Arab territories occupied in 1967. Any attempt by
Israel or its patrons to impose a distorted interpretation of the Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions
on this specific and crucial question
should be categorically rejected.

93. As has been thoroughly
stressed during the
current debate, there is a chance to achieve a just and
durable settlement of the conflict between Israel and
the Arab peoples. It would be both dangerous and.
unreasonable to miss this chance again. This, in our
view, is the significance of the present Security Council debate on the Middle East problem as a whole.
This debate should pave the way for a resumption
as soon as possible of the Geneva Peace Conference.
94. The PRESIDENT:.The
next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. In accordance with the established
practice, I request the representative of the Paiestine
Liberation Organization to withdraw temporarily from
the Council table in order. that his place may be taken
by the representative
of Tunisia. I now invite that
representative to take that place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

89. The Israeli aggressor should no longer count on
rewards for its stubborness and its flouting of United
Nations resolutions. Both the General Assembly and
the Security Council have reaffirmed the need strictly
to observe one of the basic principles of the Charter,
namely, that of the inadmissibility
of the occupation
of -foreign territory by force. Concessions through
partial agreements and separate negotiations are in

y5.

Mr.

Fwwh):

11

DRISS
(Tunisia)
(iniPrprc’ttrtion
from
First, I should like to offer my sincere con-

gratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council; you have assumed
that task with the skill, vigour and competence that we
’
have always admired in you.

the Council and to request it to invite the represent+
tives of the PLO to speak, here?* ,,
103.

The statement made by Mr. Khaddoumi
[WC
the head of the delegation of the
PLO, was enlightening
and encouraging.’ Those of
us who believe in the step-by-step approach,regard the
participation of the PLO in the Council’s deliberation
as an important step towards the ;fulfilment
of the
rights and national objectives‘of the Palestinian people
and, hence, towards the setting in motion of the process
that will lead to a just and lasting peace’in the Middle
East and at least in the immediate future to a modus
riwndi
capable, of directing us. on to the path, of
__ -peace.
1870th maeting],

96. I should like also to extend my sincere congratulations
to the new members of the Security
Council. They are all friends and brothers of ‘ours,
and my country enjoys the closest relations with them.
97. I would also express once again to the .representative of the People’s Republic of China our sincere
condolences on the death of its distinguished Premier,
Chou En-lai.
98. Finally, I should like to thank you, Mr: President,
and the members of the Security Council for giving
me this opportunity
to take part in the Council’s
deliberations on a problem which, with the passing of
the years, has become not only a source of deep
concern to everyone but also a clear threat to world
peace.

104. ; As for the Israeli delegation, its ,absence has
already emerged as a serious,diplomatic
error resuiting
naturally from an erroneous and stubborn political
judgement.
The world has seen that in this debate,
which constitutes a historic stage in the quest for a
solution to the tragic situation in the Middle East, the
Arab countrieslall
the countries,
including
t,he.
legitimate representatives of the Palestinian peopleare present, whereas Israel once again .is, shirking its
responsibility
and pretends, as in the past, to ignore
the existence and aspirations ofthe’
(, Palestinian people.

99. President Habib Bourguiba, in the penetrating
and realistic analysis of the problem he has been
working on for many years, particularly at the time of
this trip to the Middle East in 1965, stated that the
tragic situation that had existed in the Middle East for
30 ‘years stemmed
solely from the Palestinian
problem, and that a settlement of the conflict in that
region was indissolubly linked with a solution of that
problem.

105.: Having followed attentively the’statements made
by various members of the Council,, I am pleasedto
note that the position of the members of the Council
conforms to and confirms the evaluation ofthe situation
made by the General Assembly.
Everyone
now
rtcognizes that the Palestinian problem is at the origin
of the .conflict and that, as a matter of pure logic,
any settlement of that conflict must be preceded by a
solution of the Palestinian problem. Thus the natural
con,clusion is that it is necessary and legitimate that
the Palestinian people should, like%11 peoples. have
an independent and sovereign State.
_.”
.

100. It took 11 years from the time that analysis
was made and submitted to the conscience of the world,
it ‘took two devastating and deadly wars for the
conscience of the world to rid itself of the heavy veil
that a powerful propaganda campaign based on lies
had desperately beeen maintaining
over ,the background and origins of the conflict-that
is, the tragedy
that has beset the Palestinian people for 30 years.

106. Can’that conclusion-simple
because it is logical
and ‘natural, concrete because it’ is required by day,
to day events-be.adopted
by the Council,and become
a decision of the Council? Is the Security Council
not even capable of taking a simple and natural decision-knowing,
ihat is more, that in doing so it would
be inventing nothing, since General Assembly ‘resolution 181 (II), adopted 28 years ago, provided for the
creation of an independent Palestinian Arab State?
.
107. For many reasons, even after 28 years of conflict, that Arab. State -in’PaiestineX has, not yet seen
the light of day. Nor-,will it soon see the light of day
if its creation is subordinated,,‘to
the ,will of Israel
alone, which rejects it, and if the Security Council,
and particularly the great Powers, do not agree on the
creation of that State, with the guarantees necessary
to. ensure its establishment and development,.

101. And, finally, the General Assembly followed
world public opinion. At its twenty-ninth session, it
vigorously ‘affirmed the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian people and recognized that the problem of
Palestine was at the heart of the Middle East conflict;
at its thirtieth session, it confirmed that the Palestinian
people needed and had, moreover, the right to participate, through their legitimate representative, ,the
PLO, in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on
peace in the Middle East.
102. Today the representatives
of the Palestinian
people are here. They are participating in the work of
the Security Council on an equal footing with the other
member States. 1 congratulate them and extend to
them a fraternal welcome, a welcome that is all the
warmer because it had always been my personal wish
to see them present here. For, more than two years
ago, even before the October war-more
precisely,
on 17 April 1973-I had the opportunity
to address

108. Should the Security Council bow to the view that
it should
to the
I I refrain from the slightestinitiative:hot
12

.a..

z

:

_.

liking of the Tel Aviv Government?
Knowing, as we
do, the policy, ambitions and ulterior motives of that
Government,
can we suppose that one day it will
bestow its blessing on the &eation of an independent
Palestinian State? Any postponement of such a decision, in addition to being a Bagrant miscarriage of
justice, would entail the danger of creating new conditions favourable to another outbreak of violence, would
encourage the intransigence of Israel and discourage
the clearly expressed good will that has been shown
bythe other parties to the conflict.

, ,.- ,.

people, resolution 242 (1967). whose inadequacies have
been recognized by all the participants, is outdated.
Does the resolution have to be amended, cancelled
‘or replaced? It has, in a sense, aheady been superseded by resolutions 338 (1973) and 381 (1975), and
particularly by the evolution in attitudes. The attitude
of the Security Council on the problem of the Middle
East and on the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people cannot be confined to a legal attitude, but
must be an attitude that goes beyond the rigid and
incomplete texts. The Council must adopt a decision
that is in keeping with the realities of the situation and
based on a global vision of the problem, takes into
consideration the rights involved and ensures international. peace, which the Council has an obligation to
maintain under the Charter.

IO<. To wait and see, to drag one’s feet, would be
harmful to the quest for the means to bring about
peace., particularly ‘since an analysis of the various
positions set ,forth by the parties to the conflict and
by the Powers concerned makes it perfectly clear that
it is not the principle of the creation of the Palestinian
State which is at issue, but that the prime difficulty
lies in the ways and means of implementing
that
objective.

113. In 1947 and subsequent years, the United
Nations did not use the necessary means, although
they are provided in the Charter, to implement
its
resolutions. Thus, Israel, after its creation, ignored
all United Nations resolutions, and extended its control
over territories that did not belong to it. It exceeded
the boundaries established for it by the partition
res,olution. and refused to evacuate the territories of
Arab States, notwithstanding
the decision contained
in resolution 242 (1967) itself. Israel accepted the
d.isengagement agreements and partial changes in the
Sinai only in exchange for substantial political and
material
advantages,
and continued
to deny the
Palestinians their rights under the Charter and under
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

110. -Today,
one customarily
hears informed
diplomats ‘and experienced statesmen rejecting any
imposed settlement and affirming the need for an agreement between the parties. And yet, for 28 years, have
not attempts been made to impose on the Arabs, by a
policy of unconditional
moral and material support for
Israel, first, in lW7, the existence of that State, for
which the neighbouring
peoples ‘were not psychologically prepared, and then the recognition of that
State as’ a pre-condition
to any evacuation of the
occupied
territories
and any recognition
of the
legitimate
aspirations and rights of the Palestinian
people? Resolution 242 (1967) was born out of that
pressure on the Arabs. Adopted following the sixday war, on 22 November
1967, it was to be the
basis of a settlement of the Middle East problem. It
was based on two requirements:
recognition of the
State of Israel, and evacuation of the occupied territories. It disregarded the problem of the Palestinian
people, to whom it referred solely in terms of refugees.
Following the partition resolution imposed on the
Arabs in 1947, that resolution became an additional
trial for them. Arab countries accepted it in the hope
that it would constitute a basis for the evacuation of
Arab territories, and that it might lead to a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East;

114. It is now clear that the events of recent years
have had an effect on the international
public, which
finally understands that stability in the Middle East
cannot be brought about without the recognition of
the ‘rights of the Palestinian
people. That view is
accepted by many Israelis, who believe that negotiations with the Palestinians is the only proper course
of action. But Israel’s policy, because of the internal
political and economic situation in particular, remains
unchanged. Israel believes that there are no rights or
legitimate aspirations for the Palestinian people. There
would be no Palestinian State or negotiations with the
PLO.

Unfortunately,
not.only did Israel not take the
Ill.
resolution seriously, and refuse toabide by it, but also
it thwarted the.efforts of Mr. Jarring, of Secretary
of State Rogers, and of African leaders,, and rejected
the attempts of all its friends who tried to convince
it that its stubbornness and continued aggression
might ‘engulf that region-indeed
the entire worldin a catastrophe. ‘,

115. That negative attitude on the part of Israel is
part of a policy based both on a feeling of fear and on
an expansionist desire. The maintenance of tension
in the Middle East is a fundamental element in the
strategy of Israel, which intends to preserve its position by deriving support
from the diaspora and
countries that support it unconditionally
and by maintaining control as long as possible over occupied Arab
territories in the hope that it will be able to offer more
to an increasingly scanty and disappointing
international immigration.

112. After the October, war of -1973,. after the
recognition of the PLO by the Arab States, and after
the adoption by the General Assembly of resolutions
recognizing the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian

116. Is that a policy acceptable to the international
community? Is that a policy likely to bring about peace?
Is that a guarantee against further conflicts in the
13

..
._-

Middle East, or is it merely incitement to instability
and insecurity, as has, regrettably, been shown by the
tragic events that have occurred recently in Lebanon?
117. After the experience of 28 years, after four
destructive wars, bearing in mind the evolution of
opinion in Europe and elsewhere, as well as in the
Arab countries, it would be unpardonable not to try
to fulfil the minimum
objectives set by the Arab
summit conference at Rabat in 1974 with realism and
clarity, namely, the evacuation of the occupied territories and the creation of a Palestine State in the
liberated territories. Those objectives are objectives
accepted by the international
community as a whole.

you and to all the members of the Security Council
for giving me the opportunity to express our views on
the issue on the agenda, that is, the Middle East
problem including the Palestinian question. It is a
special pleasure for us to see you, a prominent son of
a friendly African country, presiding over our deliberations on this highly important issue.
,_
123. In the opinion of the Hungarian
People’s
Republic, the present session of the Security Council
is an extremely important one. It is the first time that
the Council has dealt with the real heart of this longstanding conflict, namely, the national rights of the
Palestinian people, and it is the first time that the only
legitimate
representatives
of the Palestinian
Arab
people, the representatives
of the PLO, have participated in the discussions. We are convinced that this
is a very promising sign for the future, since the
participation
of the delegation of the PLO in our
deliberations is an active and real contribution
to the
global solution of the Middle East question. I wish to
convey our warm greetings and best wishes to the
delegation of the PLO and to the head of its delegation, Mr. Khaddoumi.

118. Just as it is agreed that one can no longer
ignore the fact that the Palestinian problem is the
comer-stone of the Middle East conflict, the creation
of an independent Palestinian State is, in our opinion,
the political decision which the Security Council must
take immediately
with all that that decision entails in
terms of means of implementation,
including
the
necessary guarantees referred to by more than one
speaker in the course of the present debate.
119. Is the Security Council capable of reaching that
decision, on must we await the convening of the
Geneva Conference, whose role should not be denied,
must we await the report of the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People established by the General Assembly at its
thirtieth
session. which will constitute
a positive
contribution
to the settlement
of the Palestinian
problem, or must there be a fifth war, the spectre
of. which -hovers over our debate, before we accept
the inevitability
of the creation of an independent
Palestinian State?

124. The support of the people and Government of the
Hungarian People’s Republic for the Palestinian cause
is based upon our socialist principles. Since the liberation of Hungary, we have always supported all the
genuine national liberation movements in the world,
and we shall do so in the future as well. Nobody
can deny that the Palestinian Arab people has the
inalienable right to national identity, to self-determination, to a homeland, and nobody can deny that the
Palestinian
Arab people has its genuine liberation
movement, recognized by the League of Arab States,
by the non-aligned countries, by the socialist world
and by many capitalist countries as well. The PLO,
under the chairmanship of Yasser Arafat, was recognized by an overwhelming
majority in the General
Assembly during the twenty-ninth session. Hungary
was among the Member States which took the initiative
in placing the question of Palestine on the agenda and
in inviting represantatives of the PLO to the General
Assembly. We are glad that, by the adoption of the
relevant resolutions, at its twenty-ninth and thirtieth
sessions the General Assembly has taken the first
steps towards putting an end to the striking injustices
which have afllicted the Palestinian Arab people for
over a quarter of a century. We are ready to take
an active part in the work of the newly established
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian
People, established by General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX). There is no doubt
in. our minds that the Security Council, having the
supreme responsibility
for the maintenance of peace
and security in the world, should follow the way and
the example of the General Assembly.

120. While it is true that the recent history of the
Middle East is a record of missed opportunities,
that
must not become the rule. On the contrary, all efforts
must be directed towards the unavoidable decision
that will initiate the process of the normalization
of
the situation in the Middle East. The Security Council
can and must break the vicious circle in which that
area of the world finds itself entangled. Later on,
.when peace has won over men’s hearts and minds,
those who have faith in a better.future, who are moved
by sincerity and a desire for peace, will have to pave
the way, in a joint effort, towards the building of a
thriving Palestine.
121. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Hungary. In accordance with the established practice, I request the representative
of the
Syrian Arab Republic to withdraw temporarily so that
his place at the Council table may be taken by the
representative of Hungary. I now invite that representative to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

125. The people of the Middle East have already
paid an extremely high toll in untold sufferings for the
imperialist-Zionist
policy of expansion during the last

122. Mr. HOLLAI
(Hungary): Mr. President, first of
all 1 would like to extend our sincere appreciation to
14

whatever conclusions
are reached in the present
debate your efforts and those of the other members
of the Council will contribute, at least, to shedding
light on a situation which. inextricably
links human
factors and political considerations,
the demands of
the law and the constraints of reality, the misfortunes
of the past and the hopes for the future.

three decades. It is high time to turn this hotbed of
unending wars into a home of lasting peace and justice
for all peoples of the region, without exception. On
3 December I975 in the General Assembly’s debate
on the Middle East, on behalf of the Hungarian delegation, I stated the following:
“The Government
of the Hungarian
People’s
Republic is firmly convinced that a just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East conflict can be conceived on the basis of three inseparable principles:
first, complete liquidation
of the consequences of
aggression and immediate and unconditional
return
of all occupied Arab lands to the countries of whose
territories they formed a legitimate part; secondly,
full recognition for the Palestinian Arab people of
their national right to self-determination;
and thirdIy ,
the assurance for all States and peoples of the
region of an independent life of their own, free from
fear” .I2

130. But I shoudd not want to go any further in my
statement without first conveying to the Chinese
delegation the sincere condolences of my delegation
and of my country at the loss of Premier Chou Enlai, one of their greatest leaders and one of the most
outstanding
statesmen of our time. As President
Boumeditne
said in his message to Chairman Mao
Tse-Tung:
“Chou En-lai never ceased for an instant, despite
his long illness, to discharge his difficult responsibilities with the courage, the faith and the constancy
that have always been characteristic of him. It was
with the same resolve and the same generosity that
he placed his genius at the service of the revolutionary causes of the peoples of the third world,
to whose profound aspirations to independence,
justice .and progress he was able to give concrete
form. Because he devoted his entire life to the
struggle for the advent of a new humanity,
this
great man will continue to live in the memory of
his people and in that of the peoples of the world,
and will be for future generations the example of
revolutionary
devotion and commitment.*’

126. The most appropriate forum for a global solution of the Middle East conflict is and remains the
Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. We
strongly support the early convening of the Cotiference, with the equal participation of the representatives of the PLO. There must be no pre-conditions
set to their participation.
We urge the Geneva Conference to speed up its work and to reach agreements
as soon as possible in order to avoid again giving a
change to the evil forees of a new expansionist war.
127. The socialist countries-among
them Hungaryhave no selfish interests in the Middle East. Our sole
interest its to promote peace, security, justice and
peaceful co-operation
among all nations. Until this
better world arrives, we shall continue to support all
anti-imperialist
struggles, including the struggle of the
Arab people for the final liquidation
of the consequences of aggression, for the attainment
of a just
peace in the region and for the benefit of the whole
world.

131. The situation in the world is fraught with
numerous and dangerous threats to international peace.
This is the case in Africa; it is the case in the Middle
East; perhaps it is also the-case elsewhere. However,
the aim of this meeting of the Security Council,
unlike most of the others, is not to deal with an
immediate crisis and to take urgent measures to put
out or limit an already raging fire. In placing on its
agenda “The Middle
East problem including
the
Palestinian question”,
the Council has expressed. its
determination
to proceed to an exhaustive consideration of these questions, not so much with the intention of arriving at partial and temporary solutions as
of defining a long-term view of the matter, in which a
general and lasting settlement would find its place. I
do not think it is necessary to dwell at length on the
merits of such a procedure, but I should simply like
to refer to it for the benefit of the Syrian delegation,
since it was the initiator of this procedure.

128. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Algeria. in accordance with the
established practice, I would request the representative
of Egypt to withdraw temporarily so that his place at
the Council table may be taken by the representative
of Algeria. I now invite that representative to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
129.

Mr.

RAHAL
(Algeria) (interpretcrtion
jiiom
Mr. President, like those that spoke before
us, my delegation is pleased to see you presiding
over the work of the Council at a time when, once
again, it is considering the Middle East question and
the Palestinian problem. Your untiring work in the
area of decolonization,
the unquestioned experience
you have acquired in the discharge of your responsibilities in the Organization
and the human qualities
that we all acknowledge in you naturally equip you to
preside over this debate. We are. convinced that
Fwnch):

132. This series of meetings of the Security Council
is also characterized by the participation
of the representatives of the PLO, ‘whose presence here I should
like to welcome warmly. The PLO plays an increasingly
active part in international institutions and in all discussions concerning the Palestine problem. It was only
after a long struggle that the Palestinian
people
managed to assume the responsibility
for its own
destiny and thus to become an essential party to
15

:

any settlement of the Middle East question. In our
view an eminently positive factor is the development
of international
opinion, which is now convinced of
the need to take into account the rights and aspirations
of the Palestinian people and’endorses the participation of its representatives in any deliberation on the
Middle East. The resolutions adopted on this subject
by the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth
and
thirtieth sessions clearly reflect this evolution which,
while doing justice to a people whose claims have
long been ignored, make possible at the same time more
viable initiatives aimed at finding a satisfactory solution
to a problem which has not always been understood
in all its aspects.

I do not want to minimize the efforts of the Security
Council and the United Nations forces,.whose presence
contributes at least to discouraging or postponing a
rapid deterioration
of the situation. I do not wish to
disregard the merits of American diplomacy. But it will
be agreed that, at best, those initiatives can have only
a limited and temporary effect; it would not be
reasonable to expect more from them, because none
of them is aimed at .the crux of the problem, nor does
it pretend to be.
137. The first conclusion that should be drawn from
this long list of disappointments
and failures is that it is
impossible to make progress towards a satisfactory
and lasting settlement of the Middle East crisis unless
we take account of the Palestinian factor and unless
within the whole range of emergencies and important
matters, we give it the priority and the weight it
deserves as a central element of the problem.

133. We are well aware that there still remains
some reluctance to granting the PLO the full privileges
pertaining to its status as authentic representative of the
Palestinian people. This reluctance was expressed here
at the beginning of this series of meetings. It was based
on procedural and legalistic considerations, of whose
importance we are of course aware, but which it would
be dangerous to obey to the letter in order to frustrate
their spirit. For it is clear in our minds that those delegations which have raised objections or have been
somewhat hesitant in allowing the representatives of
the PLO to participate in this debate nevertheless
recognize the predominant
place that should be
accorded to the concerns of the Palestinian people in
this debate, as in any debate of a similar nature devoted
to the Middle East crisis. If, moreover, we agree
that the Patestinians alone are qualified to put forward
their claims and defend their rights, it becomesdifficult
to understand the logic of those who would oppose
their participation in a debate which bears on precisely
those rights and claims.

138. The fulfilment
of this requirement
has been
made simpler since the Palestinian people has begun to
express itself through the PLO, whose representative
nature is recognized by all the Arab countries and by
an increasing number of States and whose authenticity,
like that of any liberation movement, is proved by the
very broad support and the total adherence to it of the
vast majority of Palestinians. The PLO has indeed,
in practice and on the broadest possible scale,
acquired the character of a valid spokesman, speaking
and acting on behalf of the Palestinian people. The
Security Council should take note of this, because
since this prerogative is accorded by the will of the
Palestinian people alone, it cannot be the subject of
either questioning or bargaining.
139. The second conclusion that should be drawn
from this debate is that the Palestinian people cannot
exist as a people without enjoying the rights common
to all other peoples. It seems to us difficult to recognize
the existence of the Palestinian people and at the same
time’ to deny them those rights or, which is also the
case, to recognize only their legitimate interests. If
others eonsider, as we do, that legitimate interests
should necessarily be based on recognized rights, it
seems much simpler and much more explicit to have
recourse to the elementary rules of logic to .decide
exactly how the rights of peoples are exemplified
in
the case of the Palestinian people.

134. I do not, however, wish to dwell any further on
that aspect of the question since, in any case, the
Council has finally welcomed the representatives of
the PLO. That decision was a very wise one, in our
opinion, not only because it satisfies a just claim
advanced by that organization,
but also because it
gives this debate of the Council a scope which so far
it has lacked.
135. That is perhaps, if we look closely at the situation, the only tangible progress that has been made
in the search for a settlement of the Middle East
problem. Neither the resolutions of the Security Council nor the efforts made pursuant to its decisions by
the representative
of the Secretary-General,
nor
initiatives outside the United Nations have been able
to clear the way to a solution or even a distant prospect
of a solution.

140. The Palestinians ‘are human beings and the
Universal
Declaration
of Human Rights therefore
applies to them: international
law and the resolutions
of the Security Council allow those of them who
were forced to flee their homes and abandon their
belongings to return to their homes and to recover
their property or to receive adequate compensation
whenever it is not possible for them to recover their
possessions. This right of the Palestinians has always
been explicitly stated and periodically confirmed in all
United Nations resolutions dealing with the Palestinian
refugees; and it,is perhaps useful to recall that respect

136. The partial accords which are the result of a
so-called step-by-step diplomacy are not negligible,
though they only scrape the surface of the problem
and their impact will remain illusory as long as they
do not fall within a broader set of measures dealing
with the real elements of the crisis. In saying this,
16

-

for this right was one of the fiirmaf conditions for the
admission df ‘Israel to ‘in$@bership
in the United
Nations.
141.. The Palestinians are a people and as such have
the right to have a country; to live in their country,
to organize their State, to administer their own affairs
an,d to choose their political, economic and administrative’ system; in other words, as recognized by the
Charter of the United Nations, they have the right
to self-determination,
which, although .it is not a new
element in international
law, is still ‘one of the most
precious achievements ofthe international community.
142.. Thus the right of the Palestinian refugees -to
return to their homes and to recover their properties
and .the right to ss’elf-determination
of the Palestinian
people are inextricably
linked to the very’ existence
of the Palestinian people; any questioning or limiting
of these rights can be interpreted
only as another
calling into’queition
of the existence of the Palestinians
as a people. Those are elements which cannot of course
be subject to Iany ,.bargaining and which should theiefore be clearly confirmed by-the Security Council.
(.
;
1.43. The r-ecommendations
which we tire ,,.in all
humility putting forwaid here are justified by the fact
that the Security Council -can of course contemplate
only peaceful means fdr the settlemerit of disputes, by
creating the best .possible framework to enable the
parties concerned to settle their differences. However,
it is obvious that, in the very interest of,the success
of such an undertaking, it is essential to define what is
really negotiable
or, if one prefers, whai is not
negotiable.
Leaving it. to the parties concerned to
specify what ‘for them is not negotiable could rapidly
lead to a breakdown
of the discussion, each party
being of course tempted to expand to the limit what it
is not prepa:ed tci negotiate That is why we believe
that it is up to‘ihe Council itself to draw a distinction
between what is hegotiable and what is not and, in the
dase of our present concern, we have already proposed
that the Council should consider as non-negotiable the
following three principles: first, that the Palestinian
people is essentially an interested party in any settlement of the Middle East problem; secondly, that the
PLO is the genuine representative of the Palestinian
people for the statement of its claims and the defence
of its rights; and, thirdly, that as refugees the Palestinians have the right to return to their homes and to
recover their properties and that as a people they
enjoy the right to selfdetermintifion
as ,far as the
defipition of their national future is concerned.
144. It is on the basis of t&se considerations,
in
our opinion, that .tie. can judge the- validity of the
tools provided by the Security Council to encourage
and channel the search for a peaceful settlement of
the’ Middle,.&&
problem. Repeated references have
been ma+ dti+ag this Pebate to resolution 242 (1967),
which some consider as the. sole. and irreplaceable
framework for the ‘cbtiduct of future negotiations. We

should however be well aware of the fact that the
virtues of this resolution have not yet been revealed,
since periodic attempts at implementing
it have been
discouraging.
Of course, this persistent failure does
not necessarily mean that resolution 242 (1967) is
worthless; this failure indicates, however, that its
impIementation
has.,met with resistance or difficulties
that have outweighed its benefits. The .problem, then,
is to find the reasons w‘h‘y this resolution has not been
implemented and, on this basis, to make the necessary
improvements
therein which would facilitate
its
implementation.
145. It should not be forgotten that resolution 242
(1967) was adopted after the Israeli aggression of
1967 and that its main aim was to redress the
consequences,of that aggression. Thus this resolution
was first and foremost concerned with the immediate
problems resulting from the Israeli occupation of territories belonging to Arab States Members of the United
Nations rather than with long-term measures aimed at
the definitive settlement of the Middle East crisis.
Resolution 338 (1973), which after the October 1973 war
was adopted to complement
resolution 242 (1967),
made even pore obvious the partial nature of resolution 242 (1967), which is the reason why we feel
that that resolution in its present form provides an
inadequate framework for the conduct of serious
negotiations.
..
146. It is therefore obvious that to consider resolution 242 (1967) as an immutable
framework for any
future settlement of the Middle East crisis is tantamount to pai-alysing any possible progress towards a
solution acceptable to all the parties concerned. We
hope that the Security Council will refuse to be
confined within limits which render its efforts sterile
and that, drawing from past failures a better understanding of the present situation and of the chances
for future deveiopment,
it will not hesitate to adjust
its attitude and th$,decisions devolving upon it.
147. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker today is the
representative of’poland. In accordance with the established practice, I request the representative of Jordan
to withdraw temporarily
from the .Council table in
order that his place may be taken by the representative
of Poland. I now invite that representative
to take
that place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
148. Mr. JAROSZEK
(Poland):
Mr. President,
permit me in the first place to discharge the pleasant
duty of thanking you personally and other members
of the Council for making it possible for my delegation
to present Poland’s position on the very important
issue before .us. In speaking today, 1 am extremely
happy to see .the presidency of the Security Council
in your experienced hands, to see the Council under
the wise guidance of an eminent son of Africa, of the
friendly United Republic of Tanzania. I feel equal
satisfaction over the participation,
in the debate of

the delegation of the PLO. Both the presence of that
delegation in our midst and the high level of its composition testify to the growing international
recognition
and status of that organization
as the legitimate,
indeed the sole, representative
of the Arab people
of Palestine.

threat to or breach of peace and security, including
Middle East.

the

153. The Polish people, which for more than 120 years
was deprived of its own statehood, can well tinderstand-indeed,
perhaps even better than anyone
else-what
is the real plight of the Arab people of
Palestine. That same historical awareness lies behind
our unreserved support for the just aspirations of the
Palestinians.
By the same token, we follow with
friendly attention the efforts made towards the achievement of their political rights, including the establishment of their own State. History has already proved
on many occasions that such national cravings and
aspirations can hardly be thwarted by anyone. Less
than 30 years ago the Palestinians were expelled from
their native land. Only yesterday they still seemed to
be far away, reduced by some to the status of mere
refugees. Today they have observer status in the
United Nations; their organization has become a full
member of the non-aligned movement; they are here
with us. Tomorrow, I have no doubt, they will be a
full-fledged and totally recognized member of the
international
community.
Those who still deny them
the right to exist will have to start talking with them.
Indeed, the sooner that happens, the better it will be
for all concerned, without exception.

149. The position of the Government
of Poland on
the Middle East conflict, part and parcel of which is
the question of Palestine, is well known. It has been
presented on a number of occasions-I
need mention
only the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
Yet, in view of the outstanding significance of this
debate, we cannot fail to restate briefly the position
of principle consistently adhered to by the Govemment of the Polish People’s Republic. Indeed that
position of ours continues to be guided by three political
considerations:
first, the withdrawal by Israel from
all occupied Arab territories;
secondly, the safeguarding for the Palestinian people of all its inalienable
and legitimate rights, including the right to establish
its own, independent State; and thirdly, the securing
for all the countries of the region, without exception,
of a peaceful and independent development-within
their recognized borders.
150. We are pleased to note the growing awareness
of the world-and
the current debate in the Council
has proved this beyond any dotibt-that
the only
point of departure for achieving lasting peace in the
Middie East is the liquidation
of the effects of Israeli
aggression against the Arab lands: But as long as the
aggressor pays no heed to United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council, we shall need
more international
efforts and pressure to reach the
long-sought and overdue comprehensive-and
I stress
the word “comprehensive’‘-solution.
For, as I
already had an opportunity to point out last month in
the General Assembly, I2 the road to an effective solution to the problem leads precisely through a comprehensive political settlement.

154. It is precisely for these reasons that we have
long believed that any negotiating forum on the Middle
East would be but a grossly incomplete undertaking
if it -were deprived of the participation
on an equal
footing and from the very beginning of all the interested
parties, including the PLO. It. has been a matter of
gratification to my delegation that a very similar view
on the matter has been widely reflected in this debate,
especially in the context of the prompt resumption
of the Geneva Conference. The timely proposal of the
Soviet Union as its Co-Chairman
to resume the
Conference, combined with the prevailing trends of
the current debate, offer ample evidence in favour of
prompt action in this regard. This debate has also
shown the intetisifying
isolation of those who are
against such constructive action.
.
155. It is regrettable,
though not surprising, that
Israel, instead of joihing the discussion, has chosen
to obstruct yet another effort by the Organization.
There- is, in fact, hardly any effort by the international community vis-a-vis a Middle East solution that
would not have been obstructed by Israel. it is even
true of the nobie United
Nations peace-keeping
venture in the Middle East, where Israel discriminates
against a substantial part of the United Nations peacekeeping forces, including the Polish contingent;
by
denying freedom of movement,
thus viola?ing the
international agreements it signed and the provisions of
relevant Security Council resolutions.

151. On numerous occasions the Security Council
has discussed different aspects of the Middle East
problem and adopted relevant resolutions, including
its well-known resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
The General Assembly too has adopted a number of
resolutions pertaining both to the MiddIe East problem
and to the question of Palestine. I am referring in
particular to the resolutions adopted under those items
at the twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions. Those decisions and resolutions represent the basis for a sound
and prompt solution. They should therefore be fully
taken account of in seeking further progress in the
war-tom region.
152. However, if it is true that the permanent members of the Security Council bear particular responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations, it is
equally true that all should realize and share those
responsibilities
and none should obstruct or delay the
search for a peaceful settlement, wherever there is a

156. The delegation of Poland trusts that the present
debate will greatly contribute to speeding up the peacemaking process in the Middle East. We believe that it
18

will give a new impulse to all the efforts of negotiation with a view to finding an effective and compre.hensive settlement in the region, including the realization of the Iegitimate rights of the Arab people of
Palestine, for the good of world peace and stability.
The meeting

’ Aubrey Hodes, Dialague nfith Ishmaet (New York, Funk and
WagnalIs, l%S), p. 67.
5 Michael Bar-Zohar, Ben-Gurian: The Armed Praphet (tinglewood Cliffs, N.J.. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1968), p. 103.
6 earliamentary Debates (Hansard), Hause of Cammonk Off
ciat Repqrt, Session 1972-73 camprising periadfram t&h-2Sth Octaher 1973 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1973), p. 502.
’ See Official Records uf the Security Cauncit. Third Year,
Supplement for May 1948, document S/747.
8 See ‘Major-General
Carl von Horn, Salbipring fur Peace
(London, Cassell and Company Ltd., 1966).
9 See OfJicial Records uf the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 2368th meeting.
lo See General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).
‘I See Oflcial Records of the Security Council, Tnjenty-eighth
Year, 1708th meeting, paras. 81-102.
I2 See Official Records uf the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2425th meeting.

rose at 6.35 p.m.
Notes

’ See Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Second SesSian, Supplement Na. II, vol. II, annex 19.
2 Report of the War/d Conference of the internatianat Women’s
Year (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.l), chap. I,
para. 24.
3 See A/10297, annex II.

19

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstoreor write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agencesdepositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous auprh de votre libraire ou adressez-vous i : Nations Units, Section
des ve.ntes.New York ou Genhve.
KAK

IIOJISIIUTh

UBAAHUR

OITA&IEIt%AI&~H

OG%EAUHEHHFdX

HAlUiH

M3na~aK OpraKn3a&
OCi-be~KKeKxhtx Haqwfi HO)KHO KYI’IHT~ FJKHWXHLIX xara3HHax H areHTcTBax ~0 Beex paftO?IaX repa. I%3BonHTe
CnpaBKu 06 H3AaHHlfX
B
@ameM KHKXKOM
uaraanne WIIH nKumTe no 8npecy: Opraxu3aqKK OtS-hennnentibrx
HauKR, Ce~urm no npoJJalice H3&aHHR, .HbH)-PIOpK
HXU
XeKeBa.
tiM0

CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas pattes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

83-60801~May

004m
.>

1984-2.200
