A/63/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

71

st plenary meeting
Thursday, 18 December 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kpotsra
(Togo), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 64 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/63/430/Add.2)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly took action this morning on the draft
resolutions contained in the report (see A/63/PV.70).
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to speak with respect to the resolutions adopted
under this sub-item.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Last week, we commemorated the sixtieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. As Russian Federation
President Medvedev stressed in a message sent to
participants in the commemorative meeting of the
General Assembly held on 10 December, goodwill and
resolute effort on the part of all relevant actors,
including States, international organizations and civil
society institutions, are required if we are to overcome
negative trends in the area of promoting and protecting

human rights. The purpose is to ensure respect for
human rights and help to build a more just world order,
taking into account the diversity of today’s world and
traditional human values. As we have repeatedly noted,
international cooperation in the area of human rights
should contribute to the promotion of mutual trust,
understanding and respect among States.
Russia is convinced that human rights should be a
unifying, rather than a divisive, factor in international
relations. Such an approach means that no issue that
could lead to confrontation or division among United
Nations Member States should be included in the
agenda. Here, unfortunately, we are dealing with
precisely such an issue. That is why we share many of
the concerns expressed in the statement made at the
70th plenary meeting by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of a number of States.
While the Russian Federation is opposed to
discrimination, intolerance, repression and acts of
violence against persons of non-traditional sexual
orientation, that narrow and specific issue should be
addressed within the framework of existing
international legal instruments for the protection of
human rights. Artificially placing persons of
non-traditional sexual orientation in a separate group
could well overburden an already heavy General
Assembly agenda and change the main focus of United
Nations efforts to protect human rights and overcome
discrimination and xenophobia.
Mr. Rachkov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
issues related to sexual orientation and gender identity

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-66066 (E)

*0866066*

A/63/PV.71

are complex and varied. The Republic of Belarus
believes that those issues, which are sensitive and
uniquely narrow in scope, should not be considered
hastily, requiring a particularly prudent and thoughtful
approach.
The Republic of Belarus agrees that a consensual
approach should be taken in respecting the rights of all
social groups. We believe that human rights issues
should not be addressed in a manner that leads to rifts
or confrontations among Member States. Rather, they
should be discussed in a spirit of equitable and
mutually respectful dialogue, as called for in resolution
61/166, adopted by the General Assembly at its sixtyfirst session at the initiative of Belarus.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I call
on the observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Father Bené (Holy See): The Holy See is taking
the floor in explanation of position with regard to the
statement delivered at the 70th plenary meeting by the
representative of Argentina.
The Holy See appreciates the attempts made in
the statement on human rights, sexual orientation and
gender identity to condemn all forms of violence
against homosexual persons and to urge States to take
the measures necessary to put an end to all criminal
penalties against them. At the same time, the Holy See
notes that the wording of the statement goes well
beyond the aforementioned and shared intent.
In particular, the categories “sexual orientation”
and “gender identity”, used in the text, find no
recognition or clear and agreed definition in
international law. If they had to be taken into
consideration in the proclaiming and implementing of
fundamental rights, they would create serious
uncertainty in the law and undermine the ability of
States to enter into and enforce new and existing
human rights conventions and standards.
Despite the statement’s rightful condemnation of
and protection from all forms of violence against
homosexual persons, the document, when considered in
its entirety, goes beyond that goal and instead gives
rise to uncertainty in the law and challenges existing
human rights norms.
The Holy See continues to advocate that every
sign of unjust discrimination towards homosexual
persons be avoided and urges States to do away with
criminal penalties against them.

2

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 64.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/63/430/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 29 of its report.
Before proceeding further, I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution II, entitled
“Situation of human rights in Myanmar”, is postponed
to a later date to allow time for the review of its
programme budget implications by the Fifth
Committee. The Assembly will take action on draft
resolution II as soon as the report of the Fifth
Committee on its programme budget implications is
available.
We will now take decisions on draft resolutions I
and III. Draft resolution I is entitled “Situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany,
Ghana,
Greece,
Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,

08-66066

A/63/PV.71

Timor-Leste, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, Guinea,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Oman,
Russian Federation, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Barbados, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, India,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao
Tome and Principe, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Suriname, Swaziland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 94 votes to 22,
with 63 abstentions (resolution 63/190).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic advised the Secretariat that
it had intended to vote against.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”.
I call on the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on a point of order.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation would like to invoke rule 74 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly to move a
no-action motion on the draft resolution under
consideration, draft resolution III of document
A/63/430/Add.3.

08-66066

I would like to reiterate the principled position of
my Government that considering country-specific
resolutions in the General Assembly is completely
unjustified and unwarranted while the Human Rights
Council in Geneva is successfully holding meetings of
the Universal Periodic Review working groups and
considering country situations on the basis of
universality and non-selectivity.
We remind all delegations of the fact that, to
avoid politicization and selectivity in the consideration
of human rights situations, the Human Rights Council,
as the most competent and specialized institution
within the United Nations mechanism, has been
established and entrusted with the mandate of the
international monitoring of human rights through the
Universal Periodic Review.
Thus, our motion of no action today is by no
means an attempt to prevent the United Nations from
considering human rights institutions, but rather is a
request for rejection of the manipulation of the United
Nations system by Canada and a certain few other
countries. To preserve the credibility of both the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council,
there is a need to approach human rights issues in a
comprehensive, cooperative and constructive manner.
Manipulation and abuse of the United Nations human
rights mechanisms and machinery, which has
unfortunately become a prevalent tradition exercised
by certain countries, should not be tolerated any more,
primarily because of their destructive impact on the
credibility, efficiency and legitimacy of that
mechanism.
Based on what I have just said, I would like to
request that delegations vote in favour of the motion.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran has moved, within the terms
of rule 74 of the rules of procedure, that no action be
taken on draft resolution III. Rule 74 reads as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposal of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”

3

A/63/PV.71

I shall now call on delegations wishing to make
statements with respect to the motion before the
Assembly.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela once again expresses its firm
rejection of the consideration of draft resolutions that
respond to certain selective political interests and are
based on double standards whose application is clearly
contrary to the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes
that any action taken within the framework of the
United Nations should be oriented towards the
promotion and protection of human rights, and based
on fostering international cooperation and dialogue
between States. We should like to pose the following
question: Do we really want to investigate the human
rights situation in a particular country, and thus take
the measures required for an exhaustive neutral
investigation, or do we simply want to condemn a
country?
Human rights problems are widespread
worldwide, and I believe that we have taken the right
path in opening investigations through the Human
Rights Council, giving all interested parties the right to
objectively and without pressure present their cases.
We believe this is the path to follow if we truly wish to
defend human rights.
At this very moment in the Gaza Strip, there is a
grave situation, a humanitarian crisis. Which path is
being taken there — an a priori condemnation or the
setting up of an investigation? The path chosen by this
very body is that of investigation.
Thus, we defend the right of the parties to
equality in addressing issues and problems.
That is why we are expressing our support for the
no-action motion proposed by the delegation of the
Islamic Republic of Iran regarding draft resolution III,
in accordance with rule 74 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly. We urge all delegations to
support that motion and thus to prevent the use of
human rights as a tool for intervention, criminalization
and political pressure. Once again, we urge that such
methods, which would discredit the struggle for human
rights, not continue to be used.

4

Mr. Normandin (Canada): We wish to express
our deep disappointment that a no-action motion has
been presented in the plenary of the General Assembly.
That is an extraordinary step taken to stifle debate and
undermine the jurisdiction and the responsibility of the
Assembly. The draft resolution under consideration
was adopted by the Third Committee after a no-action
motion had been presented and had failed. The draft
resolution was then recommended by the Third
Committee to the General Assembly for our
consideration today.
That is how the work of the Committees of the
General Assembly is intended to proceed: we debate
and discuss and consider the issues in Committee, and
then we reach a decision. And that decision becomes
our collective recommendation to the plenary of the
General Assembly. The use of a no-action motion in
the Assembly is therefore even more egregious than in
Committee.
A no-action motion in the General Assembly after
an identical motion has been attempted and has failed
in the Third Committee, and after the Committee has
recommended the draft resolution to the General
Assembly for adoption, signifies a complete disregard
for the Committee and its decision-making process. It
also undermines the jurisdiction of the General
Assembly.
Of course, we may have differing views on the
substance of a human rights draft resolution, but we
must all agree on the critical importance of maintaining
the integrity of our work in the Third Committee and in
the General Assembly. The Assembly must be
permitted
to
consider
any
draft
resolution
recommended to it by the Committee on its individual
merits.
For all those reasons, Member States have
consistently rejected no-action motions in such
circumstances in the past. We therefore strongly urge
all Member States once again to vote “no” on this
no-action motion in order to allow the General
Assembly to vote on the merits of the draft resolution.
Ms. Nassau (Australia): I have the honour to
make this statement on behalf of Andorra, Argentina,
Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, Palau, the Republic of
Korea, San Marino, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and my own country, Australia.

08-66066

A/63/PV.71

Our delegations are intent on ensuring that United
Nations bodies continue to be forums for addressing
serious human rights situations wherever they occur,
and we are strongly opposed to the stifling of debate on
such issues. Regardless of their subject matter, all such
draft resolutions should be reviewed and actioned on
their merits.
A no-action motion on this draft resolution had
already been presented in Third Committee and had
failed. The draft resolution was then adopted by the
Committee and recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption. The introduction of yet another no-action
motion only serves to undermine the credibility and the
jurisdiction of the Third Committee and of the General
Assembly.
For those reasons, we oppose the use of no-action
motions. We call on all others to join us and vote “no”
on this no-action motion.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We requested the floor to
support the no-action motion on draft resolution III,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”.
Pakistan believes that all human rights are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated.
It is, however, important that the international human
rights agenda be addressed in a fair and balanced
manner. That can be done only through an approach
based on dialogue and cooperation.
A lesson that emerges from the results of countryspecific resolutions is that such resolutions do not
encourage better promotion of human rights. In
addition, they reflect the politicization of human rights
issues instead of encouraging cooperation among
nations on the promotion and protection of human
rights throughout the world. Another problem of
country-specific resolutions is that they create artificial
barriers to equal and constructive dialogue between the
Member State and the relevant international human
rights mechanism.
Pakistan fully supports the no-action motion on
draft resolution III and will vote in favour. We also
strongly urge all delegations to support the motion.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
the motion submitted by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran that no action be taken on
draft resolution III. A recorded vote on the motion has
been requested.

08-66066

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Central African Republic, China, Comoros,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Antigua and Barbuda, Benin, Bhutan, Brazil,
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada,

5

A/63/PV.71

Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan, Lesotho, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sierra Leone,
United Republic of Tanzania
The motion of no action was rejected by 84 votes
to 69, with 25 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): In
accordance with the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, my delegation would like to present two
oral amendments to draft resolution III.
The amendments are to delete operative
paragraphs 6 and 7 of the draft resolution. Those
paragraphs would request the Secretary-General to
prepare a report and request continued consideration by
the General Assembly of the human rights situation in
Iran. Given the fact that, under the established
procedures of the United Nations human rights
mechanism, such a report should be prepared by the
relevant rapporteur of the Human Rights Council rather
than by the Secretary-General, and given the fact that
such a report already exists, my delegation requests the
deletion of operative paragraphs 6 and 7.
The whole campaign is of a political nature,
something from which we believe the United Nations
mechanism should be detached and protected. It is a
commonly accepted belief that safeguarding human
rights will never be achievable by political means or by
applying double standards.
Therefore, my delegation would request that the
Assembly proceed with these amendments separately,
and we request delegations to vote in favour of them.
The Acting President: The representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran has submitted oral
amendments to paragraphs 6 and 7 of draft resolution
III, to the effect that they be deleted. In accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly
shall first take a decision on the amendment submitted
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
We will proceed to consider the two amendments
one by one. First, we turn to the amendment on
paragraph 6 of draft resolution III.

6

I shall first give the floor to delegations wishing
to explain their votes before the voting.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): We have asked to take
the floor in explanation of vote before the vote to
explain why we will be voting against the proposed
amendment. We will be doing so for a number of
reasons, both procedural and substantive.
Procedurally, we express our surprise and
disappointment that these last-minute amendments
have been put forward. Proposing an amendment when
concerns have not been previously raised at any point
in the Third Committee, despite numerous
opportunities to do so, is highly irregular.
Substantively, on the amendment related to
paragraph 6, we question the reasons behind the
opposition to that paragraph. In previous debates, we
often heard the representative of Iran argue that
information with respect to the situation of human
rights in his country and upon which our deliberations
are based is inaccurate or out of date. Well, we can
think of no better way to resolve this debate in a
balanced and accurate fashion than to ask the
Secretary-General to provide an update on the human
rights situation in the country.
I would also recall that last year the General
Assembly rejected a similar late amendment in plenary
meeting. So, for all those procedural and substantive
reasons that I have outlined, we should do the same
this year. We will thus be voting “no” on the proposed
amendment, and we encourage all other delegations to
do the same.
Ms. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): We are
taking the floor to explain the reasons for which we
will vote against the proposed amendment. The Third
Committee had the opportunity to consider the draft
resolution that is before the General Assembly for
adoption. Delegations then had an opportunity to
express their views and present amendments, which
they did not do.
Whatever the case may be, we believe that the
lack of progress on the situation of human rights in
Iran fully justifies that the report of the SecretaryGeneral be given follow-up and that the General
Assembly take up the situation once again at its next
session.

08-66066

A/63/PV.71

That is why we will vote against the proposed
amendment and also against the second proposed
amendment.
The Acting President: We shall first take a vote
on the oral amendment to paragraph 6 of draft
resolution III. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Bolivia,
Brunei
Darussalam, Central African Republic, China,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,
Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cape Verde, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada,

08-66066

Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Suriname, Thailand, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
The oral amendment was rejected by 72 votes to
50, with 50 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Panama advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: We turn next to the oral
amendment to operative paragraph 7 of draft resolution
III.
(spoke in French)
I call on the representative of Canada, who
wishes to speak in explanation of vote.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): Once again on this
amendment, we will be voting against for both
procedural and substantive reasons. I have already
outlined the procedural reasons in my previous
intervention, so I will not repeat them. They have to do
with the introduction of a late amendment in plenary
meeting, which is highly irregular.
On the substance, through paragraph 1 of this
draft resolution the General Assembly expresses its
deep concern at the situation of human rights in the
Islamic Republic of Iran. In paragraph 3 it calls upon
the Islamic Republic of Iran to address those concerns
and take specific measures, and in paragraph 6 it
requests an update from the Secretary-General on the
situation, to be presented at the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly.
Having expressed its deep concern on an
important issue, called for specific action and
requested a report for the sixty-fourth session, it would
be highly contradictory for the General Assembly not
to continue its examination of the issue at its next
session.
For all those reasons, both procedural and
substantive, we will vote “no” on this amendment and
we encourage all delegations to do the same.

7

A/63/PV.71

The Acting President: We shall now take a
decision on the proposed amendment to paragraph 7 of
draft resolution III. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Bolivia,
Brunei
Darussalam, Central African Republic, China,
Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mauritania, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman,
Pakistan, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Somalia, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas,
Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Vanuatu
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,
Benin, Bhutan, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cape Verde, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,

8

Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Suriname, Thailand, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
The oral amendment was rejected by 71 votes to
50, with 51 abstentions.
The Acting President: Since the oral
amendments submitted by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on operative paragraphs 6 and
7 have not been adopted, we shall proceed to take a
decision on draft resolution III as a whole. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, El
Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Latvia,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Vanuatu
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, China,
Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian

08-66066

A/63/PV.71

Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Côte
d’Ivoire,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lesotho,
Mali,
Mauritius,
Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and
Principe, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Suriname, Swaziland, Thailand, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Zambia
Draft resolution III was adopted by 69 votes to
54, with 57 abstentions (resolution 63/191).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Belize advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. Pak Tok Hun (Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea reaffirms its position of
non-recognition and total rejection of the resolution
just passed against our Republic (resolution 63/190).
The resolution is a product of political conspiracy
by the main sponsors aimed at changing the ideology
and the system of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. It is nothing but the culmination of
politicization, selectivity and double standards in
dealing with human rights issues. The promotion and
protection of human rights the sponsors are talking
about is nothing but a pretext for interference in our
internal affairs. Their real intention is a change: a
change in the ideology, a change in the system and a
change in the Government in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

08-66066

Even though such resolutions, which have no
value and no meaning whatsoever, are continuously
adopted, people-centred socialism in our country, and
our style, which were chosen and built by our people
themselves, is and will be invincible.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 64.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee
(A/63/430/Add.4)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the Third
Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 64?
It was so decided.
(e) Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities
Report of the Third Committee
(A/63/430/Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, as orally
corrected by the Rapporteur this morning to update the
status of the Optional Protocol. The draft resolution is
entitled “Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto”. The
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
the draft resolution, as orally corrected?
The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 63/192).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 64?
It was so decided.

9

A/63/PV.71

Agenda item 97
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/431)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it four draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 26 of its report and one draft
decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
27 of the same report. We will now take a decision on
draft resolutions I to IV, one by one, and on the draft
decision.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Preparations for the
Twelfth United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
63/193).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Improving the coordination of efforts against
trafficking in persons”. The Third Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/194).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Strengthening the United Nations Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, in
particular its technical cooperation capacity”. The
Third Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/195).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”.
The Third Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
63/196).
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents considered by the
General Assembly in connection with the question of

10

crime prevention and criminal justice”. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt the
draft decision recommended by the Third Committee?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 97?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 98
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/432)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“International cooperation against the world drug
problem”. The Third Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/197).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/433)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The draft decision,
entitled “Programme of work of the Third Committee
for the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly”,
was adopted by the Third Committee. May I take it that
the Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 110.

08-66066

A/63/PV.71

Agenda item 119 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/63/434)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 23 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,

08-66066

Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Canada
The draft decision was adopted by 175 votes to 3,
with 2 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Bahrain advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 119.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like
to thank the Chairman of the Third Committee, His
Excellency Mr. Frank Majoor of the Netherlands, the
other members of the Bureau and all representatives for
a job well done.
The Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee
before it.
Agenda item 45 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/63/L.55)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on this agenda item at its
46th to 50th plenary meetings, on 12 and 13 November
2008. Members will also recall that the Assembly took
action on draft resolution A/63/L.24/Rev.1 under this
agenda item at the 50th plenary meeting and on draft
resolution A/63/L.23 at the 64th plenary meeting, on
5 December 2008.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Singapore, who will introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.55.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): It gives me great
pleasure to introduce, on behalf of Singapore, Egypt

11

A/63/PV.71

and the other sponsors — Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belize, Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland, Israel,
Jordan, Kuwait, Luxembourg, the Maldives, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Oman, Panama, Qatar, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden and Thailand — draft resolution
A/63/L.55, entitled “Supporting the United Nations
International School in enhancing international
education and promoting multicultural interaction”.
The United Nations International School (UNIS),
is an educational institution that is dear to the hearts of
many, past and present, who have served in the United
Nations family here in New York, as well as to our
children. It is as diverse as the United Nations, catering
for 1,500 students from 130 countries, and employs a
multinational and multicultural staff representing 70
countries.
UNIS remains a valuable asset to the United
Nations community and has become a crucible of
multiculturalism and multilingualism. For instance,
although English is the primary medium of instruction,
all students study French or Spanish and have the
additional options of learning Arabic, Chinese,
German, Italian, Japanese and Russian. These represent
a wider selection than the number of official languages
in the United Nations. The school strives to foster and
promote an appreciation of the diverse cultural
heritages of its student body, guided by the spirit and
the ideals of the United Nations Charter.
While UNIS is self-sufficient in terms of its
operational needs, it is currently undertaking a fundraising campaign for the renovation of its ageing and
outdated facilities and infrastructure. After five years
of planning, the School’s Board of Trustees has
initiated a phased renovation programme to upgrade
the nearly 40-year-old campus.

12

The main intent of this draft resolution is to assist
UNIS symbolically and, we hope, substantively in its
fund-raising efforts. The adoption of this draft
resolution would send a strong signal to the School’s
non-governmental donors that Member States fully
support the School and its mission, and would provide
a basis on which UNIS could also approach
Governments and other non-governmental entities that
might be willing and able to contribute. I would like to
emphasize that the draft resolution itself does not
oblige any Member State to contribute financially to
UNIS, but only urges such a course of action for those
in a position to do so.
We have been heartened by the strong level of
support that this draft resolution has received, and we
are grateful to the countries that have agreed to sponsor
it. Given the nature and the intent of the draft
resolution, it is our strong hope that Member States
will unanimously support this worthy cause and that
the draft resolution can be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/63/L.55, entitled
“Supporting the United Nations International School in
enhancing international education and promoting
multicultural interaction”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/63/L.55
(resolution 63/198).

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 45.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

08-66066
