General Assembly-Forty-first Session

168

l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the International Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination; 44
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the number ofStates that
have ratified the Convention or acceded thereto;
3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification
of or accession to the Convention on a universal basis and
implementation ofits provisions are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Second Decade to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination; 45

4. Requests those States that have not yet become parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Calls upon the States parties to the Convention to
consider the possibility of making the declaration provided for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session a report concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance with
Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/105.

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning the reports
of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and resolution 41/104 of 4 December 1986 on the
status of the International Convention on the Elimination
of Ali Forms ofRacial Discrimination, 3 as well as its other
relevant resolutions on the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,46
Mindful of the obligation of ali States parties to comply
fully with the provisions of the Convention,
Aware of the importance of the contribution of the Committee to the implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to the elimination of ali forms of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic
origin,
Further aware of the need to intensify the struggle for
the elimination of racism and racial discrimination
throughout the world, especially the elimination of apartheid in South Africa and Namibia,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General
concerning the work ofthe Committee, 47 which states, inter alia, that the Committee was unable to hold its thirtyfourth session in August 1986 as planned because of the
lack of financia! means, as a consequence of the failure of
many States parties to the Convention to pay their contributions under article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention,
Recalling the appeal made at the tenth meeting of the
States parties to the Convention 48 to States parties to honour their financia! obligations under the Convention, as
well as other appeals on the same subject,
1. Expresses its grave concern that, for the above reason, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Dis-

44 A/41/508.
4 5 Resolution 38/14.
46 /bid., annex.
47 A/41/561 and Add.l.

48 See CERD/SP/24.

crimination was unable to hold its thirty-fourth session
and to carry out its obligations in the course of 1986 and
that, consequently, it could not submit an annual report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session;
2. Commends the Committee for its work in the past
with regard to the implementation of the International
Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial
Discrimination and the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Calls upon States parties to comply fully with their
obligation under article 9, paragraph 1, ofthe Convention
and to submit in due time their periodic reports on measures taken to implement the Convention;
4. Appeals urgently to States parties to fulfil their financia! obligations under article 8, paragraph 6, of the Convention so as to enable the Committee to resume its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To consider making an urgent appeal, by telex, to
States parties to fulfil their financia) obligations with regard to the Committee in order to enable it to resume its
work;
(b) To transmit notices of assessment for 1987 to
States parties as soon as possible, urging them to pay their
contributions;
(e) To explore ali appropriate avenues to enable the
Committee to meet in 1987, even iffor a shorter duration
and at a reduced cost;
(d) To consider convoking, if necessary and within
available resources, a meeting of States parties during the
first regular session of 1987 of the Economic and Social
Council, so that they can take stock of the level of assessed
contributions and make recommendations on the future
work of the Committee;
(e) To report on the situation to the General Assembly
at its forty-second session.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/106.

lmplementation of the World Programme of
Action concerning Disabled Persons and
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its pertinent resolutions, including resolution 37 /52 of 3 December 1982, by which it adopted the
World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons,49 and resolution 37/53 of 3 December 1982, by
which, inter alia, it proclaimed the period 1983-1992 the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 40/31 of 29 November 1985 and
reaffirming ali of its relevant provisions,
Noting with satisfaction the concrete measures already
carried out by the Governments of Member States, the
bodies and organizations of the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations to implement the objectives of the World Programme of Action within the
framework ofthe United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons,
Noting with appreciation the steps taken by the United
Nations system and by non-governmental organizations

40
A/37/351/Add.l
recommendat1on 1 (IV)

and

Add.1/Corr.l,

annex.

sect. VIII,

VI.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

concerned to monitor the implementation of the World
Programme of Action,
Mindful that, since developing countri~s are e~periencing difficulties in mobilizing resourc~, mt~rnattonal c?operation should be encouraged to ass1st nahonal ~fforts m
implementing the World Progr~mme o_f Actton and
achieving the objectives of the Umted Nattons Decade of
Disabled Persons,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General. on
the implementation of the World Program~e of Ac~1on
concerning Disabled Persons and the Umted Nat1ons
Decade of Disabled Persons, so
l. Once again invites Member States to reinforce national committees as focal points for the United Nations
Decade of Disabled Persons, to stimulate activities at the
national level, to mobilize public opinion on behalf of the
Decade, to participate in the implementation of di~ability
projects with regard to the International Year of Dtsabled
Persons and to assist in monitoring and evaluating the implementation ofthe World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Persons;
2. Renews its invitation to all States to give high priority to projects concerning the prevention of disa~i~ities,
rehabilitation and the equalization of the opportumtles of
disabled persons within the framework of bilateral assistance;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to administer donated funds, using them for projects under the
present structure of the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons, 51 and, in addition, to
continue to make new provisions in order to offer a selection of projects to donor countries that might be willing to
finance a particular programme under the "Special Purpose Contributions";
4. Reaffirms that the resources of the Voluntary Fund
should be used to support catalytic and innovative activities in order to implement further the objectives of the
World Programme of Action within the framework ofthe
United Nations Decade ofDisabled Persons, with priority
given, as appropriate, to programmes and projects of the
least developed countries;
5. Invites Governments and non-governmental organizations to continue their contributions to the Voluntary
Fund and calls upon Governments and non-governmental
organizations that have not yet done so to consider contributing to the Fund;
6. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Sweden to
act as host in 1987 to a meeting of experts, consisting
largely of disabled persons, in conformity with the relevant provisions of resolution 39/26 of 23 November 1984;
7. Takes note with appreciation of the status of preparations for the forthcoming meeting of experts;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution and on the out come
of the meeting of experts;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "lmplementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled

50 A/41/605 and Corr. L

51 Formerly known as the United Nations Trust Fund ti.>r the
Intt'rnational Ycar of Disabled Persons.

Persons and United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/107.

Crime prevention and criminal justice

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the need for concerted and systematic efforts by the international community towards more effective crime prevention and criminal ju_stice strateg~es and
policies and, in particular, for _co-ordmated practica!_ action to give effect to the conclustons and recommendatl<;ms
ofthe Seventh United Nations Congress on the Prevent1on
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 52
Recognizing the pivota) role of the United Nations,
through its programme activities and congresses ?n the
prevention of crime and the treat'!1ent of offendt:rs, m promoting the exchange of experttse and expenence and
closer international co-operation in this field,
Recalling its resolution 40/32 of 29 November 1985 and
Economic and Social Council resolutions 1986/10,
1986/11 and 1986/12 of 21 May 1986,
l. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
crime prevention and criminal justice; 53
2. Urges Member States and the Secretary-General to
make every effort to translate into action, as appropriate,
the respective recommendations, policies and conclusions
stemming from the Milan Plan of Action and other relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted unanimously by the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention ofCrime and the Treatment ofOffenders 52 and
to ensure that they are adequately followed up;
3. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations
congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of
offenders and of adequate and timely preparations for
such congresses by the Secretary-General and by Member
States at national, regional and interregional levels;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
first regular session of 1987 to examine in ~epth th~ fun~tioning and programme of work of the Umted Nattons m
crime prevention and criminal justice, taking into account
the results of the review undertaken by the SecretaryGeneraJ;S4
5. Invites Member States and the Secretary-General to
ensure timely preparations for the Eighth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders;
6. Also invites Member States and the SecretaryGeneral, in the performance of his duties, in implementing
the results of the Seventh Congress, to accord priority attention to the forms of crime identified in the Milan Plan
of Action;
7. Requests the United Nations Development Programme and the Department of Technical Co-operation
and Development of the Secretariat to maintain effective
support to the United Nations regional cri_me pr~vent!on
institutes and, in this regard, takes note w1th satlsfact10n

52 See Seve11th United Natio11s Congress on the Preventio,1 ofCrime and
the Treatme111 of Ojfender.1, Milan. 26 August-6 September 1985: report
prepared by 1hr Secretaria/ (llnitcd Nations publication, Sales No.
E.86.IV.J).
5J A/41 /618.
54 See Official Records of the Economic a11d Social Council, 1986,
Supplement No. 5 (E/1986/25), chap. IV.
