s

UNITED
N.ATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24511
2 September 1992
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH/SPANISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3112th meeting, on 2 September 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated 24 August 1992 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/24509)":
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the current situation
of the Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme in Iraq, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's letter of 24 August 1992 to the President of the
Council (S/24509), including its reference to Iraq's failure to renew its
Mernorandum of Understanding with the United Nations.
"The Security Council recalls the staternent of 17 July 1992
(S/24309), in which the Council expressed its profound concern at the
deteriorating conditions affecting the safety and well-being of United
Nations personnel in Iraq. The Council is particularly disturbed by
Iraq's continuing failure to ensure the safety of United Nations
persorinel and the personnel of non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
"The Security Council expresses its concern regarding the conduct
and statements of Iraq on the Inter-Agency Humanitarian Programme which
are inconsistent with the previous Security Council resolutions that
dernand that Iraq cooperate with the international humanitarian
organizations.
"The Security Council affirms that the critical humanitarian needs
of vulnerable groups in Iraq require the speedy conclusion of
arrangernents that would ensure the continuation of the Inter-Agency
Hurnanitarian Programme.
In this respect, the Council considers
unrestricted access throughout the country and the assurance of adequate
security rneasures as essential prerequisites for the effective
irnplernentation of the programme. To this end, the Council fully endorses

90-41888

3446i (E)

020992

020992

I. • •

S/24511

English
Page 2
the Secretary-General's insistence upon appropriate field offices for
participating United Nations agencies and programmes and the continuing
deployment of the United Nations Guards. The Council strongly supports
the Secretary-General's continuing efforts to sustain a United Nations
and NGO humanitarian presence throughout Iraq, and urges him to continue
to use all resources at his disposal to help all those in need in Iraq.
The Council urges Iraq in the strongest possible terms to cooperate with
the United Nations,"
