S/PV.7337

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7337th meeting

Friday, 12 December 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cherif . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chad)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Cai Weiming
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nibishaka
Ms. Mulvein
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14-69003 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1469003*

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: The purpose of the regular reports
that I am requested to provide to the Council is to update
it on developments and progress in the investigation
and prosecution of those alleged to be responsible for
the commission of crimes in Darfur. Following my
Office’s investigations and submissions of evidence
to the judges, and their independent assessment, the
judges have concluded that the evidence provided to
them established that certain individuals in the Sudan
should be brought before the International Criminal
Court to answer charges, including allegations of rape.
To date, none of those individuals have been brought
to justice, and some of them continue to be implicated
in atrocities committed against innocent civilians. It is
becoming increasingly difficult for me to appear before
the Council to update it when all I am doing is repeating
the same things I have said over and over again, most of
which are well known to the Council. Not only does the
situation in Darfur continue to deteriorate, the brutality
with which crimes are being committed has become
more pronounced. Women and girls continue to bear
the brunt of sustained attacks on innocent civilians, but
the Council has yet to be spurred into action. Victims
of rapes are asking themselves how many more women
must be brutally attacked for the Council to appreciate
the magnitude of their plight. In the almost 10 years
that my Office has been reporting to the Council, no
strategic recommendation has ever been provided to
my Office, and neither have there been any discussions
resulting in concrete solutions to the problems we face
in the Darfur situation. We find ourselves in a stalemate
that can only embolden perpetrators to continue with
their brutality.
2/16

12/12/2014

As I have stated previously on many occasions, we
must engage to define a new approach to the Darfur
situation. That requires strategic thinking and changes
from all sides. Faced with an environment where my
Office’s limited resources for investigations are already
overstretched, and given the Council’s lack of foresight
on what should happen in Darfur, I am left with no
choice but to put investigative activities in Darfur on
hold as I shift resources to other urgent cases, especially
those where trial is approaching. It should thus be clear
to the Council that unless there is a change of attitude
and approach to Darfur in the near future, there will
continue to be little or nothing to report to it for the
foreseeable future. The question for the Council to
answer is what meaningful purpose my reporting was
intended to serve and whether that purpose is being
achieved.
The recent allegations of rape of approximately 200
women and girls in Thabit should shock the Council
into action. It is disturbing — and, indeed, it should be
a matter of great concern to the Council — that even as
my Office and the international community intensify
efforts to end the scourge of sexual and gender-based
crimes, the Government of the Sudan has denied full
access to Thabit, thus frustrating full and transparent
investigations into serious allegations of sexual and
gender-based crimes. The Council must demonstrate its
strong condemnation of the failure of the Government
of the Sudan to facilitate access to Thabit and should
demand unimpeded full investigations of these crimes
without delay. It is unacceptable that investigations of
such sensitive and serious crimes were conducted in a
situation in which perpetrators have effective control
over their victims in their homes and in their villages,
and where investigators can offer no protection to
victims after they have left the crime scene.
Following my appeal and the Council’s support
for investigations of allegations of manipulation and
underreporting by the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, I thank the SecretaryGeneral for taking immediate steps to investigate these
allegations and for availing my Office of its executive
summary. It is my Office’s hope that the SecretaryGeneral and the Council will take appropriate measures
to address the issues identified in the report and to
effectively implement its recommendations. It is worth
recalling that United Nations reports are an important
and unique source of public information that my Office
relies on for its activities in most situations, and it is
for this reason that any allegation of manipulation and
14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7337

underreporting becomes a matter of concern to my
Office.

Al-Bashir or other individuals against whom warrants
of arrest have been issued.

We have taken note of Mr. Omer Al-Bashir’s travels
during this reporting period, which have been markedly
fewer. The question of Mr. Al-Bashir’s travels remains
a matter before the Council, as does his status as a
fugitive from justice.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Bensouda
for her briefing.

I share the Council’s deep concern at the serious
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur and its
profoundly negative impact on civilians, in particular
children and women. As the Secretary-General has
rightly pointed out, sexual and gender-based violence
remains a pervasive feature of the conflict in Darfur,
as do attacks on human rights defenders, civil society
members and community leaders. These unacceptable
attacks are aimed at the foundations of communities and
as such are seriously corrosive of any future stability.
As such, they must stop.
Massive new displacements that have taken
place this year have compounded an already fragile
situation. Equally concerning is the ongoing pattern
of aerial bombardments and armed attacks on civilian
populations by militia/Janjaweed, and in particular
the ongoing involvement of the newest iteration of the
Janjaweed, the Rapid Support Forces led by Mohamed
Hamdan. My Office’s factual indicators seem to
illustrate a similar pattern of indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks against civilians by the Rapid
Support Forces.
It is worth repeating once again, as has been done
many times before, that the Government of the Sudan, as
the territorial State, has the primary responsibility and
is fully able to implement the Court’s warrants of arrest
consistent with its sovereign authority. Notwithstanding
this clear responsibility, it has consistently failed to do
so. At the same time, it has also failed to provide any
meaningful measure of justice at the national level.
I remain open to constructively engage with
the Council on the Darfur issue. What is needed is a
dramatic shift in the Council’s approach to arresting
Darfur suspects. I appreciate the efforts being made
to ensure that the Council produces a substantive
response to the eight outstanding communications from
the Court. Likewise, I believe that concerted efforts to
promote cooperation with the Court may help to fill the
gap. In that regard, I call on all States and the Council
to find creative ways to support those among them that
may be most vulnerable to planned visits by Mr. Omer

I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): We thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her frank briefing this morning. We could not
agree more with her analysis. We are grateful that the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) continues to do all that it can in difficult
circumstances to investigate Rome Statute crimes
committed in Darfur since the Council’s referral of the
situation in 2005.
Once again, the Prosecutor has advised us of
allegations that Rome Statute crimes continue to be
committed in the setting of unabated violence in Darfur,
confirming information received in the context of
briefings on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We deplore these acts
and express deep concern at their impact on the civilian
population, and on the peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers seeking to provide assistance.
On 19 November, the Council expressed concern
at reports that hundreds of women had been raped
in Thabit in North Darfur on 30 and 31 October (see
SC/11658) and called on the Government of the Sudan
to investigate the allegations. We note that the report
of the enquiries conducted by the Sudan’s Office of
the Prosecutor General for Darfur Crimes has now
been circulated to the Council. The report’s advice
that the criminal investigation undertaken by the
Prosecutor General and his aides lasted only four hours
is concerning, as are statements in the report that “no
such grave crimes could have happened while men
would not move a finger or have some reaction” and
“from their demeanour and psychological posturing,
there appeared no signs of rape or sexual violence”.
Taking into account the well-known challenges
associated with the investigation of crimes of sexual
violence, in relation to which victims and witnesses
may be unwilling to come forward, we urge the Sudan
to ensure that its domestic criminal investigations
meet international standards. The Sudan must also
cooperate fully with UNAMID to enable a thorough
and independent investigation of these allegations,
including by providing full and unimpeded access to
the relevant locations. More generally, we reiterate the
importance of accurate and comprehensive reporting

14-690033/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by UNAMID, which is critical to the work of both the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court.
While it continues to be important that the Council
provide strong support to political reconciliation efforts
in the Sudan, the ongoing violence demonstrates
the challenges this process faces and, therefore, the
importance of ensuring that those responsible for such
violence are held to account. Without justice, it will
be difficult to bring an inclusive and lasting peace to
Darfur.
Australia is acutely aware that this is the twentieth
briefing by the Prosecutor to the Council on the Darfur
referral. Those briefings have provided a consistent
message. The ICC cannot achieve its mandate — a
mandate given to the Court by the Council — unless
the Darfur suspects are arrested and transferred to The
Hague. We are deeply concerned that the Sudan has
still taken no meaningful steps to apprehend the four
individuals against whom there are outstanding arrest
warrants, and that other States in a position to do so
have not done so either. We take note of the Prosecutor’s
advice in her report that her Office will soon file a
motion with the Pre-Trial Chamber requesting another
formal finding of non-cooperation against the Sudan.
In this context, we remind the Sudan and other
parties to the conflict in Darfur of their obligation
under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate with the
Court. States parties to the Rome Statute also have
cooperation obligations under part IX of the Statute.
The ICC Pre-Trial Chamber clearly concluded that
Head of State immunity does not apply in the current
circumstances, and we remind all other States, as well
as concerned regional and international organizations,
that the Council has urged them to cooperate fully with
the Court. We also call in this context for the strict
implementation of the Secretary-General’s guidelines
on non-essential contact with persons subject to a
warrant of arrest.
The Prosecutor’s has asked us again this morning
what amount of suffering Darfur’s victims should endure
before the Council will act decisively. The answer to this
question for Australia is clear. The Council has failed
the victims of Darfur. It is not, however, too late to take
action. As we have said before, sanctions committees
should give consideration to ICC arrest warrants with
a view to ensuring consistency between sanctions lists
and ICC indictments. The Council should also establish
a forum for legal experts to discuss how to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and the Court.
4/16

12/12/2014

Our most pressing immediate task, however, is to
respond to the ICC’s eight unanswered letters regarding
non-cooperation in relation to the situation in Darfur.
To have completely ignored eight successive letters sent
to the Council in accordance with the Rome Statute is
an indictment of the Council’s commitment to ending
impunity for serious international crimes. After
two years as a Security Council member, Australia’s
conviction that the fight against impunity is essential
to the maintenance of international peace and security
has only strengthened. Our support for the ICC and our
efforts to ensure accountability will continue.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing and for her twentieth report to the
Security Council. We recall that in the Prosecutor’s
briefing of June (see S/PV.7199), the Secretary-General
had been asked to investigate the alleged manipulation of
reporting by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and of the cover-up of
crimes committed against civilians and peacekeepers.
We commend the Secretary-General for his urgent
action in launching a review into the allegations. We
note that after examining relevant material, the review
team found no evidence to support the allegations.
Concerning the allegations of mass rape in the
village of Thabit, North Darfur, we have carefully
studied the report of the Sudan’s Office of the Prosecutor
General for Darfur Crimes and we have no reason to
doubt its credibility. We also note that UNAMID issued
a press release on 10 November indicating that the
Mission’s team that went to Thabit found no evidence to
support allegations of mass rape. We nevertheless urge
the Sudanese authorities to continue to cooperate with
UNAMID and to grant the Mission access to Thabit for
further investigations.
Nigeria commends the Office of the Prosecutor
for its continuous monitoring of a number of trends in
Darfur that could constitute crimes under the Rome
Statute. We unequivocally condemn acts by any party
to the Darfur conflict that target civilians. We also
condemn acts on aid workers and peacekeepers.
The violence in Darfur has had a negative impact
on the well-being of the people living in the region.
Millions have been displaced and are facing crisis
levels of food insecurity. We are deeply disturbed by
the difficulties that humanitarian actors, including the
United Nations, are facing in terms of gaining access to
those in need. We urge all concerned to lift restrictions

14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on humanitarian agencies in order to facilitate the
delivery of aid to those in dire need.
Finally, we stress that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Darfur. We therefore call on
all parties to lay down their arms and embrace dialogue
as the path to lasting peace and stability in the region.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We take note of the twentieth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation of the investigation in Darfur. We are
grateful to Ms. Bensouda for her comments on the
document.
The military, political and humanitarian situation
in Darfur remains complex. Intercommunal conflict
is the main source of the violence and the significant
increase in the number of internally displaced persons.
We welcome the active efforts of the Sudanese
authorities to appease the warring tribes. The escalation
of the intertribal clashes has been driven by a struggle
for resources caused, in large part, by the economic
hardships suffered by the people of Darfur and of the
Sudan as a whole. Improvements in the situation will
therefore greatly depend on the timely implementation
of the decisions of the International Donor Conference
for Reconstruction and Development in Darfur, held
in 2013 in Doha, to allocate billions of dollars of
assistance to Darfur’s development needs, and on the
canceling of the foreign debt and the lifting of the
United States economic sanctions against the Sudan
that were imposed via circumvention of the Security
Council.
The resolution of humanitarian issues lies in
normalizing the military and political situation in the
region. We favour the timely involvement of the Darfur
rebels in the peace process on the basis of the Security
Council’s approval of the Doha document. Sadly,
due to obstruction by the insurgents, the November
negotiations between the Government and the rebels
in Addis Ababa ended in failure. In that context, it is
high time to think about introducing targeted Security
Council sanctions against the heads of the hard-line
Darfur rebel groups.
The report touches on the theme of alleged mass
rape in Thabit, North Darfur. We recall that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) conducted an inspection in Thabit,
collecting testimony from 70 people among the alleged
victims and witnesses. The Sudanese authorities also

S/PV.7337

carried out their own investigation, as requested by
the Council, based on the primary role of Khartoum in
shedding light on all of the circumstances of the alleged
events there. Not a single victim or witness was found
by either the Sudanese authorities or UNAMID. The
illogical nature of the scurrilous claims bandied about
by the anti-Khartoum broadcasting of Radio Dabanga
is borne out by the fact that many servicemen deployed
near Thabit have local wives. Incidentally, there have
been demonstrations by residents there who were
angered by rumours casting aspersions on the dignity
of the local women.
It is to be noted that Radio Dabanga, which spread
the rumours on the mass sexual violence in Thabit,
refuses to cooperate or contact the United Nations
officials there. We believe that this is all a part of the
information war and an attempt to step up pressure on
the Sudan.
The report welcomes the swift response of the
Secretary-General to the statements of a former
UNAMID press officer to the effect that the Mission
leadership allegedly deliberately covered up crimes
against civilians and peacekeepers in Darfur. We have
every confidence in the conclusions of the Secretariat
on the baselessness of such claims. What also stands out
are attempts to ignite a scandal that, for some reason,
are specifically focused on UNAMID. As noted by the
Secretary-General, problems with accountability exist
in other missions too. We need only recall the cover-ups
and embellished information issuing from the former
leadership of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.
The endless violence in Darfur is naturally a cause
of concern. We therefore urge the Court to undertake
an objective and impartial assessment of events. The
ability of the Court to carry out impartial investigations
into alleged crimes by all parties to the conflict is
of key significance to strengthening its authority.
Undoubtedly, the job of the Court, as an independent
body of international criminal justice, is to carry out
judicial functions. However the Court’s actions in
implementing its mandate in the Darfur investigation
should not be carried out independent of general
efforts to normalize the situation in the long-suffering
province.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s comments regarding
States and the Court in the matter of Darfur. The current
situation shows once again how important the support
of States is to ensuring the successful functioning of the

14-690035/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Court. Moreover, in assessing the level of compliance
by any country with its commitments in that sphere, it
must be recalled that the level of compliance can vary
in each specific case. As to calls for so-called follow-up
action by the Council in terms of the referral of cases to
the Court, our position has been stated repeatedly and
is well known.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I shall
begin by thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing
today and for presenting the twentieth report to the
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Jordan reiterates its continued support for the
ICC, based on its belief in the principles on which it
was founded. The ICC is a cornerstone of efforts to
promote international criminal justice, end impunity
for the perpetrators of the most serious crimes,
maintain international peace and security and promote
the rule of law. The Rome Statute has provided
effective mechanisms to combat such crimes and
ensure international criminal justice. It also allowed
the court proceedings to take place with integrity and
impartiality, and in a manner in which the rights of the
accused, including their human rights, were respected.
Darfur was the first case referred by the Security
Council to the ICC, which broke ground in applying
international criminal law, fighting impunity and
giving victims a sense of justice — all through the close
cooperation between the ICC and the Security Council.
However, the relationship between the Council and the
ICC must not be limited to the referral of cases, the
holding of debates or receiving public briefings from
the Prosecutor. The Security Council must cooperate
with the ICC in implementing its mandate but without
interfering with its proceedings. In that regard, Jordan
emphasizes the importance of complete cooperation
with the Prosecutor by all nations and parties to
address the shortcomings highlighted in the report of
the Prosecutor.
Jordan feels deeply concerned about the content of
the report of the Prosecutor with respect to allegations
of ongoing serious crimes in Darfur, including aerial
bombing and other attacks affecting civilians, sexual
crimes, gender-based violence, crimes against human
rights activists, members of civil society and local
community leaders, as well as attacks against aid
workers and peacekeepers. Jordan reiterates the need
for the Office of the Prosecutor to continue working
to collect evidence on the new allegations of crimes
6/16

12/12/2014

in Darfur, despite the obstacles that the Prosecutor
mentioned in her briefing.
Working for justice and accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur is not only an ethical duty but a
cornerstone and pillar for the restoration of stability and
security in the region and the achievement of lasting
peace there.
Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and for her
briefing today.
The United Kingdom very much regrets that the
situation in Darfur has not improved since the Prosecutor
last addressed the Council in June (S/PV.7199). As her
report highlights, the ongoing aerial bombardments,
ground attacks, sexual and gender-based crimes
against civilians and the arbitrary arrest and detention
of opposition and civil society figures present a deeply
worrying picture. It has been reported that over 430,000
individuals were newly displaced between January and
November. We welcome the efforts of former President
Mbeki but are very concerned that the latest round
of talks between the Government of the Sudan and
representatives of the armed opposition groups from
Darfur did not lead to a breakthrough. We urge all
parties to resume talks at the earliest opportunity.
The United Kingdom condemns the attacks that
tragically resulted in the deaths of four staff members
of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) over the reporting period and
joins with the Prosecutor in calling on the Government
of the Sudan to take the necessary steps to maintain
security for UNAMID personnel. UNAMID remains a
key partner in monitoring the human rights situation in
Darfur. In that context, it is important that UNAMID
investigate and report fully on any incident. We
welcome the establishment of the Cooper review to
examine allegations of past underreporting and believe
it is vital that its findings are shared transparently,
including through wider publication. As we have said
in the Council, it is vital that UNAMID ensures that all
future information is shared with its stakeholders.
We also reiterate the call to allow UNAMID
unfettered access to fully investigate allegations of
mass rape in Thabit. They are serious allegations, and
we note with concern the Office of the Prosecutor’s
view that an atmosphere of intimidation has arisen
around the situation. It is vital that the full facts around
the incident are established.

14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Prosecutor has also highlighted the immunity
enjoyed by the Rapid Support Forces as part of the
National Intelligence and Security Service. That has
also been highlighted by the previous United Nations
independent expert on the human rights situation in
the Sudan, who recommended the need to repeal or
amend the 2010 National Security Act to ensure that the
powers of Service are in conformity with the Sudan’s
international human rights obligations.
We note that 31 March 2015 will mark the tenth
anniversary of the referral of the situation in Darfur
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
Resolution 1593 (2005) placed the Government of the
Sudan under an obligation to cooperate fully with and
provide any necessary assistance to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its Prosecutor. Over
the past decade, the Government of the Sudan has
comprehensively and conspicuously failed to meet that
obligation. By protecting those individuals indicted by
the ICC, it continues to obstruct the pursuit of justice
for the victims of crimes carried out in Darfur. The
United Kingdom repeats its call on the Government of
the Sudan to meet its obligations by fully cooperating
with the ICC, particularly with respect to enforcement
of all arrest warrants issued by the Court. The United
Kingdom also urges all States to cooperate fully with
the Court and the Prosecutor, in particular with respect
to the travel of ICC indictees and recalls the obligations
of ICC States parties to implement the Court’s arrest
warrants.
Where States fail to comply with their obligations,
it is important that the Security Council respond. The
United Kingdom regrets the fact that the Council has
so far been unable to agree to responses to letters from
the President of the Court relating to the obligation
to cooperate with the Court. We call once again for
all Council members to agree to timely and effective
follow-up to reports of non-cooperation with the Court.
That action should start with responses to the letters
the Council has received. It is the responsibility of the
Council to assist the Court in fulfilling the mandate we
gave it when we referred the situation in Darfur to the
Prosecutor almost 10 years ago.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the presentation
of her twentieth report on the situation in Darfur and
the judicial proceedings in progress.

S/PV.7337

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of
the referral to the International Criminal Court by
the Security Council. That, however, is no cause for
celebration. Indeed, the arrest warrants issued by the
ICC against five individuals accused of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and, for one of them, genocide,
have still not been executed. It is incumbent upon the
Government of the Sudan in the first instance to comply
with resolution 1593 (2005) and fully implement the
arrest warrants. It continues to refuse to do so and it
has failed to take action to fight effectively against
impunity at the national level. That is unacceptable.
It is also with great concern that we note the
cases of non-cooperation with the Court and the fact
that the President of the Sudan, Omer Al-Bashir,
continues to make trips to the region. We hope that the
Security Council will be able to respond to the formal
communications that the Court addressed to it to report
these cases of non-cooperation. The Security Council
must ensure the effective monitoring of cases that it has
referred to the ICC. It is a question of credibility and
effectiveness.
The security and humanitarian situation in Darfur
has significantly deteriorated in 2014. The settlement
of the crisis requires a political solution. The national
dialogue announced by the Sudanese President offers
an opportunity, provided that conditions conducive
to an inclusive dialogue are created. However, that is
hardly the case now.
Ms. Bensouda’s report gives an insight into the
crimes perpetrated in Darfur — crimes that may fall
under the Rome Statute. For example, there are aerial
bombardments, attacks against civilians, humanitarian
actors and peacekeepers, as well as gender-based and
sexual violence against women and girls. We are very
concerned about the role of the Rapid Support Forces
who commit abuses with absolute impunity and in
whose ranks the presence of children has been noted.
We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC
to continue to closely monitor the situation in Darfur, to
gather information on the alleged crimes and to consider
the introduction of new investigations on the situation
in Darfur. We realize that this is not easy, given the lack
of cooperation of the Sudanese Government and the
inability of the ICC officials to travel to conflict zones.
We need to continue our discussions to find ways to
remedy this unacceptable situation.

14-690037/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian actors continue
to be denied access to conflict zones where people need
emergency assistance and where violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are being
committed. We deplore the fact that UNAMID has
still not got obtained free and unhindered access to the
village of Thabit, in North Darfur, which would have
allowed the Mission to verify the allegations of rape
committed against nearly 200 women and girls on 30 and
31 October. A thorough and impartial investigation into
those allegations to establish responsibility must be
undertaken.
Lastly, with regard to the alleged manipulation
of the information contained in UNAMID reports,
I recall that Luxembourg was among the Council
members that supported the ICC Prosecutor in June
when she proposed that the Secretary-General expedite
a comprehensive, independent and public inquiry to
shed light on those allegations. We note the conclusions
that the internal investigation team established by the
Secretary-General submitted to the Council. We hope
to have the comprehensive report as soon as possible.
Everything must be done to ensure that past mistakes
are not repeated. It is essential that the Security Council
and the ICC have the most complete and credible
information possible on the violence committed in
Darfur.
I will conclude by citing the conviction that
Luxembourg has consistently reaffirmed throughout its
mandate as an elected member of the Council. The time
is right to do so, while the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
is taking place at United Nations Headquarters. It is
our conviction that the onus is on the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibilities to end impunity, including
by providing full support to the ICC. The fact that
the Security Council can refer situations to the ICC
makes it a key player in establishing responsibility. The
International Criminal Court needs the decisive support
of the Security Council to meet the needs of the many
victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. We must not forget that for those victims, the
International Criminal Court is often the only recourse
available to make their voices heard and to stand up for
their rights.
Mr. Cai Weiming (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her
briefing. We have seen no major changes in the Darfur

8/16

12/12/2014

situation recently. We support the ongoing efforts of
the Government of the Sudan to advance the political
reconciliation process, and we welcome the joint efforts
of the Government of the Sudan and some rebel groups
concerned to promote the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We appreciate the fact
that the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur have facilitated the holding of
negotiations in Ethiopia between the Government of the
Sudan and the Darfur rebels concerned. We hope that
the parties will demonstrate pragmatism and try to find
common ground towards a comprehensive political
solution to the Darfur issue.
The issue of Darfur is multifaceted and complex.
China has always believed that a fundamental basis
for work in other areas, such as promoting justice, can
be established only by promoting steady progress in
the political process. The overall goal is to achieve a
comprehensive solution to the Darfur issue.
The position of China concerning the handling of
the Darfur issue by the International Criminal Court
remains unchanged. With regard to the media reports
of mass rape in Thabit, China has taken note of the
recent report and conclusions of the Prosecutor General
for Darfur Crimes and the report of UNAMID’s
investigation. We hope that UNAMID will strengthen
its communication with the Government of the Sudan
to find a proper settlement of the matter and avoid
disrupting the Darfur peace process.
Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): I too should like to
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for presenting the
twentieth report of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the Security
Council. We take note of the recent judicial activities
undertaken by the Court, the ongoing Office activities,
including the monitoring of current allegations, as well
as the status of cooperation by the Government of the
Sudan and other parties.
Since February 2009, the African Heads of State
and Government have continuously requested that the
proceedings against President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir
be deferred, in accordance with article 16 of the Rome
Statute. The African Union (AU), while reiterating
its commitment to the fight against impunity, has
stressed that the search for justice should be pursued
in a way that does not impede or jeopardize efforts
aimed at promoting lasting peace. Subsequently, the
African Union has decided that all African countries
14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

receiving President Al-Bashir since his indictment did
so in conformity with the decision of the African Union
summit and were pursuing the same goal of peace in the
region. Therefore, we believe that the continued reports
of non-cooperation by African States impede the
tireless efforts of the region to achieve peace in Darfur.
We are also convinced that a concerted approach among
the United Nations, the AU and the Government of the
Sudan is the best way to ensure accountability while
addressing the conflict in Darfur.
With regard to the continued monitoring of the
current allegations, we note that most of the cases
indicated in the report of the Prosecutor of the ICC have
been discussed following the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2014/852). In this vein, we
would like to reiterate our concerns on the continued
instability in the Darfur region, as well as the lack of
a political settlement to end the conflict, a situation
which of course continues to negatively impact the
lives of innocent civilians. We appreciate that the
investigation into the allegations of the manipulation
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) reports have been conducted and
the findings have been presented to the Council. We
look forward to their implementation.
Rwanda also takes this opportunity to reiterate
it strong condemnation of the repeated attacks on
peacekeepers of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. I recall that more than
60 peacekeepers, including from my country, have been
killed since the beginning of the mission in December
2007. We urge the Government of the Sudan to work
closely with UNAMID in investigating those attacks in
order to bring the perpetrators to justice. With that said,
we are aware that, on 18 September, the special criminal
court on the events in Darfur in Al Fasher delivered
the final judgement on the case of four persons accused
of attacking, robbing and raping a female UNAMID
police officer on 10 April in Al Fashir, North Darfur.
We wish to see more progress in the investigation
of other human rights violations and crimes, including
those mentioned in the report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court. Moreover, it is important
to emphasize that the Government of the Sudan has
the primary responsibility to ensure the protection
of its people and to take concrete steps in addressing
the persistent intercommunal violence in Darfur. We
equally reject violence against civilians by armed

S/PV.7337

groups and the use of civilians as a human shield in the
fighting against the Government force.
As we are talking about justice, we believe that
the international community should adopt a balanced
approach between peace and justice in order to better
address the conflict in Darfur. At present, further to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the launching
of the national dialogue by the Government of the
Sudan earlier this year presents another opportunity
for peace in Darfur. The African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, with its Chairperson President
Thabo Mbeki, is working very hard to ensure the
success of that initiative. However, without goodwill
from the parties and strong commitment and support
from the international community, that initiative is
unlikely to succeed. Therefore, it is important that the
parties negotiate in good faith with the goal of ending
the suffering of their people. It is also important that
the international community, including the Council,
use its maximum influence and pressure on the parties
in order to ensure the participation of all parties in the
process.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our continued
commitment, as a troop- and police-contributing
country to UNAMID and as a member State of the
African Union, to work towards a sustainable peace,
genuine reconciliation and accountability for the most
serious crimes in Darfur.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I will not speak today of hunger or poverty or the
ineffectiveness of the Council’s sanctions, nor of
the need to review unilateral sanctions, nor of the
obscene proliferation of weapons, nor of the silencing
of traditional cultures — we have a hard time
understanding how traditional cultures contradict the
rule of law and human rights principles. I will also not
speak about the women raped while fetching water, nor
about children in refugee camps who only eat twice a
week. Instead, I will speak speak only about the report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
Argentina would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for presenting her twentieth report pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). Argentina, like all of us, has kept track:
there have been 20 reports. When it comes to the
situation in Darfur, we often say that we are concerned.
When we talk about Council referrals to the Court, we
say that we are deeply concerned. Argentina laments
the fact that human rights violations continue and
that international humanitarian law is being violated

14-690039/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

12/12/2014

in Darfur. At the beginning of this year, in resolution
2138 (2014), the Council stated that it was imperative
that all parties refrained from committing further
violations and abuses of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. And yet we see just how
necessary it is to lift the obstacles that continue to exist
so that the work of the Group of Experts and the work
of African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) can move ahead effectively
and consistently. The Council also called upon the
Government of the Sudan to ensure accountability for
serious crimes.

and regional organizations to cooperate with the Court.
A key aspect of cooperation is the execution of arrest
warrants. Currently, the arrest warrants that have
been issued by the Court since 2007 for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity continue without
having been executed. It is unfortunate that other States
have set aside their obligations of cooperating with the
Court, including some non-parties to the Rome Statute,
for combating impunity is not limited to the parties to
the Rome Statute. Argentina therefore again urges all
States and regional and subregional organizations to
cooperate with the Court.

Argentina again thanks the Prosecutor for her
dedication to monitoring the crimes currently being
committed, including different types of attacks on
civilians, attacks on humanitarian and UNAMID
workers and forced displacement of civilians — numbers
that are difficult to comprehend — the proliferation
of violence against women for the mere fact that they
are women, and the sexual and gender-based violence
taking place. The latter has become a key feature of
almost all of the conflicts that we address in the
Security Council. That is also the case in Darfur. Is
this something new, or are we becoming emboldened to
making visible the fact that our bodies — the bodies of
women — have always been used as a weapon of war
and object of contempt?

The matter of cooperation is directly linked to the
follow-up that the Council undertakes with regard to its
referrals to the International Criminal Court.

I should like to recall that it was less than a month
ago that information was referred to the Security Council
concerning massive violations in Thabit, North Darfur.
The Government of the Sudan was called upon to meet
its responsibility to allow UNAMID unrestricted access
to investigate the events. We also want to encourage
the Prosecutor to continue to investigate all such acts
that can be deemed crimes under the Rome Statute. In
particular, we thank the Office of the Prosecutor for its
policy paper on sexual, sexist and gender-based crimes.

I am being repetitive, as is the Prosecutor of the
Court. It is normal that the Prosecutor recall in her
report the communications from the Court to the
Council, of which there have been eight to date. It is
alarming that none of these has received a response or
led to action by the Council. In presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, we the Council committed to undertake
effective monitoring of referrals to the Court. We made
a commitment to do so. To date, however, despite the
efforts by many members of the Council, it has not been
possible to reach an agreement on a mechanism to carry
out such monitoring. I think it took René Descartes less
time to compose his Discourse on the Method than it
will take us to agree on the monitoring mechanism.
At the open debate on 23 October convened by my
delegation (see S/PV.7285), it was once again clear that
support from States Members of the United Nations
for effective follow-up on referrals was overwhelming.
We therefore urge once again that the Council dedicate
themselves to come up with a monitoring mechanism.
This organ cannot ignore its own decisions. It cannot
ignore its referrals to the Court.

There is another crucial aspect that the Prosecutor
frequently underscores in the reports on Darfur.
Of course, that has to do with cooperation. The
Government of the Sudan, pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), should cooperate with the Court and provide
all the necessary assistance. But that goes not just for
the Government of the Sudan. As this is our last time
to address the matter of the International Criminal
Court, we would like to take this opportunity to recall
that States parties to the Rome Statute are compelled
to cooperate with the Court. However, the Council’s
resolution also urges all Members of the United Nations

I shall now turn to two matters having to do with
the Secretariat. The first has to do with the SecretaryGeneral’s guidelines on non-essential contacts by staff
of the Organization with persons subject to arrest by
order of the International Criminal Court. Not as a
State party to the Rome Statute but as a member of the
Organization, Argentina, with all due respect, urges the
Secretary-General to ensure strict application of the
guidelines. That should include a rigorous assessment
of just how such contacts are essential for compliance
with United Nations mandates. Any contact found
to be essential by such an assessment must be made

10/16

14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

known to the Court prior to that contact taking place.
We cannot continue with this culture of suspicion:
there must be reporting. The Secretary-General should
also inform the Member States, who are the ones that
approve the mandates. Such measures are necessary
because contacts with United Nations officials, in
particular high-level officials and officials on the
ground, including in peacekeeping operations, could
have an impact on the Court as well as undermine the
credibility of the United Nations.
With regard to the manner in which the information
from UNAMID in the Prosecutor’s nineteenth report
concerning crimes committed against civilians,
especially women peacekeeping staff, could have been
treated, Argentina appreciates the note from SectaryGeneral. The conclusions summarized in his note
dated 29 October are worrisome. We believe that it is
essential for there to be follow-up to the information
that has been investigated and to the conclusions,
both with regard to UNAMID and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. It would also be desirable for
the Security Council to have access to the full report.
Why should we not? We urge Member States to follow
up on these matters, including at the Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
As with each time that the Council takes up the
International Criminal Court, I would like to recall
that there are two aspects with regard to referrals to the
Court, including when it comes to the issue of Darfur,
with which Argentina does not agree. The first has
to do with extending the jurisdiction of the Court to
cover nationals of States that are not party to the Rome
Statute, and the second pertains to the assertion that the
United Nations will not cover the costs of referrals. The
position of my delegation is well known and I will not
repeat it here.
In conclusion, as I have said, this is the last time that
Argentina has an opportunity to to address the matter
of the International Criminal Court as a member of the
Council; we may have another chance in 2030. Memory
is a collective thing, while the fight against impunity is
universal. I wish therefore to underscore that the Court
is an institution born of a common understanding that
serious crimes must not go unpunished and that justice
and punishment for the guilty contribute to preventing
such crimes.
The International Criminal Court was not a gracious
concession or the outcome of a rational and deep exercise
in reflection by peoples and Governments. Instead, it

S/PV.7337

was prompted by fear in the face of atrocities and mass
crimes committed by murderous States. Terror led us
to work to bring the International Criminal Court into
existence. Let us speak the truth without being ashamed
as human beings. The International Criminal Court was
not driven by reason; it was created by terror.
Therefore I say to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, a brave
daughter of Africa and of humankind: continue to be
what you are — tireless — and comply with what all of
us ask, namely, impartiality, by which I mean justice, for
the sake of memory, which is not passive or individual,
but collective, as well as for the sake of truth, which
is what allows us to know what is happening from
the voices of the oppressed, raped and silenced. In a
word, for the sake of justice, which means bringing
injustice to light. Justice is not a messianic force, it is
not revenge, it is not retaliation and it is not lynching.
It means “never again”. And do so for the sake of
reparation to victims, which does not just mean giving
them money and improving their health as survivors;
it means emancipating victims as human beings and
understanding that life — a dignified life — is the right
of all.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her sober briefing and for the
thorough report on the situation in Darfur.
This year marks a truly sad milestone. It has been
10 years since the Security Council first condemned
reports of large-scale attacks on civilians, sexual
violence and force displacement in Darfur, and urged
the Government to seek a peaceful political resolution
to the conflict and bring the perpetrators of such crimes
to justice. When the Sudanese Government failed to do
that, the Council took the historic step of referring the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in March 2005. The ICC has sought to bring
justice to the victims of Darfur, and we continue to
believe that it is essential to pursue accountability for
those most responsible for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity there.
In the decade that has passed since it Security
Council first addressed Darfur, the international
community has made enormous strides to bring those
responsible for atrocity crimes to justice in other parts
of the world. From Charles Taylor in Liberia, to the
most senior surviving members of the Khmer Rouge
regime and to Congolese warlord Thomas Lubanga,
the world has shown that it will combat impunity for
atrocities perpetrated against civilians, yet the progress

14-6900311/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that has occurred elsewhere in the world has cruelly
bypassed Darfur.
The same crimes that the commission of
inquiry uncovered and the Security Council
denounced — involving the widespread killing of
civilians, torture, kidnapping, forced disappearances,
rape, pillaging, forced displacement and destruction
of villages — have been committed and continue to
be committed by Government forces, rebel groups and
Government-aligned militia. Indeed, the Rapid Support
Forces that are now active in Darfur employ the same
tactics as the Janjaweed and are, as the Prosecutor notes,
funded, trained, equipped and administered by the
Government of the Sudan’s National Intelligence and
Security Services and commanded by the Government
of the Sudan’s Armed Forces during military operations.
Further, the scorched-earth tactics that the Sudanese
Government has pursued in Darfur were precursors to
conflicts in Blue Nile and South Kordofan states, where
the Rapid Support Forces have also terrorized civilians.
The ICC’s task is not an easy one. The Government
of the Sudan’s lack of cooperation and its disregard for
the Security Council’s decision to refer the situation in
Darfur to the ICC, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
is so profound that the Prosecutor’s report recounts that
a cooperation request with respect to Abdallah Banda
Abakaer Nourain was simply returned to the Court
by the Government of the Sudan, with the envelope
unopened. As Prosecutor Bensouda’s report indicates,
recent developments remain deeply concerning. We are
particularly concerned about recent reports of mass
rapes in Thabit, North Darfur, which have not yet been
fully investigated. The limited interviews of villagers
in Thabit to investigate this alleged mass rape were
done in the presence of the Government of the Sudan’s
military intelligence and soldiers, some of whom were
recording the interviews. This does not count as an
investigation. It is only intimidation.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has a responsibility
to investigate. It has a mandate to investigate, and
the Government of the Sudan has an obligation to
stop interfering. We again call upon the Sudanese
Government to remove immediately all obstacles to
UNAMID’s full and proper discharge of its mandate,
including to its freedom of movement in areas where it
is operating in accordance with the mandate the Council
has given it. For its part, UNAMID has played a critical
role in monitoring, investigating and reporting on the

12/16

12/12/2014

facts on the ground and must remain on the ground
without obstruction in order to fulfil its role of protecting
civilians. In that regard, however, it is important to
note, as other colleagues have, that on 29 October the
Secretary-General informed the Security Council of the
results of a review of UNAMID reporting, following
allegations of UNAMID underreporting that had been
brought to the attention of the ICC Prosecutor, to which
she referred in her briefing today.
The review found that in approximately one-third
of the incidents that were the subject of the allegations,
UNAMID did not provide a full accounting of the facts
and, curiously, the details that were omitted were usually
details that identified the Government of the Sudan
or Government proxies as perpetrators. The review
team recommended that the practice of the Mission’s
“censoring itself in its reporting to Headquarters needs
to be addressed immediately”. These findings should
be deeply concerning to every member of the Council.
The Security Council was recently briefed by the head
investigator, and the United States urges immediate
action to address the abuses uncovered in this
investigation. Accordingly, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to taking all necessary steps
to ensure that UNAMID’s reporting is full, accurate
and timely and that the Mission’s engagement with the
public is open, forthcoming and not manipulated.
Justice cannot alone bring back the lives lost
or undo the damage caused by the killings, rape and
destruction of homes and livelihoods. But it serves as an
important foundation for healing so that survivors can
rebuild their lives, fully participate in the restoration
of their communities, and lay a foundation for the
rule of law. We cannot abandon the people of Darfur
to a Government complicit in and indifferent to their
suffering. We must continue to find ways to provide
some measure of justice to people who have waited far
too long to see the crimes against them punished, and
we continue to call on the Government of the Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Court, as required
by resolution 1593 (2005).
The Prosecutor’s words today were clear and
candid and her warnings concerning. She has spoken
of the danger of investigations going into hibernation
due to continued lack of cooperation, obstruction,
intimidation — all amid ongoing attacks on civilians.
The danger of these cases going into hibernation
must be a wake-up call. She has spoken of the lack

14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of progress, and that, simply put, virtually nothing is
happening to advance justice for the people of Darfur.
This is a travesty. If these cases are in danger of going
into hibernation, we must collectively and urgently
wake from our slumber.
Ms. Jakubonė (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her report and briefing
on the situation in Darfur.
Next year will mark 10 years since the referral of
the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) — 10 years in which the people of Darfur
have continued to suffer. The ongoing security and
humanitarian crisis in Darfur is marked by widespread
violence, impunity and displacement. More than
359,000 people have been newly displaced by attacks by
pro-Government militias, including the Rapid Support
Forces. Armed clashes aimed at displaced people
outside and within the internally displaced persons
camps is another issue of major concern. Peacekeepers
continue to be subject to attacks throughout Darfur.
The months of September and October were marked by
the deaths of four peacekeepers, which raised the total
number to 61 from the beginning of the peacekeeping
mission in the Sudan. We call on the Government of
the Sudan to take all necessary measures to ensure the
security of peacekeeping personnel and their freedom
of movement.
We thank the Prosecutor for her information about
the preparations for the trial of Abdallah Banda Abakaer
Nourain. It is very disappointing that the trial could not
commence last month because of lack of cooperation
from the Government of the Sudan as well as from
Mr. Banda. My delegation still hopes that the trial will
go forward and that it will become a breakthrough in
providing justice to the many victims in the Sudan.
We remain concerned about reports of the mass
rapes of 200 women and girls in Thabit, North Darfur.
The Darfur conflict has long been marked by sexual
and gender-based violence. These allegations demand
full, impartial and unimpeded investigation. We call
on the Government of the Sudan to allow the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) full access so that it can fully discharge
its mandate to investigate allegations of human rights
violations in Thabit.
Attacks against civilians are made possible largely
because of impunity for those who continue to harm
civilians in Darfur. The prevailing climate of impunity

S/PV.7337

cannot continue, as violence breeds more violence. All
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including serious crimes
falling within the competence of the Court, must be
brought to justice. The Security Council has called
repeatedly on the Government of the Sudan to ensure
accountability and to bring perpetrators to justice.
Progress, however, remains modest. The Government
of the Sudan should do more to end attacks against
civilians, ensure accountability and guarantee justice
for the victims.
The Office of the Prosecutor continues to face
numerous challenges in fulfilling its mandate. We
reiterate our call on the Government of the Sudan to
meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) and to
cooperate with the ICC, including on the enforcement
of the arrest warrants issued by the Court. As the report
of the Prosecutor reminds us, there is still a lack of
cooperation on the part not only of the Government of
the Sudan but of the other States of the region as well.
We call on all States, even if they are not parties to the
Rome Statute, to cooperate with the ICC, as required by
the Council’s resolutions, and to meet their obligations
to arrest and surrender suspects to the Court.
My final point is on UNAMID’s reporting. We
welcome the review carried out into the allegations
of UNAMID’s underreporting and welcome the
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to strengthen and unify the reporting procedures.
Accurate and timely reporting on the situation in Darfur
is essential not only for the protection of civilians but
also for the fulfilment of the Prosecutor’s mandate,
especially in monitoring what could constitute crimes
against humanity under the Rome Statute.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Lithuania’s
full support for, and cooperation with, the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court in carrying out her
important mandate.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for her report and
briefing on the recent developments in the Darfur case.
As pointed out by previous speakers, it has been
almost 10 years since the Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC as its first instance
of such referral. We commend the decade-long
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor in purusing
its investigation and judicial activities. Despite such

14-6900313/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

efforts, however, the initial high hopes for rendering
international criminal justice and ending impunity have
not been realized, mainly because of non-cooperation,
coupled with a worsening security situation in Darfur.
We believe that it is time for the ICC and the Security
Council to deliberate more vigorously on the practical
options to cope with this issue, especially to address
the underlying reasons for the lack of cooperation
from the Government of the Sudan and other States.
We have learned over the years that simply denouncing
or reprimanding non-cooperation is not enough to
encourage necessary action from the relevant authorities
and parties.
The report on the ongoing activities of the ICC
in Darfur shows that the Court is striving to conduct
robust monitoring of alleged crimes against civilians,
peacekeepers and internally displaced persons. We also
welcome the fact that the Office of the Prosecutor is
paying special attention to the widespread occurrence
of gender-based and sexual crimes, especially to the
allegations of mass rape in Thabit. The Prosecutor
should be able to continue a full and transparent
investigation without interference.
With regard to the allegations in a report by the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, we welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
get to the bottom of the case by establishing the review
team. We hope that its recommendations will be duly
implemented.
Finally, we support all the efforts of the Security
Council and the ICC to end impunity and assure
accountability in Darfur and anywhere else in the
world.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this debate and the presence
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, as well as her presentation of the
twentieth briefing on the situation in Darfur pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005).
We note with concern that the humanitarian and
security situation in Darfur has deteriorated with
respect to the information contained in the previous
report (see S/PV.7199). We are alarmed by the fact
that, to date in 2014, the number of internally displaced
persons has surpassed 400,000, which is in addition to
the more than w million internally displaced since the
outbreak of the conflict in Darfur.

14/16

12/12/2014

In the firm belief that the International Criminal
Court represents a major step forward in the fight
against impunity, we wish to reiterate our support for
the Court and for the work of its Prosecutor. We urge
the Prosecutor to continue to monitor the various crimes
allegedly committed in Darfur as detailed in the report,
which would apparently include, inter alia, aerial
bombardments of civilians; sexual and gender-based
crimes; and crimes against human rights defenders,
members of civil society and community leaders.
My country is particularly concerned by the
repeated crimes of sexual violence and the impunity
with which they are treated. We therefore reiterate that
it is the responsibility of the Government of the Sudan
to investigate all the allegations and, at the same time,
to guarantee freedom of movement for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur so
that such reports can be duly addressed.
The Prosecutor’s report also takes note of the
summmary of the report of the review group concerning
allegations of manipulation in the presentation of
reports on Darfur. We highlight the response of the
Secretary-General in addressing the Prosecutor’s
request contained in her report of June 2014. We hope
that the implementation of the measures proposed by
the group, along with its other recommendations, will
help to prevent the repetition of such incidents.
The Council has a special commitment to the
situation in Darfur and to the International Criminal
Court. Once again, my country would like to stress that
it is vital to ensure that, with respect to cases referred
by the Council to the International Criminal Court,
the Council follow-up on the progress of each case in
order to assist the Court in making its work effective
and efficient with respect to accountability for the most
barbaric crimes against humanity.
It is possible to improve cooperaton between the
Security Council and the Court. In that regard, we
again urge the Council to respond to the Court’s eight
communications on the matter of non-compliance. In a
similar vein, aware that the success of any investigation
depends on the cooperation of all the States concerned,
we repeat our call for all States parties to the Rome
Statute, as well as those that are not, to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court on the situation in
Darfur.

14-69003

12/12/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Prosecutor for her twentieth report and for her
briefing.
Prosecutor Bensouda reminds us yet again that,
nearly 10 years after the Security Council’s adoption
of resolution 1593 (2005), the civilian population of
Darfur remains the target of both the Government and
armed militias, and that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is not
fully able to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians.
We share the concerns reiterated in the Prosecutor’s
report, as reflected in resolution 2173 (2014), which
include continuing aerial bombardments by the
Sudanese Air Force, with direct and indirect civilian
victims; attacks on civilians by the Sudanese security
forces, whose ranks have expanded and may include
minors; continuing clashes among tribes due to poor
access to natural resources, both in Darfur and because
of interference from the armed janjaweed militias;
continuing rapes and sexual violence by Government
armed forces; threats against members of the political
opposition, humanitarian personnel and personnel of
non-governmental organizations; numerous obstacles
to the delivery of aid to the civilian population by
organizations in charge of humanitarian assistance and
by UNAMID in the exercise of its mandate; and the
continued forced displacement of civilians because of
ongoing violence and the escalation of armed conflict.
As Ms. Bensouda also recalls, the arrest warrants
issued by the International Criminal Court have not
always been executed. Five individuals accused of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and, in one case,
genocide, continue to evade the Court’s jurisdiction.
Most of them continue to hold high office in the State
bureaucracy of the Sudan. A situation of such impunity
can only encourage further abuses.
The responses to that situation have long been well
known to the Council. Putting an end to the multiple
forms of violence and crime presupposes, first of all,
the successful conclusion and implementation of a
political settlement that includes both the Government
and rebel groups. In that regard, the opening of
negotiations in Addis Ababa in November between
the Sudanese Government and the Darfur rebels was
encouraging. However, those talks have not yet led to
a single specific advance despite the efforts of a highlevel group from the African Union, which we support.
We hope that will lead to a ceasefire that will lead to a

S/PV.7337

political solution as expected by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.
The second requirement is enabling the effective
protection of civilians and UNAMID’s ability to
execute its mandate. The continuing violence and
insecurity preclude any prospect of stabilization or
long-term reconstruction. The human consequences
of the crisis remain exceedingly serious, with more
than 430,000 people fleeing their homes since January
because of the fighting in Darfur, in addition to more
than 2 million long-term internally displaced. Violence
continues against civilians, especially women, as well
as looting, and UNAMID peacekeepers also continue
to be attacked.
The third requirement is unhindered humanitarian
access to civilian populations and the displaced. In that
regard, we regret that UNAMID is still subject to access
restrictions in its investigation into the allegations of
mass rape in Thabit in late October. It is essential that it
be guaranteed free and unrestricted access to the area,
as well as to the entire territory of Darfur.
The fourth is going after the perpetrators and
combating impunity effectively. In that regard, the new
semi-annual briefing emphasizes that the Office of the
Prosecutor has not ruled out any measures for fighting
impunity in the Sudan, whether through investigations,
arrest warrants or scheduling the first suit to be brought
against a rebel leader, with a trial originally set for
November this year for attacks on peacekeepers in
Haskanita. As the Council knows, the trial could not
take place, owing to the absence of the accused, against
whom an arrest warrant had duly been issued. As the
Prosecutor noted, the Sudan, required to cooperate with
the Court and combat impunity, has taken no action to
prosecute those responsible for crimes in Darfur. A
new ruling is expected from the Court on the Sudan’s
non-cooperation, despite the fact that the provisions of
resolution 1593 (2005) require such cooperation.
The final requirement is limiting contacts with
persons subject to arrest warrants of the Court to those
deemed essential, in accordance with the policy of the
Secretary-General. France calls on the entire United
Nations to work to implement these guidelines. In this
context, the Council should continue to mobilize on two
fronts. First and foremost, it should induce the parties
to cease all violence against civilians. That requires
agreement on the part of all Council members on the
deterioration in civilians’ situation that the Prosecutor

14-6900315/16

S/PV.7337

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

has portrayed yet again in her report. It also requires
enabling UNAMID to fully carry out its mandate,
with its total and unfettered freedom of movement
guaranteed. It must also be able to carry it out more
effectively. In order for that to happen, it must continue
to implement the strategic review that the Council
endorsed in April, which made protection a main focus
of UNAMID’s action, along with support to a political
solution and local mediation. Once the Secretariat’s
recommendations on the next phases in UNAMID’s
development are again submitted in February, the
Council should also consider the adjustments that
will be required if UNAMID is to make a genuine
contribution to improving the situation of civilians on
the ground.
Secondly, our cooperation with the International
Criminal Court has to made effective and we must ensure
that arrest warrants are executed, an essential condition
if the Court is to be able to carry out its mandate. It is
up to the Council to respond when the Court notifies
it of cases of non-cooperation, and to the Assembly of
States Parties and international organizations to remain
ready to react to such cases.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Chad.
I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her statement and to congratulate her on the quality
of her report, which takes stock of the deterioration in
the security situation in Darfur in 2014 and in particular
of the negative effect it is having on civilians.
During the reporting period, the Prosecutor’s Office
noted a decrease in aerial bombardments, although tribal
violence over land and natural resources has grown and
has had a serious impact on innocent civilians. There
have also been reports alleging 42 incidents of rape of
340 women, for 300 of whom Government forces and
militia are presumed responsible. On the question of
the alleged cases of rape of 200 women in the village
of Thabit, in view of the fact that the Government is
totally denying it and in the absence of confirmation
from other independent sources, we believe that only a
more thorough independent and impartial investigation
can clarify the situation.

16/16

12/12/2014

Various cases of violations of human rights have also
been cited, including, among others, arrests of political
party leaders and students. In our view, their release
could help clear the political atmosphere and improve
dialogue between the Sudanese Government and the
opposition. In that regard, we urge the Government
to make the achievement of a comprehensive solution
to the crisis a priority. We regret that humanitarian
personnel continue to be a target for armed individuals
and encourage the Government of the Sudan to pursue
the perpetrators of attacks on peacekeeping forces and
bring them to justice.
Not only has the situation of civilians not improved;
in some cases it deteriorated during the current
reporting period. We condemn the violence, regardless
of its origins and whatever the circumstances, and the
perpetrators must answer for their actions. We take
note of the Sudanese Government’s efforts to improve
the situation and urge it to maintain its commitments to
its citizens by guaranteeing them security and justice.
It is important to recall that in order to put an end to
the civilian population’s suffering, the war in Darfur
must be stopped. In that regard, we emphasize the
importance of supporting the peace process under way
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan,
led by President Mbeki. The international community
should put pressure on both the Government and the
rebel groups to advance national reconciliation and
dialogue.
Finally, we invite the Council to consider the
situation in Darfur in the context of the overall situation
in the Sudan, taking into account all the agreements
signed by the various parties to the conflict, as well as
the mediation efforts being conducted through regional
organizations, particularly the African Union.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

14-69003
