ECORDS
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

26 MAY

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2368/Rev.

1) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . +, . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Question concerning the situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(6) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/lSO99);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/15100). . . . , , . , . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . , , . . , . , . . . . . . , . . , , , *. . . . , , . 1

SlPV.2368

,“.
1
:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2368th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President:

Mr. LING

Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
United States of
Am’erica. Zaire.
Provisional

1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2368/Rev.

1)

of the agenda

Question concerning the situation in the region of
the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15037);
(b) Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15099);
(c) Letter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Panama to the, United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15100)
The meeting

was called to order at 12.40 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

26 May 1982, at 12.15 p.m.
tina to take a place at the Council table; I invite the
representatives
of Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Belgium,
Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, CoIombia,
Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Liberia, Mexico, the
Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Paraguay,
Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Listre (Argentina) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Jacobs
(Antigua
and Barbuda), Mr. Street (Australia),
Miss Devcr (Belgium), Mr. Ortiz Sanz (Bolivia),
Mr. Corr?a da Costa (Brazil), Mr. Pelletier (Canada),
Mr. Trucco (Chile), Mr. Sanz de Santamaria (Colombia), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Albornoz (Ecuador),
Mr. Resales-Rivera (El Salvador), Mr. Maye Ela
(Equatorial Guinea), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic
of Germany) Mr. Dountas (Greece), Mr. Delpre’eCrespo (Guatemala), Mr. Lobo (Honduras), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Kamil (Indonesia), Mr. La Rocca
(Italy),
Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Srithirath (Lao
People’s Democratic Republic), Mrs. Jones (Liberia},
Mr. MuI?oz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Scheltema (Netherlands), Mr. Francis (New Zealand), Mr. Chamorro
Mora (Nicaragua), Mr. Gonzdlez Arias (Paraguay),
Mr. Calle y Calle (Peru), Mr. Azar Gcimez (Uruguay),
and Mr. Martini Vrdaneta (Venezuela) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in the region of the
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
(a) ILetter dated 4 May 1982 from the Permanent
1Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
iaddressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15037);
(b) :Letter dated 20 May 1982 from the Secretary(General addressed to the President of the Security
lCounci1 (S/15099);
(c) ILetter dated 21 May 1982 from the Permanent
;Representative of Panama to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(s/15100)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?om Chi17cse):
In accordance with the decisions taken at previous
meetings on this item [2360th, 2362nd to 2364th and
2366th meetings], 1 invite the representative of Argen-

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Chinese):
I wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative
of Yugoslavia in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate
in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) took the plate reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fivt77 Chinese):
Members of the Council have before them the following
documents:
S/l.51 12, containing the text of a draft

resolution submitted by Japan; S/15122, containing
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Guyana,
Ireland, Jordan, Togo, Uganda and Zaire; S/15115,
containing the text of a letter dated 24 May from the
representative of Suriname to the President of the
Council; S/15116, containing the text of a letter
dated 25 May from the representative of Costa Rica
to the President of the Council; S/l51 17, containing
the text of a letter dated 25 May from the representative of Argentina to the President of the Council; and
S/l51 19, containing the text of a letter dated 25 May
from the representative of the United Kingdom to the
President of the Council.

both the Security Council and the Secretary-General,
chose to settle its territorial dispute through the use of
military force. Its military invasion was, as the Council
established in resolution 502 (1982), a breach of the
peace in the region of the Falkland
Islands/Islas
Malvinas which violated two of the most basic principles of international
law and the Charter of the
United Nations-namely,
the principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition
of the
use of force in international
relations. This military
action led the United Kingdom,
in exercise of its
inherent right of self-defence, to invoke Article 51 OF
the Charter.

4. The first speaker is the representative of the
Federal Republic of Germany. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

12. Deeply conscious of the sufferings caused by two
world wars, which claimed millions
of lives, and
situated at the heart of a divided Europe, my people
has stressed time and again in the forums of this and
other organizations
that the utmost respect for the
principle of the non-use of force is the essential precondition for the maintenance of peace, good-neighbourly relations and, indeed, the very fabric of human
civilization. That is why we have concluded a number
of treaties which manifest our renunciation of force.

5. Mr. van WELL (Federal Republic of Germany):
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for granting me
permission to participate in the Council’s debate on
this very important item.
6. I should like to assure you of our confidence that
under your wise and skilful guidance the Council will
work in an impartial and efficient manner.
7. The Federal Republic of Germany is deeply concerned about the escalation of hostilities in the area of
the Falklands/lslas Malvinas, causing the loss of an
ever-increasing number of human lives. We fulIy share
the sentiment expressed at this table that this war,
raging between countries which until recently enjoyed
cordial and extensive relations, is “the war that should
never have happened”.
8. The United Kingdom is one of our closest neighbours, friends and allies, both in the European Community and in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
We are linked with it by geography, history and
culture, and more than anything else by a common
perception of the values of democracy, human dignity
and freedom and the rule of law.
9. At the same time, my country has always maintained close political, cultural and economic ties with
the countries of Latin America, and in particular with
Argentina. Indeed, a substantial proportion
of the
Argentine people claim to be of German descent, It is
only natural, then, that we should want to continue,
develop and strengthen those ties,

13. Owing to the ever-growing interdependence
of
our world, each breach of the peace of necessity
affects the international community as such. This principle must therefore have global and comprehensive
validity.
If the international
community
tolerates
breaches of that principle,
it robs in particular the
small States of the protection of law and promotes
chaos.
14. From the beginning of the present crisis, my
Government
has issued urgent appeals to both parties to the conflict to explore all possibilities
for a
peaceful solution. The steps which it has taken, together with its partners in the European Community,
with a view to bringing about an early solution of the
crisis have included economic measures. What had to
be said in reply to certain allegations made by other
speakers in this context was expressed the other day
[,3353rd /neefirq] by the representative
of Belgium,
the country which currently holds the presidency of j
the European Community.
I

10. We do not take any position on the issues underlying this tragic conflict. As other speakers have
pointed out, we must realize how deep are the roots
of this conflict. We are aware that the islands have
been an important national concern of the Argentine
people for generations, concern that is reflected in a
number of United Nations resolutions and in negotiations with Great Britain extending over many years.

1.5. We have in particular whole-heartedly supported
the skilful and relentless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to bring about a peaceful settlement.
He
deserves the highest tribute for the way in which he
has used his good offices. In my Government’s
view,
he has to the fullest extent possible underlined the
great peace-keeping
potential inherent in his high
office. In view of the significant progress he was able
to achieve, we consider that his efforts should be
resumed urgently on the basis of a forma1 mandate of
the Security Council, on which the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and
security is conferred.

11. We cannot, however, overlook the undeniable
fact that Argentina, in defiance of urgent appeals of

16. A concrete and specific mandate of the Council
would give the continuation of his efforts both a new

i

basis and enhanced authority, thus improving the
chances of finding the earliest possible solution of the
present crisis in full conformity with resolution 502
(1982) and1 without prejudice to the outcome of further
negotiations between the parties.

2.5. The Federal Secretariat for Foreign Affairs of
Yugoslavia has made the following statement:
“Yugoslavia has been following the escalation of
the armed conflict between Argentina and Great
Britain with grave concern. The extent of the use of
force and the heavy loss of human life make us even
more convinced of the necessity of a cessation of
hostilities by both parties and of their seeking a
negotiated settlement
in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and positions
expressed in United Nations documents as well as
meetings of non-aligned countries concerning this
problem. The Co-ordinating Bureau of the NonAligned Countries has recently expressed the need
for such a solution.

17. It must be recalled that the two most urgent and
pressing requirements
of resolution 502 (1982) are
the demands for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and an imlmediate withdrawal of all Argentine forces
from the islands.
18. In vilew of the horrifying news reaching us every
day from the battleground, we are deeply concerned
that the longer the fighting lasts the deeper the feelings
of bitterness and aversion will be, the gloomier the
dangers of a widening of the conflict and the Fore
remote the chances for an honourable, peaceful solution will Ibecome. We therefore express our ardent
hope that the fighting will come to a halt, and we
implore the parties to create the conditions necessary
for the Secretary-General to continue his endeavours.

“Since the very beginning of the crisis around the
Malvinas, the official representatives of Yugoslavia have, in their contacts with both Argentine
and British representatives, pointed to the danger
of the use of force and called for the utmost restraint
by the parties involved in order to prevent further
deterioration of the situation and to achieve a just
and lasting solution by peaceful means, in the
interest of peace and security in the region and in
the world.”

19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fhm Chimzsc):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
20. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): At the outset,
Sir, I should like once again to express my delegation’s congratulations on your assumption of the high
and responsible duties of President of the Council. We
are convinced that, with your experienced guidance,
the Counc.il will respond to its obligations in dealing
with the issue currently on its agenda, which has a
bearing oln the problems of wider international
security.

26. In our approach we also adhere to the common
position concerning the Malvinas, taken at several
meetings of non-aligned countries held at the highest
or at the ministeria1 level, in which the just claim of
Argentina to sovereignty over those islands has been
recognized and supported. There is no doubt that what
is at stake is the necessary rectification of the consequences of the past.

21. I should also like to renew the tribute paid to the
representative of Zaire, Mr, Kamanda wa Kamanda,
on his successful fulfilment of the duties of President
of the Council for the month of April.

27. Aware of the gravity of the crisis, the non-aligned
countries, in their efforts to eliminate the last vestiges
of the colonial era and recognizing the need for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, have on several
occasions exerted efforts aimed at its peaceful
solution.

22. Yugo’slavia has been following the development
of the crisis around the Malvinas Islands with grave
concern, IBoth in the volume of the warfare being
engaged in and in its intensity, it has surpassed the
proportions
of the dispute between Argentina and
Great Britain, and it will tend to grow into an even
wider conflict.

28. In the communiquC adopted by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries on 5 May 1982,
the Bureau stated that it:
“1, Deplores the mounting loss of human life in
the Malvinas Islands conflict;

23. We witness with dismay this unfortunate conflict
between the two countries-with
both of which
Yugoslavia
maintains friendly relations and longstanding-ties-getting
out of control.

6,

2.

. ..

“3. Reiterates , . . that the use of force or threat
of the use of force in the relations between States
are acts contrary to the principles of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries;

24. The position of my country on this conflict
proceeds from the need for strict adherence to the
principles (of the inadmissibility
of the threat or use of
force and the need for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the basic principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and pre-conditions for stable international relations.

“4. Confirms the , , . support [of the nonaligned countries] for Argentine sovereignty over
the Malvinas Islands, as reaffirmed at all summit
and ministerial meetings of the Movement since the
3

Declaration
of the Conference of Ministers
Foreign Affairs held in Lima in August 1975;

of

“5. Appeals once again to the parties to the
conflict urgently to find a just, durable and peaceful
solution in accordance with Security Council resolution 502 (1982) in its entirety, the principles and
decisions of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the relevant General Assembly resolutions of the United Nations.” [S/15048, I//~/zPx.]
29. Yugoslavia has supported, and still supports, all
actions by the United Nations aimed at the peaceful
solution of the conflict, since it considers that the
world Organization is the body through which these
and similar problems should be settled, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. For that
reason. we supported resolution 502 (1982) as the most
appropriate instrument for the solution of the crisis.
To the same end. we supported the tireless efforts by
the Secretary-General,
for which I should iike to pay
tribute.
30. Instead of moving in the direction laid down by
the United Nations in its resolutions and through
the Secretary-General’s
efforts. the conflict
has
already turned into a hotbed of war, which, following
the logic of the use of force. threatens to spread even
further. It has become a firing range for experimenting
with the most sophisticated weapons, which leads to
an increased loss of human life and hinders the attainment of a peaceful solution
31, That is yet another reason for urgent action by
the international
community
aimed at securing the
cessation of hostilities between the two countries and
at a negotiated settlement. The foundations for such a
solution already exist in United Nations resolutions
and in the activity of the Secretary-General
and the
Council, particularly through the implementation
of
resolution 502 (1982). This, of course. implies
the
withdrawal of forces by both parties and entrusting
the Secretary-General
with a mandate for further
action,
32. We remain consistent in our assessment of the
substance of the issue, which lies in the inadmissibility
of the use of force in any phase of the developments
and in the fact that the peaceful establishment
of
Argentine
sovereignty
is indispensable.
We are
encouraged that the Council has taken the first steps
towards securing a cessation of hostilities
and
creating conditions that will make possible a just solution of this issue.
33. Mr. DORR (Ireland): In my statement on Friday
last [236&h /nectirrg]. I explained why Ireland
had
sought a meeting of the Council. I said that we had
two reasons for doing so. First, we felt that the
Secretary-General
would wish to report to LLS on his
long and patient efforts to reach a settlement, Secondly,
we felt that the Council, despite the possible limita-

tions on its actions, had a duty to meet wheq other
efforts failed to consider if any possibilities remained
of stopping the conflict.
34. 1 also said that the challenge we faced was to i
find a way of calling a halt as soon as possible to the i
present fighting and allowing negotiations to resume, j
while maintaining
our full support for the bask ’
principles already endorsed by the Council.
35. Finally, I suggested that there could be merit in
having the Council formally ask the Secretary-Genera!
to renew his efforts, but this time with the added
strength which a forma1 mandate from the Council
could give him.
36. I spoke again yesterday [2366tk nzeethgj an3
put forward a draft resolution [S/15/06] which Ireland hoped could be the basis for common action b)
the Council. I explained our view by saying that war i!
a failure of politics and of negotiation and that in cur
time, when we have evolved methods and procedures
for resolving international
conflict without war. w
wanted to see an end to the war and a return to thaw
procedures.
37.

Our draft resolution was intended, thereforeb
to get the Secretary-General’s
laud&k
and worth-while efforts back on the rails and to givr
him a new mandate and a new impetus. We also sou@
in our proposal to provide the parties with the men
reasonable basis for a cease-fire and an end to tl~
fighting, if they were prepared to stop fighting. IO
particular, we introduced the idea of United Nation5
observers who might monitor that cease-fire.
precisely

38. When I spoke yesterday, I explained that on
this point of bringing an end of the fighting, in order ta
allow the best chance of success for the Secretar);
General’s efforts, we envisaged three stages. The
first stage, in operative paragraph 3 of the drafl rcsol~
tion, which was introduced by the phrase “Crrges tti
parties to the conflict to co-operate fully with thl
Secretary-General
in his mission”, went on to SU~@S~
that a first step that they might take would be to agm
to a complete suspension for 72 hours in order to all@&
him to undertake the second stage, that of working
out with them the details of a cease-fire, includiq.
possibly, the dispatch of United Nations observers
This, then, in turn would prepare the way for the thini
stage, which would be a resumption,
with a men
formal mandate, of his previous efforts.
39. As I have said, our aim throughout in seeking a
meeting of the Council and in putting forward a
proposal has been to try to find a common basis 00
which the Council could act and which could &et
help and hope to the two parties which are at present
locked in combat, without a betrayal of the strang
principles which one side is defending and withoul
ignoring the grievances which the other has felt for a
long time. The draft resolution that will be introduced
formally in a moment by my colleague, the reprea

sentative of Uganda, is a slightly revised version of
this basic text. Following the extensive consultations
which have taken place over the past day or so, we
and the other co-sponsors of this draft resolution
believe tlhat it can be the basis for common action by
the Council.

43. We know well that we are giving a very difficult
task to the Secretary-General.
But I should like to
emphasize that we, as a Council, if we adopt this
proposal are strongly urging the parties to co-operate
in that task and are providing, I hope, a common basis
in the Council on which they can stop fighting and get
back to negotiation if they wish to do so. That would
satisfy the concern of the Council as expressed in the
last preambular paragraph of both texts, namely, to
achieve as a matter of the greatest urgency a cessation of hostilities and an end to the present conflict.

40. Since the draft resolution
will be formally
introduced in a few moments, I shall not go into detail
on the modifications
which have been made in the
text of yesterday. But I do want to explain one point
on the relation between the two texts. Both texts
express in exactly the same language, in the last
preambul.ar paragraph, the concern of the Council to
achieve, as a matter of the greatest urgency, a cessation of hsostilities and an end to the present conflict.
Both texts obviously give a formal mandate to. the
Secretary-General
to continue the efforts which he had
been making. Our text of yesterday envisaged three
steps. I Ihave already explained that first, in urging
the parties to co-operate fully, we asked them in our
original text as a first step to stop fighting for 72 hours
in order to allow the Secretary-General
to work out
with them the details and other aspects of a lasting
cease-fire. The revised text, which we are cosponsoring with five members of the non-aligned
group in the Council, has a very similar structure and
it too urges the parties to the conflict to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General in his mission. It too
goes on 1.0 ask him to work out with them mutually
acceptable terms for a cease-fire, and it too envisages
United Nations observers who might monitor that
cease-fire. All this, of course, in both texts would be
a preparation for the resumption on a more format
basis of the negotiations which were derailed, shall
we say, and which we want to get back on the rails.

44. Ireland is happy and honoured to join with five
members of the non-aligned group in the Council in
sponsoring this revised version of our proposal, and
we strongly hope that it can be the basis for common
action by the Council. But common action by the
Council on its own will not be enough. What the
Council and we have been trying to do is to provide
the parties with a basis for common action, a basis
which, as I have said, will restore negotiation, bring
war to an end, uphold the principles which we strongly
believe must be upheld and, at the same time, offer a
way to deal through negotiation with grievances which
have been and are deeply felt.
45. That was our aim, our only aim, in asking for a
meeting of the Council; that was our aim, our only
aim, when I spoke here on Friday last; that was our
aim, our only aim, when I spoke yesterday and put
forward a proposal; that remains, ‘as far as my delegation is concerned, our aim, our only aim, in joining
with five other countries in the Council in putting
forward a revised version of that text which we hope
adopts the same approach and leaves it to the parties
to do what our version of yesterday asked them
explicitly to do, what we still believe they must do:
co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the
difficult but important mission which we are giving
him.

41. The point of difference-and
this is the only point
that I want to make on this-is that our revised text
does not explicitly
ask the parties to agree to stop
fighting for 72 hours. It does, however, just as our
text of yesterday did, urge them to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General
in his mission, and we
would hope that, their having heard all that has been
said here, that co-operation will in fact take the form
of ensuring, in so far as the fighting is concerned,
that the proper basis will be available for the SecretaryGeneral t’o do what we are asking him to do in both
versions of the proposal. In both versions we are
asking him to do the same thing, namely, to enter into
contact with the parties and immediately to work out
mutually ,acceptable bases for a cease-fire, including,
if necessary,
United Nations observers.
-

46. I am absolutely confident that the SecretaryGeneral, for his part, will carry out that mission with
the highest skill and dedication
We already have
every evidence of that high skill and dedication. What
we now hope is that the parties, on the basis which
I have described, will find it possible to give him the
necessary co-operation
so that this debate in the
Council and whatever result we achieve today will
have the final effect of ending a dangerous conflict,
upholding principle, finding a basis on which grievances can be resolved and, finally, vindicating the role
of the United Nations and of the Security Council as
a body which addresses itself to conflict and tries to
find a way of bringing it to an end.

42. Even if the revised version of today does not
explicitly
ask the parties to cease hostilities for
72 hours while that is done, it does in general urge
them to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in
his mission. I would hope that each side in its wisdom
will find it possible to provide a basis on which the
Secretary-General
can do what we are asking him to
do in consultation with them.

47. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fbom Chinese):
I call on the representative of Uganda to introduce
the draft resolution.
48. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda): On behalf of the
delegations of Guyana, Ireland, Jordan, Togo, Zaire
5

and my own delegation, I have the honour to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document S/15122.

57’. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprerurio,? fiorn Chir~ese]: :
It is my understanding
that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution contained in documeni
S/15122.

49. In the view of the sponsors of this draft resolution, a definite area of consensus has emerged in the
debate which the Council has been holding for the last
several days. Many delegations which have spoken
have expressed deep concern over the conflict
in
and around the Malvinas Islands. They have expressed
particular concern over the tragic loss of life and over
the danger that the conflict posed to international
peace and security.

58. I shall first call on those members of the Counsjl 1
who wish to make statements before the vote.
59. Mr. de PINIl% (Spain) (inter.p,.efatior?fi.orrl &JO+ i
is/?): In connection with the draft resolution suhmittej [
to the Council for consideration
and contained ir! j
document S/ 15 122, my delegation would recall that k 1
our statement of 22 May r2362m-f meeting], we sa!j;
that it was necessary to adopt as soon as possitrZ;
a decision containing the political elements of balana i
necessary to make it viable, and which would proviL t
not only for an immediate cessation of hostilities, IX:
also for the separation of the two forces and a militar! i
withdrawal,
and for the setting up of negotiatiq:
machinery under the auspices of the United Nations II’ !
ensure respect for the principles of the Charter ai:
well as emphasizing
the prohibition
of the use (11;
force in international
relations and the application d,
relevant United Nations resolutions on the issue $,
the Malvinas as a question of decolonization.
I

50. Many delegations expressed their support for the
Secretary-General’s
efforts and expressed
their
desire to have the Secretary-Genera1 renew his mission of good offices within the framework of a formal
mandate from the Council.
51, Most delegations expressed the desire to see
the Council initiate measures which would,put an end
to the present hostilities. The draft resolution before
the Council seeks no more than to express these areas
of consensus. The essential and most significant provisions in the draft resolution are these.
52.

First, in operative

paragraph 2, the Council:

60. In this connection, we summarized our positid:
in the following three concepts: cessation of hos!il!.
ties, negotiation and peace.

"Rcqumis
the Secretary-General,
on the basis
of the present resolution, to undertake a renewed
mission of good offices, bearing in mind resolution 502 (1982) and the approach outlined
in his
statement of 21 May 1982”.
53.

Secondly,

61. The draft resolution submitted to us now doe!
not order the immediate cessation of hostilities.
contains only one formula, under which the Secretanej
General is to enter into immediate contact with rbzi
parties “with a view to negotiating mutually nccep!able terms for a cease-fire”.
It

in operative paragraph 3. the Council

“UI.KCS the parties to the conflict to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General
in his mission
with a view to ending the present hostilities in and
around the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)“.

62. In the view of my delegation, it would have hctci
preferable for this body, which has been entrusted,
with the maintenance of peace and security, to hab!’
ordered an immediate cease-fire and to have given i
more specific mandate to the Secretary-General.

54. The third element is contained in operative paragraph 4, which requests the Secretary-General
to
begin discussions with the parties immediately

63. Nevertheless,
and in view of the gravity of &’
situation, my delegation will vote in favour of the drril:i’
resolution and will, of course, support all the a~Iioi;i
of the Secretary-General,
who has been entrusted, ML
must in all fairness recognize, with an extreRtC!I
difficult and delicate task.

“With a view to negotiating mutually
acceptable
terms for a cease-fire, including.
if necessary,
arrangements for the dispatch of United Nations
observers to monitor compliance with the terms of
the cease-fire”.

64. Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (inte,;or.etnlio/~
.b’t)p:
Spcr~ish): Panama wishes to explain its vote on tht
joint draft resolution contained in document S11512~.
In this connection,
I note that this draft resolutio?
refers to Council resolution 502 (1982), to which m!
delegation
objected because we felt that it Uz
unrealistic and illogical and was not in keeping byit!
the circumstances
which existed at the time tb
resolution was adopted.

55. Those are the most essential and significant
provisions of the draft resolution before the Council,
There is a need, as has been said by many delegations,
for urgent action. I commend the draft resolution
to
members of the Council and hope that it will be possible for the Council to adopt it unanimously.
56. In the view of the sponsors, if this draft resolution is adopted it may make a modest contribution
towards peace.

65. My
resolution
6

Government
notes that the present drd
does not contain all the elements necessaS,

tion where the negotiation thus created would lead to
reason and good sense which might restore peace to
the western hemisphere.

for the attainment of a just and lasting peace. There is
one basic omission which we should like to mention,
namely, the fact that no reference is made to a question which is fundamental in this conflict, that is, the
decolonization
of the Malvinas archipelago.
The
negotiations cannot be separated from the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on the decolonization of the Malvinas archipelago, especially resolution 2065 (XX), adopted in 1965. This is a question
which my country deems so fundamental that the
President of the Republic of Panama, Mr, Aristides
Royo, lhas stated the following:

72. I should also like to make brief reference to
another element in which the parties are urged to cooperate with the Secretary-General
with a view to
ending the present hostilities. Hostilities
must be
understood to mean hostilities by the United Kingdom as well as Argentina, not by just one country. By
hostilities we must understand the term to refer to
both parties.
73. I should now like to mention another element
which is missing from this draft resolution. An appeal
should have been made here to all the member States
of the international
community,
especially to the
members of the Council and more specifically to the
permanent members of the Council, to abstain from
supplying arms, ammunition
and war material to the
United Kingdom and to Argentina. I am referring to
this because the press today states that a permanent
member of the Security Council-not
China, nor
France, nor the Soviet Union-has
sent missiles,
ammunition
and other war material to the United
Kingdom to replace what has been used in its struggle
against Argentina and for the continuation of this long
war.

“It is a fact that the United Kingdom, during its
occupation of the Malvinas and its dependencies,
has long caused great annoyance by its failure to
heed the resolutions on decolonization adopted in
the IJnited Nations. Argentina, in order to revindicate its national honour and interests, has not been
the cause but it has suffered the result of an unjust
and unacceptable situation, rendered worse by the
continued
reluctance of the United Kingdom
to
reach a peaceful agreement after many years of
fruitless negotiations. The United Kingdom is the
party which completely undermined the principle
of lalw by denying any results or hopes to the
negotiation process.”
66. Apart from this most fundamental issue, I should
like to refer to the elements contained in the draft
resolution. They have already been mentioned by the
represe:ntative of Spain.

74. I can tell the Council what the reaction will be in
Latin America. Does that permanent member feel that
the Argentines and the Latin Americans, who will in
increasing numbers go as volunteers to fight alongside
Argentina just as the Argentines helped others in their
independence struggles, are ferocious beasts or savage
animals which must be exterminated and that these
death-dealing machines must be dispatched there to
wipe out Latin Americans?

67. Tlhose elements are not set out here in the order
which my country would have preferred. Panama
informed the Council of the urgency of proceeding first
to an immediate cease-fire and to an immediate cessation of all military activities. My country would have
liked that cease-fire to have been ordered by the Council, in accordance with its powers, and concurrently
the Secretary-General
might then have started to act
in pursuance of the Council’s mandate.

75. That is going to be the reaction in Latin America
and that is why we ask that, although it does not
appear here, that feeling must be taken into consideration in the Council; we must bear in mind that this
is not merely a conflict between the United Kingdom
and Argentina but also involves responsibilities on the
part of States, particularly States of the region which
in the past have had agreements and understandings
and which cannot thus become the providers of weapons of death and extermination
to be used against
their neighbours, against those who at one time were
referred to as belonging to the same family of nations.
They spoke a language of friendship and understanding, but now they can be neither friendly nor
understood.

68. We are placing on the very strong and competent
shoulders of the Secretary-General
a very difficult
responisibility.
We must be aware of that situation.
69. The renewed mission of good offices which is
to be entrusted to the Secretary-General has inverted
the order of the elements, since the Secretary-General
is given this responsibility in order to negotiate with
the parties so that they may agree to mutually acceptable conditions for a cease-fire.
70. The* Council may well imagine the difficulties
which the Secretary-General
will have to cope with,
particularly
since my country has all along maintained
that it is the United Kingdom which has not yet had
the political
will to sit down and negotiate in good
faith on this matter.

76. I should like to mention that Panama too asked
for this meeting of the Council because it too wants
peace to return, but it wants a just peace. We know
that, in the framework of the present situation, this
draft resolution appears to be the only formula that
is viable at this time and likely to receive the affirmative vote of a sufficiently large number of Council

71. We harbour the hope that perhaps this parenthesis which is about to be opened might lead to a situa7

members, thereby winning approval for it and making
it a resolution.

interim United Nations
established, and so forth.

77. Panama wiI1 not oppose the adoption of this draft
resolution. We have- expressed our fears and our
concerns and our very specia! feelings for the Secretary-General, to whom we wish to reiterate our
support, confidence and co-operation, We agree with
the statement that has jusr been made, that a very
difficult mission has been entrusted to him. He himself
has asked what he can accomplish in seven days. The
answer is surely whatever the parties will allow him to
do, the co-operation given lo him by the parties,
particularly the country that has in the area four
fifths of its fleet-not that the same number of ships
will return to their home port-so that the SecretaryGeneral can make some progress.

83. We sincerely hope that, with the adoption of Ihe
draft resolution, the parties concerned will co-opcrare
fully with the Secretary-General
so that a peaccfuf.
just and reasonable solution may be found at an early
date.

78. This does not mean that the Council is abdicating
its responsibility. The Council has the duty to take
specific measures and, if after a certain period of time
it becomes necessary, we shall be in a position to
request another meeting in order to make a statement.
We hope that the Secretary-General will be successful
in his very difficult and dramatic task. We have every
confidence in his skill and integrity. his impartiality
and his character. We know that. at the opportune
moment, or if no progress is made in the negotiations,
he will come back to us after seven days, or even
sooner, so that the Council can assume its responsibilities.

86. The PRESIDENT
(int~~~p,.Ptationpom
I now call upon the Secretary-General.

79. I reiterate that Panama will vote in favour of the
draft resolution as a contribution
to the search,
through the Secretary-General, for a soIution.
80. The PRESIDENT (i~rprctntion
fiwm Chinese):
I should now like to make a statement as the representative of CHINA in explanation of vote.
81. For the past five days the Council has been
engaged in a debate on the question concerning the
situation in the region of the Falkland Islands (Islas
Malvinas). As a result of the efforts of the representatives of Ireland, Uganda and others, and after
repeated consultations, a draft resolution acceptable
to all has finally been drawn up. We are of the view
that, since this has created certain conditions
to
facilitate a cease-fire and the resumption of negotiations and also formally renews the Secretary-General’s mandate to continue his efforts, it can be
considered a step forward, and we should like to
express our appreciation of those efforts, The Chinese
delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
82. However, the draft resolution has failed to ask
an immediate cease-fire and has not fully affirmed
the results achieved by the Secretary-General
in the
two-week effort he undertook, as the basis for his
renewed effort-namely,
that both sides should agree
to withdraw their forces simultaneously,
that an

84.

administration

should be

I now resume my capacity as PRESIDENT.

85. The Council will now vote on the draft resolution
contained in document S/15122.

C1~irwscr:

87. The SECRETARY-GENERAL
(interpwtdw
from Spanish):
I should like first of all to thank lhc
members of the Council for their approval and sup
port of the steps that I took in pursuit of the objectives
of resolution 502 (1982). I must now express fur;
sincere appreciation of the renewed confidence shor\ n
by the Council today.
8X. The Council is surely conscious
of the serious
problems which this mission entails. For my part.
I feel obliged to state that, while I recognize the Jifficulties encountered by the Council in reaching an
agreement of this nature, I fear that the terms of
reference may not provide sufficiently clear and precise guidance either to the parties or to myself. When
Iwar is in full swing, as is now the case, the earl:
achievement of a cease-fire and a return to negstiations is certain to be extremely difficult. The Council
can be assured that, nevertheless, I shall do all in ml
power to bring about peace. As a first step in thij
new effort, I would urge the parties to recognize that a
lasting solution of the crisis in the South Atlantic can
only be achieved through negotiations.
The l?rst
KXjUirement for negotiations is a cessation of arnlcii
conflict. Herein lies the common interest of bath
sides. I remain convinced that the restoration of peace
can be accomplished
in consonance with resolution 502 (1982) and the progress made in my carlicr
efforts.
89. I must hope that the force of reason and the
tragic cost of continuing conflict will make the parlies
ever more aware of the weight of their responsibility
and thereby facilitate the early end of this crisis.
90. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Chirrrwi:
I shall now call on those representatives who wish 10
make statements after the voting,
91. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): My delegation is nor
pressing to have its own draft resolution, contained in

document S/15112, put to a vote because in our view
the main ideas of the Japanese draft resolution have
been well incorporated in the six-member draft resolution that has just been adopted, a resohrtion that my
delegation was of course very pleased to support.

98. We also wish to stress with the utmost vigour
that the Soviet Union is in favour of an immediate,
final cessation of all hostilities in the region of the
islands, and we are in favour of the immediate implementation of the resolution adopted today.

92. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): In its statement of 22 May [ibid.], the Soviet delegation has
already set out the Soviet Union’s position with
regard t.o the Anglo-Argentine
conflict.

99. In conclusion, we wish the Secretary-General
success in his efforts to carry out the mandate in the
resolution, As the TASS statement says:
“We in the Soviet Union are convinced that,
whatever the positions of the parties on the substance of the conflict may be, the questions in
dispute between them must be resolved by peaceful
means, at the negotiating table. The longest negotiations are better than even a short war.”

93. In an official statement by TASS dated 23 May
[S/lSfO.S, nr~nex], reference is made to a new and
dangerous turn taken by the conflict over the Falkland
Islands (Malvinas),
as a result of the United Kingdom’s launching a massive attack on the islands,
using mlilitary aircraft, warships and a landing force.

[Ibid.]

100. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I should like once again, Mr. President, to express
my Government’s
appreciation
of the skill and
judgement with which you have conducted, and are
continuing to conduct, the affairs of the Council during
a month in which it is dealing with a terribly difficult
problem.

94. Thiere is no doubt that responsibility for the situation which has arisen around the Falkland Islands
(Malvinas)
lies with the United Kingdom, which has
for many years stubbornly opposed the implementation of the United Nations decisions concerning the
decolonization
of the islands and the settlement by
peaceful means of the dispute with Argentina about
sovereignty over them.

101. The United States has already explained here
that the conflict is particularly poignant and painful
for us, We have already expressed out intense desire
to reduce, to isolate and to end this tragic conflict.
I believe that we have given evidence of the seriousness of our desire. My Government, in the person of
the Secretary of State, made a sustained effort to
avert the conflict, and subsequently we have offered
full support to the efforts of Peru’s President
Belalinde and, of course, the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral.

95. The TASS statement also includes the following
passage:
“In expressing concern about the dangerous turn
of events around the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
Soviet leading circles condemn the use of military
force by the United Kingdom. The bloodshed must
be stopped
immediately.
Urgent
efforts are
required,
chiefly within the framework of the
United Nations, to settle the dispute between the
United Kingdom and Argentina by means of negotiations.”
[Ibid.]

102. The United States ardently desires an end to
this tragic war, We welcome the resolution and pledge
our continued support for the Secretary-General’s
efforts to find a just and enduring peace.

96. It was on that basis that the Soviet delegation
voted in favour of the resolution adopted today by the
Council.
It is our hope that it will lead to an early
cessation of bloodshed and permit the SecretaryGeneral to make new efforts to restore peace in the
area.

103. I should like to take this opportunity to assure
the representative of Panama, and any other interested
parties, that my country has deep respect for all our
neighbours in the hemisphere; that we greatly desire to
live in peace with them; that we are ourselves part of
this hemisphere; and that we desire to put an end to
the conflict, so that we can get on with the business
of living in peace in the hemisphere. As I said last
week [2362nd nrreting], the quicker we put this tragic
conflict behind us, the quicker we can begin building
our future, and then, as always, the nations of Latin
America will find how deeply the United States is
committed to the cause of peace and prosperity for
our hemisphere,

97. Nevertheless,
we see certain shortcomings in
the resolution.
The Soviet delegation in particular
would like to affirm its position concerning Council
resolution 502 (1982), references to which are made in
the resolhtion that we have just adopted. As we have
already pointed out, resolution 502 (1982) entirely
disregards the problems of the decolonization of the
Falkland Islands (Malvinas), which is provided for iri
the relevant decisions of the General Assembly. This
aspect of the matter must be taken into account in any
just settlement of the conflict. The restoration of the
colonial status of the islands by means of force is
inadmissible.

104. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
I should like first to express my delegation’s heartfelt appreciation to the delegations of those nonaligned countries that have worked so hard to produce
9

the text of the resolution
unanimity in the Council.

or parts of it, just delivered by the representplivc cf
the Soviet Union. On 1 April, the Soviet Union joincli
in the call by all members of the Security Council 13
Argentina and the United Kingdom to refrain from ths
use of force. On 2 April, Argentina did use force, Tkir i
was registered in resolution 502 (1982), which tbc ’
Soviet Union did not oppose. I am still waiting IO
hear a word of condemnation of this first use of ftrrsr:
from my colleague from the Soviet Union. He baj
adopted, if I may say so, a one-eyed stance this after
noon, not seeing the use of force by Argentina but t
focusing with one eye on the United Kingdom’s
actions in exercise of our right to self-defence.

that has just commanded

10.5. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
because it contains a clear reaffirmation
of resolution 502 (1982). It registers beyond doubt that the
Secretary-General’s
efforts have been and will be
concentrated
on ensuring the implementation
of
resolution 502 (1982). That is the key to the return of
peace to the region, which all of us so devoutly wish.
In particular, the key lies in paragraph 2 of that resolution-the
unconditiona1 demand for the immediate
withdrawal of all Argentine forces from the Falkland
Islands.

I I I. The PRESIDENT
(intcrprctntion
ncs(~): I now call on the representative

106. My delegation will certainly co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General
in his renewed mission,
but, in the light of certain statements made by delegations in the debate and in explanation
of vote this
afternoon, I must make it clear, so that there is absolutely no misunderstanding,
that for our part the only
acceptable condition for a cease-fire is that it should
be unequivocally
linked with an immediate
commencement of Argentine withdrawal.

fh~rrr

/

’

112,

Mr. LISTRE
(Argentina) (in~erprefa~io,~ fit~pz :
The delegation of the Argentine Rep&tic
would like first of all to express its gratitude to the
members of the Council who have spent many lone
hours considering the serious problem of the So&
Atlantic. My delegation wishes to pay a special trib
ute to the President of the Council, the representa, /
tive of the People’s Republic of China, for his lop
severance, his efforts, and his skilful conduct pi
these deliberations.
I should accordingly
like tc7
associate myself with whal the Foreign Minister oi
my country said to him a few minutes ago in his of&x.

Sput~ishj:

107. The history of the past two months has done
nothing to create British confidence in the Government of Argentina. First, Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands without warning while negotiations were
still in progress and in defiance of the Council’s
appeal of 1 April [22345,/r nlccti,!~, pnra, 741. Secondly,
we have exerted ourselves to the utmost in six rounds
of negotiations for a peaceful settlement of the crisis
brought about by the Argentine invasion. In every
instance we have found at the end that we have
travelled in a circle, or rather that we have never left
the point of departure. Hence, a simple verbal agreement by Argentina to withdraw its forces would not
be sufficient for a cease-fire. This must be on the
basis of an Argentine commitment
to practical and
irrevocable arrangements for immediate
withdrawal,

113. We should also like to express gratitude IQ ~hr
delegation of Ireland for the responsible attitude it hfi!
been adopting for some time with a view to ensuring
that the Council meet its obligations as the prim:itr)
organ of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international
peace and security, first, by requesting
the formal meeting of the Council, and then by submitting the draft resolution which was the basis of tkr
document which has just been voted upon. We shouW
also like to thank those members of the Council Ih31
are also members of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, which, together with Ireland, submitted thr
text just adopted.

108. In the light of other statements
made this
afternoon, the Council should also be quite clear on
another point. The situation has changed since the
Secretary-General reported to the Council on 21 May
[236&h nweting].
Paragraph 2 of resolution
502
(1982) is plainly stated. We are talking about Argentine withdrawal. We cannot now accept that Argentine
withdrawal be linked in any way to parallel British
withdrawal.

114. I must also express gratitude to those countriei
not members of the Council which took part in the
discussions, supporting the right of my country to Ihe
Malvinas,
South Georgia and South Sandwich
Islands, and putting forward constructive ideas for
resolving the conflict between Argentina and tht
United Kingdom.
Nevertheless, I think it is apprcrpriate to remind the Council that the view of Ihe
majority of its members, as well as that of other representatives of countries that are not members of Ihe
Council but which took part in the deliberations, ~~a5
that a cease-fire was necessary. A decision to call for
a cease-fire would have been in keeping with the direct
responsibility
imposed upon this body by Article 14
of the Charter of the United Nations. I should like 20
emphasize that, despite this fact, the Council has been
prevented by the intransigence and pressures of more
than one permanent member of the Council from

109. We do not minimize the difficulty of the Secretary-General’s task, but I would be the last in the
world to underestimate
his great skill and his devotion. If anybody can succeed in the task before him,
it is the Secretary-General,
and I should like again to
assure the Council that my delegation will co-operate
with him to the full.
110. I cannot conclude this statement
expressing a little surprise at the explanation

ClC

of Argen~in:l.

without
of vote,
IO

---

taking such a decision and is now transferring a heavy
responsibility to the Secretary-General.

120. The PRESIDENT
(intryretation
,rese): I shall now call on representatives
speak in exercise of the right of reply.

115. I rcan assure you that the Argentine Republic will
comply with the call in the resolution just adopted to
co-operate fully with the Secretary-General
with a
view to bringing about an end to hostilities and a
diplomatic solution of the conflict, as requested in the
resolution. It could not be otherwise, because my
country has always supported the purposes and
principles of the Charter and has always supported the
Council and the Secretary-General.
With respect to
the Secretary-General,
our gratitude
is further
strengthened by his personal qualities and the ceaseless and tenacious efforts he has already made, about
which he informed us in his statement of 21 May
[ibid.] *

121. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation ,#kom Russian): I should
just like to say a few words.
122. The representative
of the United Kingdom
expressed surprise at my statement. I can say that we,
like, I believe, many others, would express surprise
about his statement in explanation of vote. The representative of the United Kingdom referred to resolution 502 (1982), but he completely failed, as indeed has
his Government, to take note of paragraph 1 of that
resolution, which calls for an immediate cessation of
hostilities.
123. In so far as the resolution just adopted by the
Council is concerned,
the representative
of the
United Kingdom also entirely ignored the fact that in
paragraph 2 of that resolution the Secretary-General
is requested to undertake a mission of good offices
bearing in mind not only resolution 502 (1982) but also
the approach outlined in his statement of 21 May
[236Othmeeting]. That is a very important point which
we cannot overlook.

Republic
will resume these
negotiations with the firm purpose of achieving a
solution of the conflict and the restoration of peace,
without giving up any of our rights.
fI6.

fro/n Chiwho wish to

Tlhe Argentine

117. The Secretary-General
has just made a statement, in which he said, inter uliu:
“As a first step in this new effort, I would urge
the parties to recognize that a lasting solution of the
crisis in the South Atlantic can only be achieved
through negotiations.”
[Para. 88 above.]

124. Unfortunately,
we get the impression that the
representative of the United Kingdom has once again
adopted the course of putting forward ultimatums.
This calls into question the sincerity of his voting in
favour of the draft resolution, which we have just
witnessed.

1 IX. 1 do not need to ask my Government for instructions to tell the Council and the Secretary-General
that my country can say here and now that we accept
the appeal. We shall enter the negotiations without
pre-conditions.
We have heard here, however, that
pre-conditions are being set.

125. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): My
Soviet colleague and I have different interpretations
of these resolutions, as we frequently have different
interpretations of other resolutions.

119. I should like to conclude by pointing out that
the responsibility
which the Secretary-General
must
take upon himself can be carried out successfully only
if he has the continuing support of the members of
the Council, for they must share the consequences of
the manldate they have given him, since in the final
analysis international
peace and security remain the
primary responsibility
of the Council.

126. I shall not weary the Council more. I shall
merely repeat what I said in another debate on another
subject about two years ago-that is, that I think the
Council would probably be thankful if I pursued our
differences in private consultation rather than in continued statements in exercise of the right of reply.

II

_

HOW

TO OBTAIN

LWcd
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstarc

NATIONS

ma? be obtained
Itom bookstores
and distributor5
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
mondc enticr. Informez-vow
aup&
des ventes. New York au Genhe.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

NATIONS

sent en vente dans Its librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

L.as publicaciones
dc las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
ConsuIte
Nueva
York D Ginebra.

DES

DE

LAS NAClONES

Unidas
es&
en venta en lib&as
a su librcro
o dirijasc
a: Nacioncs

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Its apnces
h : Nations

dtpositaires
du
Units.
Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Scccibn
de Ventas.
