22

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

Council in its resolution 365 ( 197 4) of 13 December
1974, as the valid framework for the solution of the
problem of Cyprus;
2. Reiterates its call upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus and to cease any
form of interference in its internal affairs;
3. Calls for the urgent resumption in a meaningful
and constructive manner of the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities, to be conducted freely on an equal footing on the basis of comprehensive and concrete proposals of the parties concerned with a view to reaching as early as possible a
mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
4. Demands that the parties concerned refrain from
any unilateral actions which might adversely affect the
prospects of a just and lasting solution of the problem
of Cyprus by peaceful means;
5. Recommends that the Security Council should
keep the question of Cyprus under constant revi~w ~nd
adopt all practical means to promote the effective implementation of its relevant resolutions in all their
aspects;
6. Calls upon the parties concerned to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General in the performance of
his tasks under the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council as well as with
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus;
7. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-third
session and requests the Secretary-General to follow
up the implementation of the present resolution :1nd
report thereon to the General Assembly at that sess10n.
64th plenary meeting
9 November 1977
32/18.

Restitution of works of art to countries
victims of expropriation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX)
of 19 November 1975 and 31/40 of 30 November
1976,
Taking note of resolutions 17 and 24 adopted by the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to
19 August 1976,32
Convinced that the promotion of national culture
enhances a people's ability to understand the culture
and civilization of other peoples and thus has a most
favourable impact on international co-operation,
Convinced also that the protection by all means of
national culture and hentage is an integral part of the
process ot preservation anu future deve10pment of cultural values,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,33
1. Invites all Member States to sign and ratify the
Convenuon on we Means of .1:'roh1bitmg and Preventing
32 See

A/31/197, annex IV.

aa A/32/203.

the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property, 34 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970;
2. Calls upon all Member States to take all necessary steps to prevent, on their territories, any illicit
traffic in works of art coming from any other country,
especially from territories which were or are under
colonial or foreign domination and occupation;
3. Affirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures
constitutes a step forward towards the strengthening of
international co-operation and the preservation and
future development of cultural values;
4. Decides to remain seized of the question and to
incl1;1de in the provisional agenda of its thirty-fourth
session the item entitled "Restitution of works of art
t~ countries victims of expropriation", in order to review the progress achieved and, in particular, the action
taken in this regard by the United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization.
'

66th plenary meeting
11 November 1977

32/19.

Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling all i~s previo~s resolutions on co-operation
bet~een the Umted Nations and the Organization of
Afncan Unity, including in particular resolution 31/13
of 16 November 1976,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the. Organization of African Unity at its fourteenth
ordmary session, held at Libreville from 2 to 5 July
1977, 35
Taking into account the statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
the 34th plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
14 October 1977,30
. Commen1ing the _importa_nt role which the Organizat10n_ of Afncan_ U~1ty contmues to play in helping to
achieve the obJect1ves of the United Nations in the
":'orld in general and on the African continent in particular.
Noting with satisfaction the initiatives which the
Organization of African Unity has taken with a view
to promoting multilateral co-operation among African
States and the efforts exerted to further with the collaboration of the United Nations, social' and economic
development in Africa,
Noting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the
Org~nization of African Unity and the United Nations
bod1e~ c<;mcern~d,_ the spcc_ialized agencies and other
orgamzat1ons w1thm the Umted Nations system to help
31
U1~ited Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzat1on, Records of the General Conference Sixtee 11 th
Ses~wn, vol. I, Resolutions, pp. 135-141.
'
3 " See A/32/310.
36
_O/Jieial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Se.\"Slon, Plenary Meetings, 34th meeting, paras. 23-154.

II.

solve the serious social and economic problems which
affect the African continent,
Taking note with satisfaction of the successful cooperation between the Organization of African Unity
and the United Nations in organizing the International
Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May
1977,37 and the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,38
and of the ensuing positive results,
Aware of the urgent need to give increased assistance
and support to the victims of colonialism, racial discrimination and apartheid resulting from the intensified
acts of provocation and aggression against neighbouring countries by the apartheid regime in South Africa
and Namibia and the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia,
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the
widest possible dissemination of information relating
to the struggle of the African peoples concerned for
their liberation from colonialism, racial discrimination
and apartheid,
Reaffirming the determination of the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations to work closely
towards the establishment of the new international
economic order,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity 3 ri and commends his
efforts in promoting such co-operation;
2. Expresses its deep appreciation of the outstanding contribution made by the Organization of African
Unity in the relevant work of the United Nations bodies
concerned;
3. Invites the Organization of African Unity and
the United Nations to co-operate fully in the speedy
implementation of the Maputo Declaration in Support
of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and the
Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe
and Namibia, 40 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and
the Lagos Declaration for Action against Apartheid,41
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977;
4. Commends the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity to find solutions to African problems of
vital importance to the international community;
5. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to put an end to the
remaining vestiges of colonialism and racial discrimination and to apartheid in southern Africa;
6. Recognizes that it is important that the United
Nations and the specialized agencies be closely asso37 For the report of the Conference, see A/32/109/Rev.lS/ 12344/Rev.1 (Official Records of the Security Council,

Thirty-second Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977).

38 For the report of the Conference, see A/CONF.91/9
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XIV.2 and 3 and
corl"igendurn).
39 A/32/207.
40 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second

Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.
41 A/CONF.91/9

23

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.

ciated, where appropriate, with the efforts of the Organization of African Unity to promote social and
economic co-operation in Africa;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with
regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in
this connexion, draws attention once again to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle against Colonialism and
Apartheid established by the Organization of African
Unity;
8. Requests once again the United Nations bodies,
in particular the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid
and the United Nations Council for Namibia, to continue to take effective measures to associate closely the
Organization of African Unity regularly with all their
work concerning Africa;

?· Invites the specialized agencies and other organizat10ns concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and intensify their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity and, through it, with the
national liberation movements of Zimbabwe and Namibia, in particular within the context of General Assembly resolution 31/30 of 29 November 1976;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the efforts he is making on behalf of the internati?nal community to provide effective programmes
of assistance to various African States experiencing
grave economic difficulties because of special political
and geo-economic circumstances;
11. Requests all Member States, regional and international organizations as well as the organizations of
the United Nations system to give full and generous
support to the programmes of assistance being organized
by the Secretary-General;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the Gen~ral Assemb~y at its thirty-third session a report
on the 1mplementat10n of the present resolution and
on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations concerned with the United Nations system.

66th plenary meeting
11 November 1977
32/20.

The situation in the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled "The situation
in the Middle East",
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject in
particular resolutions 3414 (XXX) of 5 Decerr:ber
1975 and 31/61 of 9 December 1976,
Taking into account the decisions of the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 Au-
