United Nations

S/PV.5898

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5898th meeting
Tuesday, 27 May 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Sawers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-35281 (E)

*0835281*

S/PV.5898

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Canada, Colombia, Georgia, Israel, Japan,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Myanmar, Nigeria, Norway,
Peru, Qatar, Slovenia, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic and United Arab Emirates, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 21 May
2008 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2008/335 and which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict”.
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

2

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. At this meeting, we shall hear
a briefing by Mr. John Holmes, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator. I welcome him to the Council and
now give him the floor.
Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council again on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Mr. President, the mural on the wall behind you,
by the Norwegian artist Per Krogh, serves as a
compelling reminder of the past —the world rising
from the ashes of the Second World War into a period
bearing the promise of peace, prosperity and equality.
But it serves also as a vivid reminder of the
present — that millions of ordinary people are still
trapped in the horror of war and conflict, hoping
desperately to rise from the chaos that surrounds them
into more peaceful times. It is also a reminder to the
Council, to Member States and to the United Nations
itself, of our collective responsibility to prevent war, to
secure peace and, in its absence, to ensure the
protection of civilians.
We see varying degrees of progress on all these
fronts. In Kenya, mediation in the wake of postelection unrest reduced the prospects of intensified
violence. The consolidation of peace and relative
stability continues in Côte d’Ivoire, Nepal, TimorLeste and, in a more fragile way, Uganda, allowing for
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
At the same time, recent upsurges in violence in
recovering areas like Burundi and Southern Sudan are
of great concern.
The full deployment of peacekeepers in Chad, the
Central African Republic and Darfur has the potential
to augment significantly efforts to protect and assist
those caught in the turmoil of violence in the region.

08-35281

S/PV.5898

But the risks of deterioration are currently very great.
It is essential that these missions be given the requisite
support and resources to fulfil their mandates.
Last but not least, we see the potential for notable
progress towards improved protection for civilians
from the devastating impact of cluster munitions. Over
100 States are currently gathered in Dublin to negotiate
a treaty banning them. I urge States to seize this
historic opportunity and conclude a treaty that has the
protection of civilians at its core and that contributes to
reducing the dangers they face from these weapons
during and after conflict.
Important though this progress is, the stark reality
remains that in conflicts throughout the world,
countless civilians continue to see their hopes shattered
by violence and displacement and their lives blown
apart by suicide bombers or ground down by physical
and sexual violence, deprivation and neglect.
In just the first five months of this year, more
than half a million people have been displaced by
conflict, both within and across borders. In Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Chad, Somalia and
Sudan, over 337,000 civilians have been forced to flee
violence this year, some of them not for the first time.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the benefits
of January’s conference on peace, security and
development are yet to be felt by those being sheltered
in camps and public buildings in the east, including the
175,000 people newly displaced this year.
In Iraq, sectarian violence, as well as armed
confrontations around Basra and Sadr City, have forced
more thousands from their homes. In Afghanistan,
conflict-induced displacement continues to undermine
the gains made in the return or resettlement of those
previously displaced. In Colombia and Sri Lanka, the
threat of further displacement is ever present in some
areas, as violence continues.
Of course, displacement is not the only indicator
of conflict or of its impact on civilians. Each of the
contexts that I have mentioned raises very different
concerns for the protection of civilians. Allow me to
elaborate today on three that remain particularly acute
in many of today’s conflicts: the conduct of hostilities,
sexual violence and humanitarian access.
First of all, on the conduct of hostilities, civilians
continue to account for the majority of casualties in
armed conflict, often in flagrant violation of the rules

08-35281

of international humanitarian law governing conduct of
hostilities.
In Darfur, for example, civilians remain the
principal victims of attacks by Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Janjaweed militia. In January and February,
aerial bombardments and ground attacks on villages in
west Darfur left 115 civilians dead, including elderly
and disabled persons, women and children. Earlier this
month, attacks on villages in north Darfur, including
the bombing of a school, water installations and a
market, resulted in further civilian deaths and injuries.
Rebel attacks, often mounted from areas of significant
civilian population, have also been heavy in civilian
casualties.
Last month in Somalia, hundreds of civilians
were killed or injured and thousands more were forced
to flee their homes due to fighting in Mogadishu
between the Government, supported by Ethiopian
forces, and non-State armed groups. The number of
casualties was no doubt exacerbated through the use of
heavy weapons in civilian areas.
Israeli civilians remain subject to physical and
psychological suffering caused by indiscriminate
rocket and mortar attacks launched from the occupied
Palestinian territory. In Gaza, Israeli air attacks and
ground incursions continue to result in unacceptable
Palestinian civilian casualties.
Non-State armed groups in Colombia continue to
perpetrate killings, mass displacements, hostagetaking, sexual violence and forced recruitment of
civilians. In Sri Lanka, hundreds of civilians have been
killed or injured this year, including in attacks on
civilian buses, railway stations and other public places.
Only last month, over 40 civilians, including the
Government’s Highways Minister, were killed in
separate suicide attacks. Yesterday, nine people died
and 73 were injured when a bomb exploded on a busy
commuter train in Dehiwela, a suburb of Colombo.
Last Friday, a roadside bomb in Kilinochchi killed 17
civilians, on a main road used to reach families
displaced by the conflict.
In Afghanistan, 300 civilians were killed in the
first four months of this year in attacks by so-called
anti-Government elements, the majority in suicide
attacks. Though often aimed at military targets, the
manner in which these suicide attacks are carried out
almost inevitably leads to civilian casualties. Similarly,
in Iraq, suicide attacks continue to be used with

3

S/PV.5898

chilling effect, while members of professional and
religious groups, the media, and Government officials
are targeted for assassination and abduction.
In both these contexts, I remain concerned also
by civilian casualties resulting from air strikes and
search operations conducted by national and
multinational forces, as well as the number of so-called
force protection incidents in which civilians are shot at
after being considered a threat to military convoys or
for not obeying instructions at checkpoints.
I do not for one second underestimate the
challenge, in Afghanistan, Iraq and other contexts, of
engaging an enemy whose members are difficult, if not
impossible, to identify, and who see the surrounding
civilian population as a shield from attack. This is an
enemy for whom the principles of distinction and
proportionality appear to have no practical meaning or
application. Nevertheless, any military response must
itself comply with international humanitarian law and
demonstrate respect for the dignity of those already
exposed to insurgent attacks.
Against this background, I welcome the inclusion
in relevant Council resolutions of provisions calling for
all parties to conflict to comply with international
humanitarian law, including in resolutions authorizing
multinational forces in Afghanistan and Iraq. I would
encourage the continued and systematic inclusion of
provisions to this effect in all relevant Council
resolutions.
I also welcome efforts made by the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and other
international forces in Afghanistan to minimize the risk
of civilian casualties. Nonetheless, I would reiterate the
Secretary-General’s recommendation, from October’s
protection of civilians report, that ISAF and the
multinational force in Iraq provide information in their
quarterly reports to the Council on steps taken to
ensure the protection of civilians in the conduct of
hostilities.
Turning to sexual violence, we need further
robust action to prevent and respond to such violence
during armed conflict. Anything less risks condemning
current and future generations of women and girls, and
boys and men, to indescribable humiliation and cruelty
followed by, for those who survive or who are born
from such violence, a life defined by pain, stigma and
rejection.

4

Following October’s presidential statement on
women, peace and security, Under-Secretaries-General
Arbour, Guéhenno and I asked peacekeeping missions
to provide improved reporting on sexual violence. This
will help build a better picture of the problem in
different contexts and allow for more targeted
prevention and response activities by the missions and
other actors. A conference begins today in the United
Kingdom, bringing together military commanders,
United Nations actors and some Member States to
discuss practical actions that could be taken by
peacekeepers in this area. We still have problems
ourselves in this area and we also recognize that we
have much more to do.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has long
been at the centre of our discussions on sexual
violence, given the pervasiveness of the problem there
and the sheer brutality with which those crimes are
often perpetrated. We have long urged the Government
and other actors on the ground to seek to address the
issue. In March, the Ministry of Gender, Family and
Children, in partnership with United Nations and civil
society actors, launched a national campaign to raise
awareness of sexual violence and the need for
accountability. This is a welcome step, as was
President Kabila’s reaffirmation of his zero-tolerance
policy on sexual violence during the Conference on
Peace, Security and Development in January.
But we need to intensify our efforts to make this
zero-tolerance a reality. This includes reversing, in
places like the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
continued failure of the police and judiciary to take
sexual violence seriously. Ineffective investigations,
minimal prosecutions, interference by military and
other officials in the administration of justice: these are
all practices which have to stop. They are an affront to
the rights of victims and serve only to reinforce the
culture of impunity on which sexual violence has
thrived for so long.
They also reaffirm the importance of the
Secretary-General’s recommendation in the protection
of civilians report that consideration be given to
establishing ad hoc judicial arrangements to support
the national authorities in addressing sexual violence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For example,
consideration could be given to creating a special,
possibly internationalized, chamber within the
Congolese criminal courts to prosecute sexual violence
cases.

08-35281

S/PV.5898

The Secretary-General also recommended using
targeted sanctions in response to sexual violence. I
welcome provisions in Council resolution 1807 on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that foresee the
possibility of imposing such measures against the
perpetrators of sexual violence. It is essential that the
Group of Experts and the Committee of the Council
have the necessary capacity to ensure implementation
of these provisions and that Member States apply the
required measures.
This problem must be approached with the same
degree of concerted action wherever it occurs. I
welcome provisions in Council resolution 1794
regarding the need to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of sexual violence and requesting the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to
pursue a mission-wide strategy on sexual violence and
to report regularly to the Council on actions taken. But
I would like to have seen similar requirements in
subsequent Council resolutions 1795 and 1812 on Côte
d’Ivoire and the Sudan respectively.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo may
stand apart in terms of the intensity of sexual violence.
But it is no less essential that we take action to prevent
the same horrific crimes against the displaced persons
returning home to southern Sudan; or that we seek
accountability for those who raped their way across
Côte d’Ivoire and ensure support to their victims. It is
precisely this need for consistency in approach that
stands behind the proposed expert group of the
Council, to which I shall return.
The third issue on which I would like to focus is
humanitarian access. Safe, timely and unhindered
access is fundamental to our efforts to protect civilians
and assist those in need. Yet, throughout the world,
including in countries on the Council’s agenda, the
harsh reality is that millions of people in need of
protection and assistance remain beyond our reach
owing to a variety of constraints.
Overall, improving access in concrete and
practical terms remains a key priority for me. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) is continuing to develop a mechanism to
enhance its capacity for reporting and analysis on
access constraints in conflict settings. This analysis
will be annexed to future reports of the Secretary-

08-35281

General on the protection of civilians and included in
my briefings to the Council.
The intention is not to establish a league table of
situations, ranked according to the severity of access
constraints. Rather, it is intended to provide a
disaggregated and qualitative picture of access
constraints and their humanitarian impact.
It should provide a clearer understanding of how
constraints impact different humanitarian actors, that is
how insecurity impacts differently on United Nations
agencies, international and national non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). It will help to identify
programmes that are seen by parties to a given conflict
as more acceptable and which may constitute possible
entry points from which operations can be expanded.
In Afghanistan, for example, insurgent groups tend to
be more disposed towards health programmes and
those that provide employment opportunities for local
populations.
The analysis will also help to identify emerging
trends and patterns, such as the increased presence of
commercial enterprises that are prepared to “pay for
access”. Such practices will, inevitably, have
unwelcome implications for free and unhindered access
by humanitarian actors working in the same area.
Ultimately, the analysis should provide the basis for
more nuanced, targeted and practical measures to
mitigate access constraints.
One known key factor in all this is the degree of
acceptance of humanitarian actors by local populations
and parties to the conflict. This is critical for reducing
security risks and enhancing access. This means good
local knowledge and contacts, as well as constant
reassertion to all concerned of the need for full respect
for humanitarian principles. It also requires sustained
and consistent dialogue about principles and needs
with all actors who can facilitate our access to people
in need. And that may, in some situations, include
those seen by many as terrorists.
Not all constraints on access constitute violations
of international humanitarian law. For example, some
result from the absence, or poor state, of roads or other
infrastructure, such as in the Democratic Republic of
Congo. Climatic conditions make areas inaccessible
during rainy seasons when rivers cannot be crossed, or
in winter, in periods of heavy snowfall, a particular
problem in parts of Afghanistan. Sometimes, our
access is temporarily constrained by active fighting.

5

S/PV.5898

Other constraints clearly are violations of
international humanitarian law. One of the most
alarming and direct threats to humanitarian operations
today stems from deliberate attacks against
humanitarian workers in addition to other securityrelated incidents. Often it is difficult to determine the
motivation of the perpetrators and their affiliation. Are
they connected with a party to the conflict? Are they
targeting humanitarian staff, whom they do not
perceive as neutral? Are they armed or criminal
elements taking advantage of the climate of insecurity
and preying on a soft target? Or is there some personal
or revenge motive?
Less than four weeks ago, Save the Children’s
Country Director in Chad was killed when his convoy
was attacked by unidentified gunmen, underlining the
increasingly dangerous operating environment for
humanitarian workers in that country.
Across the border in Darfur, seven humanitarian
workers were killed and 109 abducted in the first four
months of this year. 131 agency vehicles were hijacked
and humanitarian premises broken into by armed actors
on 52 occasions. Humanitarian workers have been
forced to relocate from areas of operation on eight
occasions, disrupting the provision of vital assistance
to populations in several locations.
In Somalia, 12 humanitarian staff were killed in
the first five months of this year. The threat of violence
is exacerbated by public threats and accusations of
partisan behaviour levied against the humanitarian
community by the Government and armed groups. In
Afghanistan, a significant proportion of attacks against
NGO staff by anti-Government elements are said to be
motivated by perceived support for the Government on
the part of NGOs.
Another major constraint on our operations stems
from restrictions on the movement of staff and goods
owing to checkpoints and spontaneous roadblocks. In
Somalia, the proliferation of such obstacles has led to
severe delays, diversion and looting of relief items and
additional costs incurred through charges levied at
checkpoints, which can run into hundreds of dollars.
Between October 2007 and March 2008, the number of
checkpoints on routes used by the World Food
Programme increased from 224 to 311.
In a different and less dangerous but no less
frustrating context, in the West Bank, there are still
over 600 checkpoints and roadblocks, though I hope

6

recent promised reductions will improve this situation.
Between November 2007 and April 2008, United
Nations vehicles experienced delays or were turned
back at checkpoints on 516 occasions. Over 4,000 staff
hours were lost due to delays or denials of access at
checkpoints in March 2008.
Interference in humanitarian activities or the
overt diversion of aid is another significant constraint
on our operations in some contexts. In Somalia, for
example, we face an acute phenomenon of so-called
gatekeepers who try to control access to communities
in need, often in return for a portion of the aid being
provided.
Another major constraint stems from bureaucratic
requirements for the entry and movement of staff and
goods. For example, requirements governing the entry
into Sri Lanka of humanitarian personnel and relief
items continue to impede our operations. The entry of
international staff designated for work in conflict areas
requires the authorization of three ministries and many
staff hours to process the necessary documents.
Operations in Sri Lanka are further constrained
by restrictions on the amount, type and mode of
transportation of relief goods and other items. For
example, restrictions on the movement of construction
materials and fuel from Government to Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam-controlled areas is affecting
shelter and sanitation activities.
Ad hoc demands and requirements by officials at
the local level also reduce, or paralyse, the passage of
assistance. In North Darfur, for example, the Wali
issued a decree earlier this month directing the
cessation of flights to and from El Fasher by the United
Nations and other organizations and the suspension of
road travel outside El Fasher for the United Nations
and NGOs. While United Nations flights resumed the
following day, the ban on road travel has effectively
curtailed access throughout the State except for in, and
around, the major humanitarian hubs.
While clearly outside the scope of this report and
debate, I note in passing that access can, of course, be
an issue not only in situations of conflict but also in the
aftermath of natural disasters, as we have seen most
recently following Cyclone Nargis. I hope this issue is
now resolved, but implementation will be key.
Meanwhile, this example demonstrates that we must
find a satisfactory way of dealing with access issues
for natural disasters as well.

08-35281

S/PV.5898

As I hope you will see from this, the issue of
constraints on access is complex. But the issue is
crucial. We are continuing our analysis so that the first
fruits will be available to the Council in the autumn.

text in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.

Vital progress has been made in the nine years
since the Council first considered the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. There is increased
awareness among Member States of the issues involved
and their relevance to the Council’s work. Four
thematic resolutions on the protection of civilians, in
particular resolution 1674 (2006), have established a
comprehensive — and ambitious — framework for
action. The challenge now is to realize that ambition
and ensure the systematic consideration of protection
of civilians issues in the Council’s work.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the Republic of Slovenia on
behalf of the European Union. I will just add a few
remarks.

To this end, I would emphasize the importance
that we and, I believe, a number of Council members,
attach to the Secretary-General’s recommendation for
the creation of a Security Council expert group on the
protection of civilians.

We warmly welcome the statement of UnderSecretary-General Holmes and his extremely focused
and action-oriented approach. He has offered us, I
would say, a really outstanding, very disturbing,
frustrating and almost appalling briefing.

For those who harbour reservations, let me be
clear that we are not proposing a subsidiary body of the
Council with the bureaucratic and resource issues that
that implies.

We all know and welcome the progress made by
the Security Council on this issue as recalled by
Mr. Holmes. First of all, resolution 1674 (2006)
reaffirms the principle of the responsibility to protect, a
“cardinal achievement” (S/2007/643, para. 11) of our
Organization and one that must be read and
operationalized in a non-confrontational manner. In
general terms, concerning the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, I feel that the briefing of the UnderSecretary-General requires us, for our part, to look at
the issue with a ground-centred operational approach,
as he has done. We must never lose sight of the fact
that what matters most at the end of the day is if and
how we are able to deliver and have an impact on the
ground in bringing relief to those who suffer.

Rather, we envisage an informal forum that
would bring together all of the Council Member States
at the expert level for transparent, systematic and
timely consultation on protection of civilians concerns,
particularly, but not only, in the context of the
establishment or renewal of peacekeeping mandates.
The Security Council has come far in addressing
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. But I
believe the Council could go further. A more consistent
approach to integrating the protection of civilians into
all relevant aspects of the Council’s work could make a
very real difference to the lives of millions of people
trapped in the chaos and horror of war.
An expert group of the kind I have described
would, I believe, be a useful vehicle to help take you
there.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached among Council members, I wish
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than five minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the

08-35281

Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and once again bringing to
our attention an issue that is and must remain, as the
Secretary-General said to us last November in vibrant
and powerful words, “an absolute priority” (S/PV.5781,
p. 2) for the Security Council and for Member States.

I think that is why the briefing of UnderSecretary-General Holmes is so disturbing: because it
questions how much of an impact we are able to have.
In fact, as I was saying, the Under-Secretary-General
paints a very disturbing and troubling picture of
conflict situations throughout the world, including
constraints and denials of access of humanitarian
personnel to vulnerable people caught in conflict and
negative developments in the conduct of hostilities,
among which is the scourge of sexual violence. We are
convinced that when used as a method of warfare and
when it deliberately targets the civilian population or is
part of a widespread attack against civilian population,

7

S/PV.5898

sexual violence in situations of armed conflict is a
threat to international peace and security, and therefore
the business of this Council. It is time that we fulfil our
responsibility and move from merely denouncing those
crimes to taking concrete action to end them.

highlighted — as soon as they arise. And then we must
react and find ways of being effective operationally
and not just through statements. We do not have the
luxury of wasting time when innocent lives are at
stake.

In operational terms, the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/643) was very clear, precise
and focused on which actions we need to take in the
following weeks and months. We are strongly in favour
of the proposal regarding an informal forum for
consultations on protection concerns at the expert level
among Council members. Here I will not repeat what
was so eloquently clarified by Ambassador Holmes. I
definitely think that that informal mechanism for
consultations would enable us to facilitate a systematic
consideration of the protection of civilians in the
Council’s deliberations, specifically when considering
the establishment, assessment and renewal of
peacekeeping mandates. There should be no new
mechanisms, just, as underlined by Under-SecretaryGeneral Holmes, an informal gathering, a “light” tool
for that enhanced operational and ground-centred
approach I was just referring to. It will make the
difference if it will give an added value to this groundcentred approach. I call on my colleagues: let us
deliver on such proposed action and try to sit down at
the same table. Discussing together is the best way of
achieving our goal. Once again, what is at stake is our
credibility in delivering.

Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank UnderSecretary-General Holmes for his detailed and
informative briefing. The Chinese delegation also
appreciates his efforts and his extensive work on the
ground since he took office. We express our positive
assessment of the work accomplished by the relevant
United Nations agencies on the ground for many years.

I have just two final remarks on other operational
tools.
First, on peacekeeping, United Nations operations
must be clearly mandated to ensure the protection of
civilians and subsequently report on it. Once again, I
welcome the joint study being conducted by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General.
Secondly, on access, we have greatly appreciated
the update received on the enhanced mechanism for the
monitoring and reporting system. More systematic and
timely reports by the Emergency Relief Coordinator to
the Council on serious access constraints are necessary.
We need an effective system of proactive monitoring
and prevention, and here I would like to underline the
term “proactive”. The attention of the Council must be
drawn to the different types of access constraints —
which do not necessarily mean violations, as has been

8

The Security Council has been discussing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict for almost a
decade and has adopted many resolutions and
presidential statements on the matter, including
resolution 1674 (2006), which constitutes the legal
framework within which the Security Council may
address this issue.
However, as the characteristics of conflicts
change and the complexity of interwoven issues
increases, many civilians are still being negatively
affected by armed conflict. The implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions still faces challenges. We
express our profound concern about the threat to the
life and property of civilians in armed conflict and call
upon the parties involved in conflict to comply with
international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and to protect the
life, property and legitimate rights and interests of
civilians.
On this occasion, I would like to highlight the
following points on how to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
First, the Security Council should strengthen its
efforts to prevent conflict and safeguard peace.
Civilians are a vulnerable group in situations of armed
conflict. The best protection that can be offered to
civilians is to prevent and reduce armed conflicts. The
Security Council should proceed to take action within
its mandate to prevent and reduce armed conflicts,
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
and improve the humanitarian situation in conflict
areas. Meanwhile, the Security Council should not
approach the question of civilians in an isolated
manner. It should take an integrated approach to
addressing the issue as an integral part of the peace

08-35281

S/PV.5898

process and the complex political situation in a given
conflict area.
Secondly, the role of national Governments in the
protection of civilians should be respected and
supported. The primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with national Governments.
The international community and external forces can
provide constructive help and support. However, they
should provide this in compliance with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and in full respect
for the will of the countries concerned. It should not
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned and, still less, intervene
forcibly.
Thirdly, when discussing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should
approach the concept of the responsibility to protect —
and especially its application — with great prudence.
The Final Document of the 2005 World Summit
devoted a lengthy section to a very careful description
of the responsibility to protect civilians from
massacres, war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity. It also indicated that that concept should be
further considered by the General Assembly. Many
members are currently deeply concerned about the
concept of the responsibility to protect, and the
relevant discussions should therefore be pursued in the
United Nations. The Security Council is in no position
to interpret or expand the concept of the responsibility
to protect at will, much less to abuse it.
Fourthly, humanitarian assistance should be
delivered in accordance with the principles of fairness,
neutrality, objectivity and independence. Humanitarian
relief is closely and practically linked to the protection
of civilians. Humanitarian relief agencies provide
assistance and support to civilians in dangerous
circumstances. Those efforts should be appreciated and
acknowledged. Moreover, humanitarian assistance
must retain its credibility and humanitarian nature. It
should be undertaken in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the principles of fairness and
neutrality. It should not be allowed to become
embroiled in local political disputes or involved in
actions that affect the peace process on the ground.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
cannot rely solely on the efforts of the Security
Council. We expect the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Human Rights

08-35281

Council to play a greater role. We also encourage the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank and other international agencies, as well as such
regional organizations as the African Union, to play
their role in helping the countries concerned in their
economic development, the resolution of their conflicts
and the promotion of reconstruction. We also welcome
the positive role that non-governmental organizations
play in that regard.
China is prepared to join with the rest of the
international community in a solid and effective effort
to enhance the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and achieve more constructive results.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also commend the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, for
briefing the Council.
In armed conflicts around the world, civilians
continue to be displaced, killed, maimed and often
raped. According to the Secretary-General’s report, for
35 million people around the world, flight has become
the only option. The deliberate targeting of civilians
and the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
including suicide attacks, have become widespread in
certain places, creating a climate of fear aimed at
further
destabilizing
and
displacing
civilian
populations. In other conflict situations, even militarily
superior parties, including multinational forces, are
often compelled to respond with methods and means of
warfare that violate the principles of distinction and
proportionality, of which civilians again bear the brunt.
Therefore, addressing the specific protection
needs of women and children remains an important
matter for the United Nations system. My delegation
reiterates our support for the implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict. That
means that concrete proposals are also needed to
ensure the right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to safe and unimpeded voluntary return.
South Africa, as a signatory to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and its two Additional Protocols
of 1977, wishes to underline the importance of
adhering to the principles contained in those
Conventions and to appeal for the full implementation

9

S/PV.5898

of the commitments made by all States parties to those
basic tenets of international law. The Security Council
should also continue to call upon all parties to conflict,
including multinational forces authorized by the
Council, to uphold their international humanitarian law
and human rights obligations and to report on steps
taken to ensure the protection of civilians during the
conduct of hostilities.
The issue of humanitarian access will require
further attention so as to find ways to ensure that those
in need of life-saving assistance receive it and that
those who provide it do so in a secure environment in
which attacks on humanitarian workers are not
tolerated.
According to the Secretary-General’s current
report, constraints on or denials of access can take
several forms. Those are constraints imposed by the
operating environment, such as the destruction of
infrastructure; the attempts by parties to conflict to
restrict or block access; time-consuming bureaucratic
procedures for importing humanitarian supplies and
restrictions, or delays in issuing visas and travel
permits for humanitarian personnel; and the constraints
resulting from deliberate attacks on humanitarian
workers.
The Council should look into the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal for establishing mechanisms to
enable United Nations humanitarian agencies to have
some working-level dialogue with all parties to armed
conflict on the ground. Such dialogue would be
necessary
for
establishing
“deconflicting”
arrangements to agree upon the routes and timing of
humanitarian convoys and airlifts to avoid accidental
strikes on humanitarian operations. Such dialogue
would also promote humanitarian corridors and days of
tranquillity.
In the case of the occupied Palestinian territories,
the blockade should be lifted so that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs can have contact
and dialogue with all parties, particularly in Gaza, and
provide the necessary humanitarian assistance.
Therefore, it is important that humanitarian assistance
continues to be provided in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict must
remain a priority of the United Nations system. My
delegation is therefore of the view that finding a

10

common solution to the protection of civilians would
need the cooperation of each and every Member State.
We further believe that the protection of civilians
would be better addressed in partnership with regional
mechanisms, and that strengthening dialogue and
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
organizations would contribute to tackling common
security challenges and ensuring speedy action on the
ground.
Finally, allow me to convey my delegation’s deep
regret at the tragic killings that took place earlier this
month of two aid workers, a World Food Programmecontracted truck driver in Somalia and a country
director of Save the Children in eastern Chad. The
deaths of those humanitarian workers underline yet
again the dangerous and volatile environment that aid
workers have to endure in giving assistance to civilians
caught in armed conflict. The loss of their service is a
loss to all of us.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President. I would like to thank you for
having convened this important meeting and thank
Mr. Holmes for his valuable report on the current
situation in the field and the principal challenges
linked with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
My delegation would have preferred to hear
about today’s panorama in very different terms from
those that the Council encountered six months ago.
However, once again we are witness to situations in
which many Governments disregard the pressing needs
of their populations. It is regrettable that those
allegedly responsible for serious crimes, including
some who have been called before the International
Court of Justice, go unpunished, making a mockery of
international law and justice.
As Mr. Holmes has told us today, there are many
and very diverse obstacles to protecting civilians. My
delegation wishes to highlight limitations on
humanitarian access, as we have seen in Myanmar in
recent weeks, as well as other obstacles that prevent
the deployment of peacekeeping missions, as we see in
Sudan, where the Government raises obstacles to the
full implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Violations of international law in the conduct of
hostilities are also a source of concern to us, such as
the use of human shields by terrorist groups and the

08-35281

S/PV.5898

indiscriminate use of force by private security
companies and the multinational force in Iraq, or
deliberate attacks against civilians in the conflict
between Israel and Palestine. There, civilians,
particularly children and women, are direct victims of
the escalation of violence through rocket attacks,
military incursions or the obstruction of a continuous
supply of humanitarian assistance. Sexual violence and
gender-based violence, used as a weapon of war, as we
see in Sudan and in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, are also a particular source of concern to my
delegation.
On this topic, as a member of the open-ended
group that last year adopted a strategy of providing
support to the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations personnel and associated staff, I was
very distressed to see the report on Save the Children
in the London Daily Telegraph today, reporting on
what seems to be an abiding problem — the abuse and
sexual misuse linked to United Nations staff, even to
humanitarian personnel. That has cast a shadow over
the whole Organization, which is the lesser evil. The
greater evil is the fate of the children — the boys and
girls, as well as adults, who are victims of those
terrible acts. Zero tolerance must stop being just a
slogan used to condemn sexual violence as a tool of
war or intimidation. It should also stimulate our efforts
to ensure that humanitarian staff, and United Nations
personnel, in particular, are always seen as bringing
relief, hope, peace and well-being to those whom we
are committed and obliged to protect.
My delegation is also concerned by the
continuing use of cluster bombs, which are killing
innocent people along the borders between Lebanon
and Israel. We could go on listing all types of situations
where owing to different factors, but in particular a
lack of political will, hundreds of thousands of
civilians are killed or are the direct targets of this
violence daily. We see it in Sudan, in Somalia, in Chad
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where it
is clear the protection of civilians must be part of the
political strategy to reduce short and long-term risks to
the population while there is action to provide physical
protection and the vital assistance they need to survive.
It must be clear to us that, while humanitarian
assistance and peacekeeping missions are important
protection mechanisms, these are only temporary
solutions, that are unsustainable without the
appropriate political framework, as sadly we see in

08-35281

Somalia, where for the time being it is not even
possible to deploy a peacekeeping operation and
hundreds of people are dying every day.
We clearly understand that constrained resources
are one of the greatest challenges for missions, such as
in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
when it comes to discharging their mandate
appropriately. But we must bear in mind that the same
resources could produce far greater dividends, if they
were also invested in tackling the roots and causes of
the conflict. A development-based perspective on
protection could, for instance, provide increased access
to water in cases like Sudan, where the struggle for
access to natural resources is an important part of the
conflict. That is why we restate our appeal that, every
time the Council extends or authorizes a peacekeeping
mission, it should incorporate a suitable peacebuilding
component, with coordination of United Nations
system activities, so as to turn it into an integrated
mission.
My delegation is concerned by the fact that,
although the majority of us agree that the protection of
civilians is a general objective and one of the main
justifications for United Nations presence in the field,
at the same time we lack a unified and adequate
understanding of the topics and dimensions that
comprise the protection of civilians, particularly in
multi-agency operations, where a concerted focus is
particularly necessary to provide effective protection.
The different political, humanitarian, military and
development components of the various United
Nations missions in the field lack such an integrated
focus on the protection of civilians. Compliance with
protection mandates depends on the interpretation that
each mission wishes to give it. The protection of
civilians should be one of the main mandates in any
United Nations mission in the field, whether it is a
peacekeeping operation, or a political or peacebuilding
mission. As established in resolution 1674 (2006), we
must work on drawing up clear guidelines to ensure
effective coordination among the various actors
involved, in particular between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
My country gives priority to the Council
receiving extensive information on the implementation
of the eight civilian-protection mandates created since
1999 so that we may assess their effectiveness and

11

S/PV.5898

impact in the field and take the necessary measures to
strengthen them and extend their application to other
situations where it may be necessary.
Finally, my delegation would like to say that it
looks favourably upon the recommendations to create a
working group on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This could be a useful tool to strengthen the
work of the Council in this field through ample,
systematic and, above all, continuous analysis and
debate of the necessities for protection in each case.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): We
appreciate the opportunity provided by this meeting for
the Council to reaffirm its steadfast commitment to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
briefing and continued hard work in this area.
Although today’s presentation makes clear that
there have been some positive developments since we
last discussed this issue, much remains to be done if
the international community is to achieve an adequate
level of protection for civilians in armed conflict. As
my delegation has stated before, the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians lies with the
parties to the armed conflict and the national
governments concerned. However, the efforts of the
United Nations should support and reinforce that role.
In situations where either the national Government or
the parties to an armed conflict are unable or unwilling
to protect civilians, the international community can
play an important role.
I would like to address the four challenges
highlighted by Under-Secretary-General Holmes and in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2007/643).
The United States shares the view that we must
stand ready to help ensure the safety and security of the
courageous and dedicated humanitarian workers who
attempt to provide relief throughout the world. As we
all know, there is a lack of humanitarian access in
many areas of conflict that must be urgently addressed.
In particular, we support the goal of the return of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, and
critical elements of the United Nations country team
from Kenya to Somalia, as soon as it is feasible, which
will help the United Nations to coordinate
humanitarian relief. We urge all parties to facilitate the
critical work of the United Nations and humanitarian
non-governmental organizations. In that regard, we

12

welcome the recent appointment by Somali Prime
Minister Nur Adde Hassan Hussein of a humanitarian
focal point. We look forward to that appointment
facilitating humanitarian work in Somalia.
Regrettably, this challenge exists elsewhere in
Africa. As has been necessary to state all too often in
the Chamber, millions of people in the Darfur region of
the Sudan are at the mercy of the humanitarian
assistance lifeline provided by the international
community. But that aid continues to be hindered by
Government and rebel actions and inaction, despite
agreements and promises to the contrary.
The hardships facing the Israeli population in
southern Israel and the Palestinian people in Gaza also
rightly merit the continued concern of the international
community. Recent terrorist attacks by Hamas only
exacerbate the plight of the Palestinian people, by
making it more difficult for the international
community to deliver much-needed humanitarian
assistance and goods to the people of Gaza. While
Israel has an unquestionable right to defend itself
against terrorist attacks, we urge the Government of
Israel, when responding to attacks, to take all
appropriate steps to avoid civilian casualties and to
minimize the impact on innocent civilians.
My Government remains gravely concerned about
the ongoing and widespread use of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict situations throughout the
world. It is one of the most significant protection
challenges, and one that is too often ignored. Sexual
and gender-based violence must be more effectively
addressed. United Nations peacekeeping missions have
a clear role to play in preventing that violence and
addressing its impact. The United States condemns
sexual violence as an instrument of policy and calls on
all Member States to end that gross injustice. We were
encouraged last fall by the adoption without a vote of
General Assembly resolution 62/134, calling on States
to end impunity by prosecuting and punishing those
who use rape and other sexual violence to advance
military or political objectives, to protect and support
victims, and to develop and implement comprehensive
strategies on prevention and prosecution of rape. The
United States urges all Member States to take concrete
steps to end both the use of rape as an instrument of
war and impunity for perpetrators. During my
Government’s presidency of the Security Council in
June, in a further effort to continue progress in that
area, we and others will pursue a draft resolution

08-35281

S/PV.5898

addressing the role of women in conflict, in particular
as regards sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict, as part of a ministerial-level meeting on
women in conflict.
The
United
States
continues
to
seek
comprehensive approaches to resolve protracted
refugee situations in all parts of the world through
support for durable solutions. We also seek innovative
approaches to develop livelihood strategies and to
maximize opportunities for refugees, self-reliance and
empowerment.
Where conflict is causing civilians to flee and
seek asylum, we are actively working with other
Governments to provide protection to those in need.
We call on all Member States to renew their
commitment to uphold the right to asylum, to protect
civilians from forcible return to face persecution and to
provide durable solutions for refugees.

General Holmes for their efforts and personal
commitment to help the people of Burma in the
aftermath of cyclone Nargis, in particular by pushing
for unhindered access by international humanitarian
experts and workers to conduct a thorough assessment
of the situation and to accelerate the flow of
desperately needed humanitarian assistance.
Overall, the United States would like to
encourage strong Security Council and multilateral
action generally to deal with one key source of
humanitarian crises in armed conflict, that is,
Governments or actors that deliberately target or fail to
protect civilians and generally fail to respect the
protected status of civilians and civilian objects. In that
regard, my Government fully shares the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns about any erosion of the principle
of distinction, which requires parties to armed conflict
to distinguish at all times between combatants and
civilians and to direct attacks only against combatants
and military objectives, as well as about the all-toofrequent disregard for the principle of proportionality
in balancing harm to civilians and civilian objects
against military gain in a particular attack. As the
Secretary-General’s most recent report correctly
declares, “Deliberate targeting of civilians has become
more widespread” (S/2007/643, para. 22).

The United States shares many of the
humanitarian concerns associated with the use of
cluster munitions expressed in the Secretary-General’s
report. My delegation wishes to make clear that the
United States is committed to reducing the harm that
those weapons can cause to civilian populations.
However, we do not share the Secretary-General’s
conclusions and related recommendations regarding the
desirability of a treaty emerging from the Oslo process.
We do not believe that abandoning cluster munitions is
tenable from a military standpoint, or that banning
them without the participation of those States most
likely to use cluster munitions is the option that will
have the greatest positive humanitarian impact. Rather,
my Government believes that a useful agreement that
would include all the primary users and producers of
cluster munitions is possible in the framework of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. Thus
far, negotiations in the context of the Convention have
been positive. The first two sessions have produced
some real progress towards a document. The July 2008
session will be pivotal to our work, and the United
States is preparing to make intensive efforts at that
session. We remain hopeful that an agreement can be
achieved this year.

Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I wish, first of
all, to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on a very important topic. I take this
opportunity to express my delegation’s appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General
Holmes
for
his
comprehensive briefing. We are convinced that
periodic briefings on this issue constitute a critical
mechanism to update the Security Council on the
situation and to take appropriate measures.

The United States remains committed to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, in connection
both with the work of the Council and with our
activities throughout the world. In that regard, we
commend the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-

My delegation joins other Council members in
welcoming efforts made by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
United Nations missions to protect civilians in armed
conflict. We also recognize the progress they have

08-35281

In closing, the United States once again
commends the Secretary-General, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
OCHA’s humanitarian partners for their dedicated work
in life and death situations to provide assistance and to
be advocates for the protection of civilians, particularly
children, women, the elderly and other vulnerable
groups.

13

S/PV.5898

made in recent years, which has contributed to
lessening civilian suffering in some parts of the world.
The most notable recent cases include the United
Nations missions in Côte d’Ivoire, Timor-Leste and
Nepal.
However, we are deeply concerned about the
worsening situations in many areas where civilians —
first and foremost women and children — continue to
fall victim to killings, maiming, abuse, humiliation and
other inhumane treatment. We recall with concern the
alert raised two weeks ago by Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guéhenno (see S/PV.5892) with regard to
attacks on villages occupied by civilians in North and
South Darfur, as well as the alert raised in great detail
today by Under-Secretary-General John Holmes with
regard to pervasive hostilities in many countries in
Africa, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America.
These, plus sexual and gender-based violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere,
represent a strong warning that the efforts of United
Nations bodies and Member States are not enough.

regional organizations, for we trust that regional
organizations, with their good understanding of
regional stakeholders, are well positioned to convince
parties to armed conflict to minimize their operations
in civilian areas, facilitate humanitarian access and
respect humanitarian and human rights law. At the
same time, we emphasize that parties to armed conflict
should comply with the principles of international
humanitarian law relating to distinction and
proportionality and refrain from exerting measures
against civilians, and that the Security Council should
consider the issue of the protection of civilians on a
case-by-case basis and in line with the approach
endorsed in previous relevant resolutions.
While supporting international cooperation, I
would like to reiterate Viet Nam’s view that it is States
that bear primary responsibility to protect their own
civilians and to deal with violence against civilians as
well as violations of international humanitarian law. In
order to help States fulfil their responsibilities, the
United Nations can help improve their national
capacity, provide technical assistance and work with
them to conduct other awareness-raising activities, for
instance through training courses. Bearing that in mind,
we hold that the creation and application of any
international mechanism should be thoroughly studied
with a view to ensuring its efficient, effective and
sustainable performance without resulting in an
unnecessary financial burden for States, and that such
an act should respect national sovereignty, territorial
integrity, ownership and self-determination and should
be in accordance with the United Nations Charter and
international law.

While sharing the view that humanitarian access,
among other things, is critical to protecting civilians in
armed conflict, we hold that humanitarian access and
assistance should be independent of political and
military measures, in keeping with the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
and in conformity with national and international law.
We are mindful of the millions of people who are still
excluded from access to life-saving assistance and of
continued attacks targeting United Nations personnel,
relief workers and other humanitarian staff in many
conflict places. Beyond the detailed account of attacks
on humanitarian workers that Under-Secretary-General
Holmes has just given us, the recent ambush of four
United Nations peacekeepers in West Darfur and the
kidnapping of two Italian volunteers in Somalia are but
two of the many examples of this situation. It is
therefore urgent now to demand that parties to armed
conflicts end hostilities against humanitarian staff and
allow them to help people in need.

Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for the
timely convening of this open debate on a topic of
great importance on which your country has taken the
lead. We also appreciated the briefing by Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, about the alarming situation of civilians in
armed conflict.

As we have highlighted during several Council
meetings, the best way to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to prevent and peacefully resolve armed
conflict itself. In that regard, we wish to underline the
need to ensure better and closer cooperation and
coordination between the Security Council and the
General Assembly and other agencies and
organizations and between United Nations bodies and

The Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols are the foundation of international
humanitarian law. They are the highest expression of
international law as regards the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Nevertheless, there are countless
obstacles to protecting civilian populations caught in
the midst of hostilities, which were extensively
described in Mr. Holmes’s presentation. Among them

14

08-35281

S/PV.5898

we wish to emphasize restrictions on access for
humanitarian assistance owing to security, bureaucratic
or logistical factors.
We must also emphasize other challenges to the
provision of humanitarian assistance that we consider
to be of great importance. These include a lack of clear
mandates for humanitarian actions; a lack of
monitoring and investigating mechanisms to identify
and register the perpetrators of flagrant and systematic
violations of international humanitarian law. Among
such violations, the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war and, most recently, acts of piracy deserve
particular attention.
To confront these challenges, the Security
Council must implement a strategic vision for the more
effective allocation of existing resources and
capacities. Also, the Council should take on a
supervisory role and use all the tools at its disposal to
identify those who commit such violations and bring
them to trial before the relevant judicial bodies. At the
same time, the United Nations should carry out
preventive activities by collecting and disseminating
information, implementing an early-warning system in
coordination
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, and strengthening State institutions in
order to protect human rights, the rule of law and the
provisions of basic services.
In parallel, it is important to incorporate — or
where it already exists, strengthen — the civilian
protection element in current peacekeeping operations.
In that context, we agree with the suggestion that a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict be established.
In the sphere of international justice, the
International Criminal Court is, without question, the
key instrument for avoiding the obstacles I have
mentioned and deterring parties from ignoring the rules
in this area. Unfortunately, initiating a case and
gathering evidence can sometimes be an enormously
complex and difficult task owing to the situation on the
ground. Hence, we encourage all States Members of the
United Nations to help the Court in its work by
providing the resources and evidence needed to punish
the perpetrators of crimes in conflict areas.
Nor can we forget that the protection of civilians
is relevant not only during armed conflict. The
international community must also support States in
meeting the most pressing needs of their populations

08-35281

when those populations are affected by natural
disasters.
Finally, my delegation has repeatedly stated that
there is a close relationship among international
humanitarian law, the protection of civilians and the
concept of the responsibility to protect, as set out in the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1). That principle makes the State and its
institutions responsible for protecting its citizens from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, and it warns that, if the State does
not wish to protect its population or is unable to do so,
the international community is obliged to help with
that task, or to assume it, through an effective and
transparent response. In order to prevent this concept
from becoming a mere footnote to history, we must be
clear about its definition so that it can provide a
concrete mandate for those entrusted with the
protection of civilians.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing, which was pertinent to the
topic under discussion.
The protection of civilians must be the highest
priority for Governments involved in conflicts. We
emphasize that all parties to armed conflict bear
responsibility for ensuring the security of civilians. We
vigorously condemn both deliberate attacks on
civilians and their deaths resulting from indiscriminate
or excessive use of force, which is a violation of
international humanitarian law. There can be no
justification for armed groups that make use of suicide
terrorists and take hostages.
Once again we would like to draw attention to the
alarming data cited in the most recent report of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
with regard to the situation of human rights in that
country. Armed groups continue to carry out deliberate
attacks and terrorist acts directed against the civilian
population. Another source of considerable concern is
the activity of private guard enterprises, which often
grossly violate the rights of civilians. First and
foremost, we are speaking here of the behaviour of
such companies in Iraq that have caused injuries to and
deaths of civilians, including women and children. It
should be emphasized that under international law the
responsibility for the actions of such groups in many
cases is borne by the States that hire them.

15

S/PV.5898

The use of children in conflict is inadmissible, as
is inhuman treatment of them. In that context I wish to
flag the problem of the detention of minors in military
prisons of the multinational forces in Iraq, which
contravenes international standards. According to the
data in the UNAMI report, those prisons now hold
about 900 children who are accused of terrorism and
who have had no access to the civilian court system.
We support the appeal of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
Mrs. Coomaraswamy, regarding the need for a speedy
solution to this problem. It is well know that minors
are also being held at the military base in Bagram, near
Kabul, and in Guantánamo.
Conflicts remain the major reason for the high
level of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) throughout the world. Once again Iraq,
unfortunately, is in the lead in that respect, with more
than 2.5 million refugees and approximately 2 million
IDPs, most of whom have been deprived of basic and
fundamental vital human needs. Their problems require
an immediate solution. In addition to purely
humanitarian factors, they are a difficult burden on the
host countries.
The problem of displaced persons is a serious
concern with regard to the situation in the Sudanese
province of Darfur. Here, we rest our hopes for an
improvement of the situation first on the proper
functioning of the political negotiating process and the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Serious threats to civilians continue to exist in a
number of other conflicts, especially in the Middle East
and in Africa.
With regard to the protection of civilians, the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former fighters is of great significance. Those
programmes require proper support from the United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
We favour the interpretation of the concept of the
responsibility to protect in accordance with the final
document of the 2005 summit (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), as a responsibility of each State to
protect those individuals under its jurisdiction —
protection from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Moreover, it is the United
Nations and the Security Council that bear the task of
supporting those national efforts.

16

The prevention of violence is an objective that is
strategic in nature, reaffirming the need to combat
impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Here, assistance to those States
involved in restoring or establishing independent
national judicial systems and institutions should be
stressed.
With regard to the idea of creating in the Security
Council an expert working group on the protection of
civilians, the advisability of such a step seems dubious.
Before raising that question, in our view there should
be an assessment of the effectiveness and experience of
the operations of the first such body, the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts.
The United Nations must rapidly and effectively
respond to incidents of violence against civilians and to
the destruction of civilian facilities during armed
conflict. That task requires systematic coordination of
measures at the international, regional and national
levels. It is important to achieve unswerving
compliance by all sides with the norms of international
humanitarian law and the relevant decisions of the
Security Council. The implementation of documents
already adopted by the Council on, inter alia, children
and armed conflict and on women, peace and security
must be insisted on. They have great potential, and the
Council could focus on the assessment of the
implementation of its decisions in that sphere and on
identifying and eliminating the obstacles.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Burkina Faso is grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on a question as
significant as the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We thank the Secretary-General for his
commitment to find solutions commensurate with this
problem. The relevant recommendations in his report
form an important contribution to the Council’s action.
We also wish to thank Mr. John Holmes for his
statement and for his efforts in the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to meet those
challenges.
Many have pointed out that to meet the evermore-complex needs for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, the international community has
established a legal and institutional framework, in
particular the Charter of the United Nations and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and its two
Additional Protocols of 1977. In addition, recently the

08-35281

S/PV.5898

International Criminal Court, the Special Tribunals and
Council resolution 1674 (2006) have reiterated the
responsibility of States and of the international
community in this area.
With regard to the persistence of violence
experienced by civilians in conflict zones, in violation
of resolution 1674 (2006), the appeal launched by the
Secretary-General during the Council’s most recent
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(5781st meeting) unfortunately has not generated a
reaction. It should be recalled that the responsibility to
protect civilians under their jurisdiction devolves first
and foremost on States, due to their territorial and
personal competences. When necessary, the United
Nations and particularly the Security Council must see
to it that they can bring the necessary assistance to
distressed civilian populations, with the assistance and
cooperation of Governments.
Millions of civilians, including women, children,
the elderly and the disabled, are still being wounded,
mutilated and killed because they have been
deliberately targeted, sometimes with disproportionate
use of military force. The result is an ever-growing
number of refugees and displaced persons crammed
into camps where they are subjected to inhuman and
unacceptable living conditions and conditions for
survival. In addition to the many damaging effects
associated with overcrowding, those people are
sometimes the focus of unacceptable blackmail by the
protagonists.
The situation of civilian victims of conflicts is
often exacerbated by deliberate restrictions on
humanitarian access through attacks on convoys, acts
of aggression and the killing of humanitarian
personnel, as we have unfortunately seen quite recently
in Somalia. That is a major concern for which we must
find the appropriate answers, such as humanitarian
corridors. In particular, there is a need to provide the
means to bring parties to fully respect their obligations
within the framework of international humanitarian law
and human rights. The same holds true for the
protection of journalists, who are often the initial
witnesses to civilian tragedies and the only link
between those people and the outside world.
It nearly goes without saying that Burkina Faso
condemns the use of generalized and systematized
sexual violence as a weapon of war and therefore
advocates a zero-tolerance policy towards those proven

08-35281

to have committed such acts. We therefore encourage
the investigation, trial and appropriate punishment of
such individuals.
We are also concerned by the use of cluster
bombs and other weapons having excessive and
injurious effects on civilians, in particular children. In
addition, such weapons hamper access of humanitarian
workers to people and therefore have disastrous
consequences during and for a long time following
conflict, thus making the return of civilians difficult,
leading to a deterioration of the environment and
destroying much agricultural land. They therefore form
an obstacle to the socio-economic reconstruction and
development of States. While waiting for the
conclusion of the Oslo process, we urge parties to
respect the recommendations made in paragraph 65 of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2007/643).
The struggle against impunity is an integral part
of the protection of civilian populations, including
humanitarian workers. My delegation reaffirms its
support for all initiatives designed to bring to justice
the perpetrators of violations in this sphere.
The best guarantee of respect for the rights of
civilians is the creation of conditions ensuring stability
and lasting peace in States, in particular through
strengthening the rule of law, democracy and good
governance. Another element in this strategy is the
struggle against trafficking in small arms and drugs,
which is also contributing to destabilizing countries
and even entire regions.
Together with all of these actions, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General must for their part
continue to promote preventive diplomacy in
coordination
with
subregional
and
regional
organizations. For ultimately the efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflicts must be developed and
harmonized in an integrated, inclusive and
participatory manner.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the presidency of the Council for this timely
meeting and also to thank John Holmes for his
introduction to our debate.
This debate is taking place in a very particular
context. The Secretary-General and Mr. Holmes have
just returned from Burma. Clearly, the situation of the
civilian population victims of cyclone Nargis cannot be
confused with the situation of the civilian population

17

S/PV.5898

victims of an armed conflict. But can we talk about the
protection of civilians without talking about the
tragedy that we have been watching for weeks now for
hundreds of thousands of persons in Burma? Can we
talk about access to humanitarian assistance without
addressing the obstacles that have unacceptably been
encountered in access to Burmese civilians? In the face
of such a heavy reality, can the Council retreat into an
academic distinction between two types of population:
the victims of armed conflict and the victims of a
natural disaster? We do not believe that, all the less
because the victims of cyclone Nargis are not just the
victims of a natural phenomenon.
As our Minister for Foreign Affairs said on
19 May, “The Burmese people are the victims of a
two-fold scourge — a natural disaster on an
exceptional scale on the one hand and the stubborn
obstruction of proposals for emergency assistance on
the other. In French national law, that is called
‘non-assistance to persons in danger’”.
We do not know today whether the assurance
given by the Burmese authorities to the SecretaryGeneral, and then at the donors conference that was
held in Rangoon on Sunday, will be translated into
action. We do not know whether all the international
assistance that has been proposed will actually be
accepted. We do not know whether the humanitarian
agencies will truly have access to the distressed
population.
What we do know, however — and I am referring
to what Mr. Holmes said on behalf of the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) on Sunday -that only 41 per cent of
the population affected by the cyclone has received any
assistance, that is, 1 million out of 2.4 million people.
What we know is that out of this 1 million people who
have begun to receive some assistance, a vast majority
are in the Rangoon area; only a minority of victims
living in the delta has received help. What we know is
that the population in the delta was deprived of the
1,500 tons of food supplies and other relief — the
equivalent of 30 cargo planes — that the French ship
Mistral could have provided starting 15 May.
Finally, what we know — and I am referring
again to Mr. Holmes’s remarks in Rangoon — is that
there is a possibility of a second wave of deaths that
will be the result of epidemics and malnutrition.

18

Do we have to accept this? Should we do nothing
and condemn the population of Burma? If the
commitment to openness and cooperation undertaken
by the Burmese authorities several days ago are not
followed by actions, should our Council continue to
hide behind a restrictive interpretation of its
competencies? Some were surprised to hear Bernard
Kouchner talk about the responsibility to protect. But,
as we have had the opportunity to emphasize, there is
always a risk of slipping from not helping people in
danger to crimes against humanity. Must we really wait
until we have crossed that threshold before the Council
agrees to consider a situation? I will say this clearly:
that is not the concept of the United Nations or of the
Security Council that France champions.
That is all the more the case, in view of the fact
that the concept of non-assistance to persons in danger
is not foreign to the international community, least of
all to the United Nations. On 8 December 1988,
20 years ago, the General Assembly adopted its
resolution 43/131, which sets out, if not legal, then at
least political obligations. By virtue of the principle of
subsidiarity, it is the territorially competent State that
bears the primary role in organizing, carrying out and
distributing assistance. If, and only if, that State is not
in a position to cope with the situation, because of a
lack of means or political will, the international
community takes over and replaces the State that is
failing to assist the endangered population.
Resolution 45/100, adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 December 1990, confirmed the
principle of free access to victims of natural
catastrophes and other similar emergency situations.
For all those reasons, if the situation does not
rapidly change in Burma to the benefit of the
population affected by the cyclone, France will not sit
idly by in the Council. The Security Council can decide
to intervene to force the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, as it did in the recent past by opening
humanitarian corridors in Kurdistan, Bosnia and
Somalia. Was the outrage at those massacres greater
than that provoked by those drowned or starving in
Burmese countryside?
I have spoken at length about what seems
indispensable to us. I shall be more concise on the
remainder of the themes related to our debate.
In the view of France, it is indispensable to
promote the protection of civilians throughout United

08-35281

S/PV.5898

Nations activities, in particular in the context of
peacekeeping missions. As the Secretary-General
recommended, we think it is useful that States
members of the Council take the initiative to meet at
the expert level to consider ways and means of more
systematically tackling the protection of civilians when
peacekeeping operations are set up or when their
mandates are renewed. France, together with others, is
ready to initiate such meetings. The troop-contributing
countries should naturally be associated with these
endeavours in some way or another.
In addition, we commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the
information it has provided on obstacles to
humanitarian assistance to populations in need.
We also hope that all Council resolutions on the
protection of civilians are given systematic follow-up.
We are thinking, of course, of resolution 1674 (2006).
In that regard, we look forward to the adoption of a
presidential statement at the end of today’s debate,
calling upon the Secretary-General to inform us, in the
context of his next report, on the implementation of
protection mandates by United Nations missions.
Another aspect of resolution 1674 (2006) is of great
importance for us: combating impunity. The
International Criminal Court has a key part to play. The
obligation to cooperate arising from the Rome Statute
and from Security Council resolutions must be
respected.
We are also thinking of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security. As already stated here,
sexual violence is systematically being used as a
weapon of war. These are abominable crimes affecting
millions of people. Such crimes must be prevented and
punished. I welcome in this regard the arrest this
weekend of Mr. Bemba, who had been sought by the
International Criminal Court for many crimes,
especially for sexual violence. I would also like to
repeat our preoccupation with reports of abuses
involving peacekeeping personnel. The soldiers of
peace must have exemplary conduct; the United
Nations must see to that.
We are also thinking about resolution 1502
(2003) on the protection of humanitarian personnel and
about 1738 (2006) on the protection of journalists.
I also reiterate my commitment as Chairman of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in

08-35281

favour of very effective implementation of resolution
1612 (2005).
I wish to conclude my statement by sharing with
members the decision just taken by France in order to
contribute to the momentum that has begun even
before we see the final text of the treaty now being
negotiated, to immediately withdraw the M26 rocket
from operational service. This is an important gesture
that attests to the responsible attitude of our armed
forces. That weapon actually accounts for 90 per cent
of our cluster munitions stockpiles.
In doing this, France, which has not used cluster
munitions in 17 years, shows that it is possible to
reconcile humanitarian demands with the requirements
of defence. Following the Oslo Conference on Cluster
Munitions in February 2007, France was among the
first States to be mobilized by a clear objective: to
prevent the humanitarian tragedy caused by cluster
munitions.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend my
thanks to Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for the valuable and
comprehensive briefing. We highly value his efforts
and endeavours in this field.
The issue under discussion in this meeting, based
on the framework of a previous understanding reached
in the Council, is one that unites us all. Protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is one of the highest legal,
moral and religious commitments and is an absolute
priority in our work.
At the end of the last century, the Council started
to give priority to the commitment. After the civilian
tragedies in Rwanda and Bosnia, the first open meeting
of the Council was crowned by a presidential statement
(S/PRST/1999/6) that revealed the growing gap
between the provisions of international law and their
implementation and emphasized a coordinated and
comprehensive method for protecting civilians.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/1999/957),
issued at the end of the last century, set out specific
measures that could be undertaken by the Council
within its mandate. It was followed by other reports,
the most recent of which was last year’s, which
determined measures to be taken rapidly and
systematically.

19

S/PV.5898

The discussions in the Council advanced, and a
number of working groups have been established.
Many resolutions have been issued, such as 1674
(2006) and 1738 (2006), as well as a number of
presidential statements. Most of those resolutions and
presidential statements underscored the Council’s
commitment to protect civilians and to condemn any
violations of international humanitarian law, human
rights law, refugee law and to combat impunity and
safeguard access of humanitarian assistance and the
safety of humanitarian workers.
In the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), all States accepted
the principle of the responsibility to protect. The most
recent report of the Secretary-General noted the
advances in the implementation of this principle. The
role of the Council has grown in a number of ways,
such as combating sexual enslavement, protecting
women and children and controlling the spread of
small arms and light weapons. Many measures were
taken to promote and build national and international
judicial capacities to combat impunity from
punishment, and some of the activities relating to the
protection of civilians were given to peacekeeping
operations, whose humanitarian role we highly value.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation of
the importance of promoting it.
In addition to what we have said, I regret to say
that action is needed in a number of areas in Africa,
particularly in Somalia, and in Asia, especially in
Palestine. I remind members of what was in the
UNICEF documents and in those of the SecretaryGeneral in his briefing concerning the tragic situation
existing up to today in the Gaza Strip. Actions include
the deliberate and arbitrary military attacks against
vulnerable civilian populations, the continuous
humanitarian impact of mines and cluster bombs,
which have been spread in civilian areas,
administrative detention, internal and external
displacement, collective punishment, measures to
eradicate cultural identity, bulldozing of land and the
demolition of property, including refugee camps.
In summary, those are all actions that are
criminalized by the provisions of the law, including the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, on the
protection of civilians in times of war, which includes
occupation and which is ratified by all States. Despite
all this, the Council stands idly by and does nothing.

20

That situation reminds us of an old position leading to
human tragedies that we all know.
The Security Council, in taking humanitarian
action to protect civilians, cannot be selective, far from
balanced and transparent. Action must be in accordance
with a method supported by an accountability system
and specific sanctions. Everyone should submit and
comply with the provisions of law and allow none to
enjoy impunity.
Finally, I would like to thank you, Mr. President.
We are all full of hope that our deliberations will end
with tangible and general progress in an issue that is
linked to the dignity of humanity.
Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank Mr. John Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
statement and his highly relevant comments on the
topic of discussion today.
Belgium associates itself with the statement
which our Slovenian colleague will be making soon on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to limit
myself here to a few considerations that are important
for my delegation.
Belgium is deeply devoted to having the Security
Council periodically revisit the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. Such a
review unfortunately has a negative connotation. It
reminds us of the lack of progress in the area of the
protection of civilians. But such a review also provides
the opportunity to take note of positive developments.
It allows us to show that when the United Nations acts
in a sustained fashion, it can indeed make a difference
in the field.
For those who would still doubt the usefulness of
this exercise, we would like to recall here both our
Charter, which says
“We the peoples of the United Nations,
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind”,
and also the Preamble of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which says
“the advent of a world in which human beings
shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and
freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed
as the highest aspiration of the common people”.

08-35281

S/PV.5898

We desire those essential objectives of our
Organization, to be pursued with the unflagging
support of the Security Council for all measures and
actions conducive to their achievement. In that context,
Belgium advocates more systematic and regular
follow-up by the Council, as Mr. Holmes also
mentioned in his statement.
During the presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General on this question on 20 November
2007 (5781st meeting), we already voiced our concern
regarding several priority subjects for Belgium: access
to victims, sexual violence as an instrument of war and
the effect of certain conventional weapons such as
cluster bombs, which cause unacceptable damage and
suffering to civilian populations. We have already
emphasized the important contribution of the Security
Council in dealing with those problems with a view to
reducing and even eliminating their negative effects.
In this context, we welcome in particular the
initiative of the United States to organize, during its
Council presidency next month, a ministerial debate
focused, inter alia, on the problem of sexual violence
in armed conflicts. We are convinced that that exercise
will help us in further developing a collective response
to this scourge, for which impunity is intolerable.
Under-Secretary-General
Holmes
has
just
emphasized the impact of hostilities on civilian
populations by citing various examples. Those
examples illustrate the diverse nature of conflicts. It is
in taking this diversity into account that the Security
Council must demand of all parties, without exception,
respect for the protection of civilians. Moreover, it
must act in concert with all actors in the international
community: the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross, civil society, etc.
Finally, access to humanitarian aid is closely
linked to the protection of civilians. That relationship
is not limited just to the framework of armed conflicts;
it can also go beyond. The objective remains, above all
else, the protection of civilians. They deserve that
everything be done to ensure this, as we have done in
Myanmar. If the Security Council can add value here, it
should do so to the best of its ability.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset, I wish to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for the
opportunity to discuss here in the Security Council this
most important issue of the protection of civilians
during armed conflict. I would also like to thank

08-35281

Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his informative
and important briefing.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement by the
European Union that will be delivered later by the
representative of Slovenia.
In our opinion, the question of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict deserves more consistent
attention in this Council. The statistics over the past
20 to 30 years clearly show that civilian casualties in
conflict areas have consistently outnumbered and still
outnumber military casualties.
In the twenty-first century, we are still witness to
gross violations of international humanitarian law, in
which civilians are increasingly and deliberately
becoming the prime targets of armed groups. Too many
parties to an armed conflict see civilians as a method,
rather than a by-product, of war. For example, they do
not hesitate to use rape and other forms of sexual
violence to destroy the most fragile parts of the society
against which they are fighting.
We have read or heard many reports of children
under five being raped, and we have to take decisive
collective action against such atrocities. We have heard
many reports of children being killed, maimed and
illegally recruited as soldiers. That goes directly
against our commitments of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution
60/1) as well as against Security Council resolution
1674 (2006), which reaffirms the provisions of
paragraph 138 and 139 from that document.
The international community should encourage
and help States to exercise their responsibility to
protect their populations against genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The
international community has already expressed its
readiness to take collective action through the Security
Council when national authorities manifestly fail to
protect their populations from the above-mentioned
violations of humanitarian law. We should not be seen
wanting in the implementation of our commitments.
The protection of civilians comprises the
protection of their lives and well-being. Even in the
case of natural disasters, civilians deserve protection.
My Government strongly supports the efforts of the
wider international community in assisting and
attempting to protect the victims of Cyclone Nargis in
Myanmar/Burma.

21

S/PV.5898

On the other hand, if humanitarian access is
denied in conflict areas, it is civilians who suffer the
most. In such cases the vast majority of victims are
women and children, the elderly and the disabled. We
are therefore naturally concerned when we hear of
cases of Governments and armed groups denying
access to humanitarian assistance or using such
assistance for political manipulation, including attacks
on humanitarian personnel and looting of humanitarian
supplies.
We believe that condemnation is not the only
collective action that the Security Council has
committed to taking. We would encourage all its
members to do everything in their power to ensure that
parties to armed conflicts worldwide cooperate
adequately with the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations.
Another matter of concern is the growing number
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
armed conflicts. Croatia is very concerned by the
security situation in and around refugee camps,
especially at those in some areas of Africa — for
example, the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
Sudan, where children are still being recruited as
soldiers and fall victim to rape and other grave
violations.
Those situations require peacekeeping missions
with a strong, clear and goal-oriented mandates,
including the authorization of the use of force, if
necessary, to protect civilians. That is just one of the
many lessons that the international community has
learned from past armed conflicts.
Let us also not forget the importance of the
implementation by the Security Council of smart
sanctions and other targeted measures against
dissenting Governments and armed groups. When
taking into account the immediate impact that
hostilities can have on civilian populations, it is
increasingly important that the Council use its mandate
to truly address the underlying causes of conflict so as
to help enact real change on the ground for those who
truly require it.
If used in conjunction with a holistic approach, as
described in our previous debate this month on postconflict peacebuilding (5895th meeting), the Security
Council can be the tool that helps foster or, if need be,
coerce lasting change for the betterment of civilian
populations.

22

I would like to add two short comments before
ending. First, Croatia understands the impact of cluster
munitions on civilians, and our remain concerned about
their use in armed conflict. We therefore add our
support to efforts being undertaken in the international
community to negotiate in 2008 a legally binding
instrument that would prohibit the use, production and
transfer of cluster munitions.
Moreover, Croatia strongly believes that when
Governments fail to investigate, prosecute and punish
violations of humanitarian law against civilians by
members of their own armed forces or committed on
their territory, recourse to the International Criminal
Court should be considered.
The question of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a serious matter that requires our
serious attention and is, without question, of concern
for international peace and security. My country is part
of a region that has suffered from armed conflict, and
thus we ourselves have witnessed what international
will can do for the protection of civilians.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to
preface our statement by expressing appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. John Holmes, for his
statement earlier and of course to you, Mr. President,
for convening our deliberations this morning.
Every day, news of civilians falling victim to
armed conflict feeds the discussion in the Council. In
many instances, the intensity of violence is shocking.
However, the most tragic situation is when we are
immune to the suffering of civilians, when we fail to
cope with it or when we consciously decide to ignore
it. The Council has an imperative duty to stand for
those who are defenceless and in need of protection in
times of conflict. Today’s meeting will serve to further
address the issues surrounding the protection of
civilians in a comprehensive and resolute manner.
It is our shared responsibility to alleviate the
suffering of victims wherever and whenever it occurs.
The specific needs and protection of women and
children need to be particularly highlighted.
The safety and security of civilians must be
prioritized when security matters are addressed through
military measures or military operations. Parties
engaged in situations of armed conflict must respect
the letter and the spirit of international humanitarian

08-35281

S/PV.5898

law. Those universal instruments are one of the
foundations of the international system.
However, that alone is insufficient. A
comprehensive perspective on this issue entails the
relevance of issues of gender and cultural diversity as
well, along with an approach that is sensitive to the
needs of local populations. All peacekeeping and
military operations must be exceptionally mindful of
local beliefs, traditions and values. Lack of respect can
trigger violence and serious repercussions, which can
undo peace processes or operations.
Ending the cycle of violence on the ground is key
to the full achievement of any peace process. That can
be attained only when all parties concerned on the
ground exercise restraint and refrain from any actions
that could undermine those efforts. Thus, we are
particularly concerned over the continued civilian
casualties among Palestinians, including children and
women, caused by the indiscriminate and excessive use
of force in Israeli military operations in the Gaza Strip.
That must immediately come to an end.
We cannot fail to stress the importance of a total
ban on cluster munitions and landmines. Those
indiscriminate weapons not only have a gruesome
impact on the victims; beyond their immediate impact,
they damage the environment and the economy of a
region. We witness this in many parts of the Middle
East and other regions, where the widespread use of
cluster munitions has turned arable land into a
wasteland.
Civilians,
including
farmers
and
schoolchildren in over 60 countries, remain under the
threat of those inhumane weapons. The affected
countries bear a costly burden, and their citizens have
to deal with potential death or injury every time they
take a step. Indonesia therefore underlines the
paramount importance of a total ban of those heinous
types of munitions.
With regard to anti-personnel landmines, we
welcome the mine action activities of the United
Nations, in collaboration with Governments and other
international organizations. We underline the
importance of mine clearance, victim assistance, minerisk education and the destruction of stockpiled
landmines as part of mine action. We urge countries
that hold information about the sites of the mines and
other munitions they deployed during a war to share
that information, especially with the United Nations, as
a basis for further action.

08-35281

With the growing complexity and intricacy of
world matters, the United Nations is surely not in
position to tackle all of the issues related to the
protection of civilians. Regional organizations have an
important role to play in the protection of civilians. It
is important to remember that the best preventive
medicine for war is fruitful negotiation and dialogue,
which is often achieved by inviting the participation of
regionally relevant players.
In addition, we are witnessing the increasing role
of non-State actors in addressing the plight of civilians
in armed conflict situations. We have on many
occasions noted with appreciation the role of
non-governmental organizations and other civil society
organizations.
In that regard, we believe that private aid is also a
critical component of a solution to armed conflict and
of the attenuation of the suffering of civilians. This can
originate from private organizations or philanthropic
organizations which have gathered the funds available
to those in need. In many cases, they also have the
necessary expertise in various fields. That, I believe,
would further strengthen our global efforts.
Humanitarian assistance is essential to addressing
the plight of civilians in armed conflict. It is therefore
very deplorable that irresponsible acts taken against
relief workers, humanitarian aid convoys and others
engaged in humanitarian assistance to shield the
population from the effects of war continue to happen.
The deliberate targeting of those individuals is a crime,
and we should invoke the relevant international laws,
including the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and its Optional
Protocol, for that purpose.
Finally, let me reiterate that our efforts should be
focused on maintaining momentum by strengthening
the efforts of the United Nations system, Member
States and other stakeholders working as a whole in a
coordinated, coherent, comprehensive and cooperative
manner. An approach that includes development and
humanitarian dimensions is required and should be
supported by the political will of States to ensure that
civilians are protected in times of war and in times of
peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

23

S/PV.5898

I am grateful to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing today. In the view
of the United Kingdom, the protection of civilians is
central to the Security Council’s work. It matters
morally and it matters legally. It matters because
effective protection of civilians increases the
possibility of achieving a sustainable peace in any
given conflict. Protecting civilians helps reduce further
violence caused by the deep frustration and tensions
that result from displacement, human rights abuses and
revenge attacks. Like others, we believe that a more
consistent and systematic consideration of the
protection of civilians by the Council would lead to
progress in our ability to act to protect those whose
lives have been torn apart by conflict. We hope to
continue our dialogue with other Council members to
find the best way to do that. We look forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General, which will inform
our efforts.
The Council will also have a chance to review the
effectiveness of United Nations action to protect
civilians next week when we are in Africa and will talk
to United Nations teams and political leaders in
Somalia, Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, three countries where the challenge of
protecting civilians is especially acute.
As well as protecting civilians in situations of
armed conflict, the international community has
committed itself to assist States that are under stress
before crises and conflicts break out. In that regard, we
reaffirm our support for the concept of the
responsibility to protect, as agreed by Member States at
the World Summit in 2005. It is an important
commitment, which should result in earlier and more
decisive action to prevent genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The scourge of sexual and gender-based violence
was rightly highlighted in Mr. Holmes’s briefing. It is
another element that undermines efforts to secure a
lasting peace. The targeted use of sexual violence,
sometimes as a deliberate weapon of war, is an
unacceptable practice that is not only terrible in itself,
but also has a destabilizing effect on post-conflict
peacebuilding. As the Under-Secretary-General has
said, we must end the climate of impunity that fuels
those grave abuses. We listened with interest to his
ideas on accountability and look forward to discussing
these issues further next month under the United States
presidency of the Security Council.

24

As the Secretary-General has said, humanitarian
access is the fundamental prerequisite for humanitarian
action and protection. We have heard today that there
are many reasons why humanitarian access is not
always possible. We welcome the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on this
issue. Some obstacles are caused by geography. But
when the obstacles are man-made and malign, for
example in
the imposition of bureaucratic
impediments, it is incumbent upon all of us to ensure
that those obstacles are challenged and removed.
It is only by putting in place mechanisms to
reduce the suffering of civilians in armed conflict and
ensuring their protection that we can succeed in our
attempts to bring an end to conflict and establish
sustainable peace.
I agree with those other Council members who
shared Mr. Holmes’s concern that humanitarian access
is also a critical issue in situations of natural disaster,
as we see currently in Burma. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s leadership on that issue. As UnderSecretary-General Holmes said, the implementation of
the agreements reached in Rangoon this weekend is
now the key. The eyes of the world remain very much
on the terrible situation there.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Windsor (Australia): Where we cannot
prevent armed conflict, the protection of civilians is
and must remain an absolute priority. Australia
therefore welcomes the attention the Security Council
has rightly focused on this issue. I wish to express my
thanks to the United Kingdom for convening this
important debate and to the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for his update briefing earlier this
morning.
It is clearly apparent that the plight of civilians in
modern conflict remains dire. They continue to account
for the vast majority of casualties. The situation must
be addressed as part of any comprehensive
international response to conflict.
United Nations peacekeeping is one tool we can
use to address that situation, but it is important that we
use it wisely and effectively. Protection of civilians
tasks are now mandated in eight of the 20 peace
operations led by the Department of Peacekeeping

08-35281

S/PV.5898

Operations (DPKO), but there is a need to develop
clear guidance to implement them. We must bridge the
gap between our words and our deeds, and we call
upon the Council to implement paragraph 16 of
resolution 1674 (2006) fully to ensure the provision of
clear guidelines regarding what missions can and
should do to achieve protection goals. Australia also
calls upon the broader membership to ensure that
United Nations peace operations are properly resourced
to carry out their mandates.
We look forward to the outcome of the joint study
being undertaken by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian
Affairs
and
DPKO
on
the
implementation of protection tasks, and we would also
welcome an update of the aide memoire to reflect the
increasing focus on physical protection.
Some armed conflicts witness the perpetration of
heinous mass atrocity crimes. In 2005, world leaders
recognized the responsibility we all share to protect
vulnerable communities from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. While it
is the primary role of States to protect their own
populations from those evils, the international
community has a responsibility to assist States to
exercise that responsibility and, in appropriate
circumstances, to take collective action, consistent with
the Charter, to prevent such mass atrocity crimes.
More must be done to develop a practical
approach for implementation of the responsibility to
protect principle. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
appointment of Mr. Edward Luck as his Special
Adviser to focus on the conceptual development of the
principle. Australia looks forward to working with
Member States to continue our consideration of the
principle and to give effect to it in appropriate
circumstances.
Just as the international community has a
responsibility to protect communities from such mass
atrocity crimes, so too do we have a responsibility to
bring those who abuse fundamental principles of
international law to justice. We must renew our
commitment to end impunity for those who commit
mass atrocity crimes and to increase accountability for
crimes against civilians.
In conclusion, Australia remains committed to
working with partners in the international community
to translate our words into action in an effort to protect
civilians in armed conflict. Australia will work to

08-35281

ensure that United Nations missions on the ground are
provided with clear guidance and adequate resources to
fulfil their mandates. We will work to prevent the
commission of mass atrocity crimes, and we will work
to ensure that perpetrators of abuse are held
accountable for their actions.
The President: I call on the representative of
Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this important debate today. We
would also like to express our appreciation to UnderSecretary-General Holmes for his comprehensive
briefing to the Council.
Before addressing the core issues of today’s
debate, I would like briefly to touch on several key
humanitarian situations that have commanded the
world’s attention in recent weeks. The impact of
cyclone Nargis in Burma and the earthquake in China
have reminded us of nature’s sometimes devastating
power. Canada offers its sincere and heartfelt
condolences to the friends and families of the deceased
and missing.
In Burma, it has now been more than three weeks
since the cyclone struck, yet humanitarian access
remains, at best, inconsistent. The 25 May conference
offered some hopeful signs of stronger cooperation
between the Burmese authorities and the international
community. However, in many cases, United Nations
and other humanitarian actors still await visas. For
those who have received visas, access to affected
populations is not yet guaranteed. We call on the
Burmese authorities to provide full and unhindered
access to areas affected by the cyclone to help deliver
aid to those most in need. That is urgent; the window
of opportunity to save lives is closing rapidly.
It is also clear that the consequences of armed
conflict are deadly for civilians in many countries
around the world. The deliberate targeting of and
attacks on civilian populations, forced displacement,
sexual violence and the denial of land and property
rights are far too prevalent for millions of people
globally.
In the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Sri Lanka, Burundi and Somalia, civilians are
quite simply part of the calculus of conflict. In
Afghanistan, indiscriminate acts of violence, such as
suicide bombings, serve as a potent reminder of why

25

S/PV.5898

support for the Afghan Government is so important.
Without a continued commitment to long-term peace
and security, civilian protection cannot be guaranteed.
All of that illustrates the point that, despite the
significant gains that have been made over the past
decade, there is a great deal of work left to do. In that
respect, the Secretary-General’s report last year on the
protection of civilians offers us an important road map
when considering the question of next steps.
Increasingly, the question of humanitarian access
remains the critical challenge for the Council and
Member States. Member States have a collective
interest in ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to civilians in need. That is not simply a hope; it
is a fundamental principle of international
humanitarian action and should not be open to
interpretation. Yet full, safe and unhindered access —
so critical to providing life-saving relief and support to
vulnerable populations — remains an elusive goal.
Canada strongly supports the commitment made
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator to develop a
monitoring and reporting mechanism to understand and
address access constraints. However, the Council must
be prepared to act — drawing on the full range of tools
at its disposal — when access is systematically delayed
or denied. Those who refuse access cannot be allowed
to act with impunity. Enhanced accountability,
underscored by a clear demonstration by the Council
that systematic denial of access will not be tolerated, is
more important than ever.
Among the many protection challenges facing us,
sexual violence against women, girls, boys and men
remains particularly stark. We need look no further
than the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo to
understand the prevailing culture of impunity.
Thousands of incidents of sexual violence are
perpetrated with virtually no prosecutions. Clear
resolve on the part of the Council to prevent sexual
violence is essential. Canada believes that the Council
should underscore that there will be no impunity for
perpetrators.
Strengthening
the
Council’s
protection
framework for children can help address protection
challenges linked to sexual violence.
(spoke in French)
More broadly, Canada calls on States to cooperate in
the four countries in conflict or in post-conflict

26

situations in which the International Criminal Court is
active: the Sudan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda.
Perpetrators of serious international crimes must be
held responsible for their acts.
Finally, let me reaffirm Canada’s support for the
Secretary-General’s 2007 proposal to establish a
Security Council working group on the protection of
civilians. We urge members of the Council to welcome
that recommendation. Moreover, it is important that
any such group be results-driven. That means that it
must be allowed to offer clear recommendations and
courses of action for Council consideration in instances
where protection concerns remain acute.
We are fast approaching the 10-year anniversary
of resolution 1265 (1999), a landmark in the protection
of civilians. The endorsement of subsequent
resolutions on a range of protection issues, including
resolution 1674 (2006), as well as the inclusion of
strong protection references in country-specific
resolutions, is an important demonstration of the
Council’s commitment to that issue. The Council now
has at its disposal a sophisticated and flexible
framework for action, including in instances of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
In conclusion, we must refocus our efforts.
Canada remains committed to protecting civilians from
deliberate targeting and abuse. In that regard, our
collective resolve is more important than ever.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, we wish to thank you for convening this
thematic debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I also wish to thank Mr. Holmes for his very
important and comprehensive briefing. The last report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in cases of armed conflict (S/2007/643) analyzed some
of the challenges that the Council should face. We
agree, in principle, that it is indeed important that the
international community should implement the
principle of protection in accordance with the final
document of the 2005 World Summit, which should
take place through joint multilateral action in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. We also
support the continuation of efforts in the General
Assembly to define the nature and scope of protection

08-35281

S/PV.5898

and human security within the limits of strict and
unequivocal respect for the sovereignty of States, and
to treat each case on its own merit.
The subject of today’s debate is an issue that
should be considered in depth and defined by the
international community. The region to which I belong
has suffered its wars, especially in the occupied Arab
territories in the Middle East, and in Somalia, Iraq,
Afghanistan and south Lebanon, whose population are
suffering from the landmines and cluster bombs that
were planted and dropped by the occupation. Similarly,
the civilians in the areas of rebel activities in Sudan are
suffering the consequences of the activities of armed
groups.
It is, indeed, easy to call for establishing
mechanisms for protection within the multidimensional
United Nations missions. Yet, the real challenge
remains in how to implement the principle of
protection in cases where the suffering of millions of
civilians and their right to protection and security is
being ignored, for political reasons, as with the
civilians in Palestine, Somalia, Iraq or Afghanistan,
who under the yoke of occupation are in dire need of
humanitarian assistance and protection from killing
and murder. This is an issue that demands genuine,
sincere and noble intentions, and we ask ourselves
when there will be the necessary political will to
enable the United Nations organs, especially
the Council, to fulfil their role in the protection of
civilians — so that humanitarian assistance will,
obligatorily, reach the areas under occupation and
those responsible for the violation will be held
accountable — while pressure is being put on several
States in the name of protection and human security.
We believe that crimes against humanity should be
dealt with without discrimination or selectivity. The
deliberate targeting of civilians, extrajudicial killings
and the indiscriminate bombardment by the occupying
Power are crimes that violate the Fourth Geneva
Convention on the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War. No less a crime is the killing of
journalists and the bombardment of information and
media premises — all these are crimes that should be
condemned and not be ignored — they are no less
dangerous than crimes taking place in south Lebanon
and in Sudan last year. No doubt some groups of
civilians deserve special protection, such as children,
women, and vulnerable groups of society in accordance
with international law, international humanitarian law

08-35281

and the laws on refugees as well as the relevant
international conventions, such as the Fourth Geneva
Convention and its additional protocols, which
international jurisprudence considers binding on all
Member States.
The State of Qatar has assumed responsibility to
make use of these instruments, to accede to them and
to implement them through national legislation, and to
conduct mass information campaigns and to train
national officials and cadres. The State of Qatar
supports the United Nations promoting these
instruments and supports providing the Secretariat with
objective information regarding the status of their
implementation in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions. We must be far-sighted and
comprehensive in the options to limit the dangers
feared by civilians, which means we should take
measures to prevent conflicts and settle conflicts
through diplomatic and peaceful means whenever
possible. We should promote friendly and sincere
bilateral efforts on the part of regional organizations
and support them through the United Nations. The best
example of this is what happened a few days ago in
Doha, the capital of my country, where there was
agreement among the Lebanese factions to put an end
to the crisis afflicting their country. That event was
supported by the Council as soon as it was announced,
since promoting genuine dialogue through impartial
mediators is the best way to put an end to violence and
to stop subjecting individual civilians to danger.
The President: I now call on the representatives
of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
First of all, Switzerland would like to stress the
importance of the obligations contained in the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols. It is clear
that only increased respect for and better
implementation of international humanitarian law by
all the actors concerned will make it possible to
alleviate the suffering and better protect civilians, who
are the main victims of conflicts.
While the parties to a conflict are primarily
responsible for complying with and for implementing
international humanitarian law, it is equally important
for other actors to be involved. Switzerland would,
therefore, once again like to invite the Council to
demand in its resolutions that all parties to a conflict,
as well as peacekeeping forces, abide by their

27

S/PV.5898

obligations under international law. Moreover, we
would like to reiterate that respect for and
implementation of international law are indissociable
from the fight against impunity. Although this task is
primarily the responsibility of national jurisdictions,
the International Criminal Court plays a vital role when
national jurisdictions are unable to prosecute persons
suspected of committing international crimes. It is,
therefore, essential that the Council ensure, whenever
necessary, that States cooperate fully with the Court.
I would like to endorse the words of UnderSecretary-General Mr. John Holmes and will
concentrate on two aspects. First, the five initiatives
presented in his report contain concrete and realistic
recommendations. Here, the establishment of a group
of experts on the protection of civilians is an important
proposal that should be implemented as a priority.
Switzerland intends to support it once it has been set
up.
We support the Secretary-General’s proposal for a
systematization of reports to the Council on situations
where there are serious difficulties of access.
Switzerland also believes that humanitarian access
should be the subject of systematic follow-up and
analysis, using clear indicators that have been
established in advance in order to ensure that the
Council is duly informed of the main problems and
challenges in this area. The experience of the Council’s
working group on children and armed conflict is an
interesting example. The best practices drawn from this
group could be integrated into the evaluation of the
problem of access. We invite the Council to take into
account the ongoing work that uses those indicators
and to encourage debates on this basis.
At a different level, a meeting of experts on the
subject of humanitarian access in situations of armed
conflict will be held from 30 June to 1 July 2008 in
Montreux in Switzerland at the invitation of my
Government. The main purpose of this meeting will be
to discuss and identify measures to improve
humanitarian access in armed conflicts, taking into
account the existing legal framework and the realities
on the ground. It is my hope that the results of this
meeting will be useful to the Council.
To return to my second point, persons displaced
in their own countries in situations of increased
vulnerability have specific needs, both in terms of
protection and of assistance. For 10 years, the guiding

28

principles on internally displaced persons
demonstrated their relevance and effectiveness.

have

We would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the interdependence between peacebuilding and the
taking into account of the needs of displaced persons.
On the one hand, the non-resolution of the issue of
displacement can lead to instability that can jeopardize
efforts aimed at restoring peace. On the other hand,
solutions to the issue of displaced persons cannot be
lasting unless their needs as regards security, access to
basic services, property rights, justice, reconciliation,
reparation and post-conflict reconstruction and
political transition have been met.
In that context, the recommendations made by the
Representative of the Secretary-General on human
rights of internally displaced persons deserve to be
taken into account by all parties concerned during the
negotiation and peacebuilding process, including the
Security Council. In particular, Switzerland urges the
Council to take into consideration the framework for
durable solutions that has been developed by the
Representative of the Secretary-General, which
provides an important tool for action in the search for
lasting solutions for the millions of displaced persons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries of Turkey and Croatia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates of Albania, Montenegro and Serbia, the
European Free Trade Association country member of
the European Economic Area, Iceland, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement. In the
interest of time, I shall deliver an abbreviated version
of this statement. The complete official version is now
being distributed in the Chamber.
At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to discuss the issue
of the protection of civilians at this important thematic
debate of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his
comprehensive and compelling briefing.
The European Union is appalled by the number of
civilians who continue to be victims and targets in
armed conflicts. It is a sad reality that the changed

08-35281

S/PV.5898

nature of contemporary conflicts has placed the safety
and security of unarmed men, women and children at
even greater risk. We strongly believe that the situation
of civilians in armed conflict would be more
encouraging if the existing provisions of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
were applied and observed.
It is our opinion that concerns for the well-being
and protection of civilians need to be mainstreamed
into the activities of the Organization, and in particular
into the decision making process of the Security
Council — while recognizing that conflict prevention
is a multi-stakeholder endeavour that also embraces
civil society and the business community.
The European Union commends the steps taken
to strengthen the normative framework for the
protection of civilians. In particular, we have
welcomed the endorsement by heads of State and
Government at the 2005 World Summit of the
responsibility of each State to protect its population
from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. That recognizes the primary
responsibility of States for protecting their own
populations, but also underscores the shared
responsibility of the international community to help in
that regard.
We also welcomed resolution 1674 (2006), which
reaffirmed the responsibility of the international
community to protect civilians from those appalling
crimes when national authorities manifestly fail to
protect them. That was truly a decision of historic
magnitude, but it has not yet led to a sea change in the
protection of civilians worldwide. The European Union
emphasizes the need for further consideration by the
Security Council of the responsibility to protect, as
well as by the General Assembly, in order to find a
practical approach to its implementation.
An important aspect of protecting civilians in
armed conflict is safe, timely and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief for civilians in need. We are
deeply disturbed by the increase in attacks deliberately
targeting humanitarian workers. We would like to
emphasize that reaching those in need is a fundamental
principle of humanitarian assistance, and that
facilitating the passage of humanitarian relief for
civilians is required under international humanitarian
law. We call upon all parties to armed conflict to
comply with the relevant provisions of international

08-35281

humanitarian law, and in particular to stop attacking
humanitarian workers.
It is equally important to highlight that women,
children, older persons and persons with disabilities, as
well as other vulnerable groups, are especially affected
by armed conflicts. Given the particular vulnerability
of women and girls, sexual violence seems to continue
unabated, including in its most worrisome form as a
policy to intimidate a civilian population. The
European Union is deeply concerned about the
continued use of sexual violence as a method of
warfare that each year destroys the lives of thousands
of women and girls, as well as men and boys. It is
unacceptable that United Nations officials should be
inactive witnesses to such atrocities or, even worse, be
part of such acts. We therefore reiterate our full support
for the zero-tolerance policy regarding sexual abuse
and exploitation by United Nations personnel. In
addition, we have also adopted the same policy in our
own European security and defence policy operations.
The primary responsibility for preventing and
addressing sexual violence lies with Member States.
Nevertheless, combating sexual violence and the
impunity on which it thrives requires efforts by the
whole international community, including the Security
Council. The Security Council should send a clear
message of deterrence by referring situations of grave
incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence to
the International Criminal Court.
While addressing the vulnerability of civilians,
we should also bear in mind the needs of refugees and
displaced persons. The European Union calls for
ensuring their protection, in particular by maintaining
the security and civilian character of camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons. Furthermore,
the need to address the issue of housing, land and
property becomes highly significant as people are
forced to leave their homes and lands.
Another issue that needs to be addressed is that of
cluster munitions. Our aim is to conclude a legally
binding instrument prohibiting the use, production,
transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions, which
cause unacceptable harm to civilians.
Controlling small arms and preventing violence
are multifaceted problems. The protection of civilians
cannot be addressed comprehensively unless smallarms control policies are integrated into that
framework.

29

S/PV.5898

One of the last points that we would like to make
pertains to the fact that we continue to be appalled at
the high degree of impunity that has been allowed to
exist, which sends the message that the international
community is not prepared to take action, even when
fundamental human rights are breached. There is no
doubt that perpetrators of crime must be held
accountable for their actions; but, regrettably, impunity
prevails in many cases of conflict owing to the lack of
action. That impunity often leads to a circle of
violence.
The role of the International Criminal Court is
clearly central in the fight against impunity in general.
The Court is seized with a number of situations, and,
more importantly, its activities and its very existence
have also had a preventative effect. The European
Union encourages members to provide their full
support to the International Criminal Court by acceding
to the Rome Statute. We also call on all Member States,
especially States parties to the Rome Statute, to
cooperate fully with the Court. Universality and our
full support are crucial if we are to end impunity for
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes against
civilians. When we succeed in establishing the rule of
law and proper judicial systems, we will have
contributed greatly to durable peace and stability.
We have highlighted the primary responsibility of
Member States and the increased importance of
regional actors, peacebuilding and prevention
strategies. What is now required is a more systematic
assessment of the lessons we have learned. Equally
important is the provision of reliable data to the
Security Council through monitoring and reporting, so
that the Council can develop targeted and effective
strategies for civilian protection.
Nevertheless, fundamental to the protection of
civilians is the resolution of the conflicts that cause
their suffering. In order to reach this goal, we need to
continue the hard work to establish concepts of conflict
prevention and reach peace, to which the European
Union remains firmly committed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having convened this open debate on the protection
of the civilians in armed conflicts. This topic is of
particular importance since it is one of the main

30

elements of Argentina’s foreign policy, consisting of
the defence of human rights and international
humanitarian law and the fight against impunity in all
areas.
As it is known, the civilian population is most
affected by armed conflicts, whether they be
international or domestic. No national security
considerations can prevail over the primary obligation
of the States and parties to a conflict to protect the
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleaning
and crimes against humanity.
We share the views of previous speakers in this
regard who underlined, inter alia, the importance of
ensuring that the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations include
provisions for the protection of civilians, the
prevention of sexual violence, and guaranteeing
security in and around camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons and the full, unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel to assist civilians
affected by armed conflicts.
However, for the sake of conciseness, I would
like to focus on a specific topic that we consider
essential and a priority in order to be able not only to
better protect civilians in armed conflicts but also to
promote a more efficient collective security system. I
am referring to the fight against impunity.
We consider that the best incentive to dissuade
potential perpetrators of war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity from committing such
atrocities is the fear that there exists a real possibility
that they will have to appear before justice to answer
for their crimes. On the other hand, from the
perspective of peacekeeping and international security,
we consider that it is increasingly obvious that the best
way to consolidate peace and national reconciliation
after a conflict is to avoid impunity.
The
Security
Council
has
substantially
contributed to the international regime for protection of
civilians through its resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000), 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006). At the same
time, the Council has been given a clear mandate by
the General Assembly to take collective action should
peaceful means be inadequate and should national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their civilian
population. In that regard, during Argentina’s term on
the Security Council in 2005 and 2006, our country not
only propelled the adoption of resolutions 1674 (2006)

08-35281

S/PV.5898

and 1738 (2006), it was also among those that voted in
favour of resolution 1593 (2005), by which for the first
time the Council, acting under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, decided to refer the
situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
In cases where we cannot prevent abuse of
civilians, at least we should ensure that their
perpetrators and those who bear political responsibility
for violence against civilians are held accountable for
their actions. We therefore believe that cooperation of
States with the International Criminal Court and other
international mechanisms that are fighting genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity is essential,
and it is also indispensable for the Council to take
steps it considers appropriate to encourage and
facilitate such cooperation when it is not otherwise
forthcoming.
The President: Now for the last speaker in our
session this morning, I give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The increasing
victimization of civilians in armed conflict is a sad and
well-documented fact. While civilian populations have
always
suffered
disproportionately
from
the
consequences of armed conflict, modern warfare and
the changed nature of armed conflicts have exacerbated
their situation.
The Security Council’s decisions and actions
have a strong and immediate impact on the situation of
civilians in armed conflicts. That special responsibility
should be expressed through a more consistent and
more permanent engagement. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to establish
an expert-level working group among Council
members.
We have witnessed an erosion in respect for
international law relevant to the protection of civilians.
The law of armed conflict, or international
humanitarian law, is one of the core achievements in
the history of international law, and the Council has a
particular responsibility to promote its observance.
A central element in this respect is a clear
commitment to fight impunity. The establishment of a
number of ad hoc and hybrid tribunals was an
expression of such a commitment. The key role in the
fight against impunity, however, falls on the

08-35281

International Criminal Court. While the Court is seized
with a number of specific cases, including situations on
the Council’s agenda, its activities and mere existence
also have a preventive effect in conflict situations
beyond those under investigation.
The Rome Statute attributes certain functions to
the Security Council, including the possibility of
referring situations to the Court. In March 2005 the
Council exercised this function in connection with the
situation in Darfur. More than two years later, the
Council must follow up with action to ensure
cooperation in the arrest of the persons indicted by the
Court. The Council’s upcoming visit to Africa offers a
unique opportunity for doing so.
Beyond the execution of arrest warrants, full
cooperation is needed in other areas as well. In the
interest of effective protection of civilians, all organs
of the United Nations as well as individual States
should extend such cooperation — not just States
parties to the Rome Statute, even though of course only
States parties have a legal obligation to cooperate. The
jurisdiction of the Court extends to a number of crimes
that are still being perpetrated on a large scale and
sometimes systematically and as part of a policy of
intimidating civilian populations. Sexual and genderbased violence and the recruitment of children as
soldiers or for other purposes in connection with armed
conflicts play a sadly prominent role in this respect.
Access to civilians in armed conflicts and in other
emergency situations is vital for effective humanitarian
assistance. Too often access is unsafe, provided too late
or is far from unhindered. In Somalia and Darfur, for
instance, access to the populations affected is severely
limited, and significant numbers of people cannot be
assisted by humanitarian agencies. In other situations,
access is used as a tool in political bargaining, at the
expense of the civilian population.
It is worth recalling that facilitating rapid and
unimpeded passage to relief activities for civilians is
an obligation under international humanitarian law.
Both the Council and the General Assembly must
therefore give more attention to the question of access,
including in specific situations. We thus welcome the
efforts of the Emergency Relief Coordinator to set up a
mechanism for reporting on and analysis of access
constraints in conflict settings. We look forward to
receiving that analysis as part of the next report of the
Secretary-General.

31

S/PV.5898

The protection of civilians is particularly fragile
when those who should provide it are themselves at
risk. Today more than ever, the safety and security of
United Nations and associated personnel continue to be
jeopardized. Humanitarian personnel in particular often
face life-threatening risks when carrying out their
duties. Against that background, the number of States
parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
remains very low and must increase.
The safety and security of humanitarian personnel
has long been a priority for us, and we are currently
one of only two countries financing the Saving Lives
Together initiative, which aims to provide better
security for the United Nations, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations in
the field. We will continue our financial support for
that initiative this year and hope that other donors will
join us.
The consensus decision at the 2005 World
Summit to accept the concept of the responsibility to

32

protect was of historic magnitude, but it has not yet led
to a paradigm shift in the protection of civilians. We
believe that it is time to operationalize this concept and
that the relevant discussions must be carried out with
the necessary conceptual clarity. The responsibility to
protect, as defined in the Summit Outcome Document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), is not as such
linked to armed conflicts, but to the crimes listed in the
Outcome Document: genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Some of those
crimes do not necessarily occur in situations of armed
conflict and therefore do not require a connection to
armed conflict. The responsibility to protect concept is
thus highly relevant to the discussion we are having
today, but protection-relevant situations also occur
outside of armed conflicts.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of members of the
Council, to suspend this meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

08-35281
