S/PV.8134

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8134th meeting

Wednesday, 13 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kawamura. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2017/995)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43968 (E)
*1743968*

S/PV.8134

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2017/995)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/995 which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall: It is my honour to present the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/995) on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). The report covers the latest peace and
security developments in the subregion, as well as the
activities of UNOCA that have been undertaken since
my last briefing to the Council in June (see S/PV.7967).
I am pleased to report on some positive
developments in the subregion, particularly regarding
the regional integration and capacity-building of the
General Secretariat of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS). However, the overall
situation in Central Africa remains marked by tense
sociopolitical situations, economic difficulties, and
continued attacks and horrific abuses carried out
by armed groups against civilian populations, all of
which necessitate concerted national, regional and
international action to prevent further degradation.
In this context, I have maintained continuous contact
with stakeholders and leaders across the subregion to
2/6

13/12/2017

facilitate the search for a peaceful resolution of the
conflicts through inclusive dialogue.
In Chad, the Republic of the Congo and Gabon,
continuing, serious economic difficulties, combined
with political and social tensions between the
respective Governments and opposition movements,
remain a cause for concern. In Chad, I have encouraged
the Government and opposition leaders to discuss the
modalities and time frame for an inclusive dialogue in
order to reach consensus on proposed solutions to the
governance and economic issues facing the country and
agree on meaningful governance reforms that will create
an environment conducive to the holding of legislative
elections. In the Republic of the Congo, though several
political leaders who were arrested following the 2016
presidential election were released on humanitarian
grounds to seek medical treatment abroad, prominent
opposition figures — such as Jean-Marie Michel
Mokoko and André Okombi Salissa — remain detained
without trial. The security situation in the Pool region
also remains unresolved, although it has relatively
improved and internal political consultations have
begun regarding the region’s stabilization. During my
visits to the country, I have stressed the importance
of stabilizing the Pool region and operationalizing
the platforms for political and social dialogue. I have
also highlighted the need for a timely and fair trial for
the detained opposition leaders, who deserve humane
detention conditions.
Meanwhile, in Cameroon, half of the country’s
regions are affected by either Boko Haram in the far
north; the crisis in the Central African Republic in
the eastern part of the country; or the Anglophone
separatist movement in the north-western and southwestern regions. We must remain alert and redouble our
prevention efforts to ensure that prevailing tensions do
not deteriorate in the context of the 2018 elections.
The situation connected to the grievances of the
population in the English-speaking regions of the
country is of particular concern. I have maintained
close contact with the Cameroonian authorities and
continued to underline the need for genuine and
inclusive dialogue. While the Government has taken
a number of measures to address those grievances,
including reforms in the judicial and education sectors
and the release of a number of English-speaking leaders
detained in connection with the crisis, there have been
calls for a more fundamental dialogue to overcome the
marginalization that is felt by much of the population
17-43968

13/12/2017

Central African region

there. At the same time, clashes have continued
between radicals and Government forces, resulting in
the deaths of security officers in the north-western and
south-western regions that are likely to further inflame
tensions.
(spoke in French)
In Gabon, the national context is characterized
by the persistence of an economic slowdown, strikes
and the debate on a controversial constitutional reform
project. The opposition and a part of civil society
criticize the method used, which they consider as
non-inclusive and illegitimate, and the substance of
the constitutional reform, which, according to them,
represents a democratic retreat. It is expected that the
reform will be passed by Parliament, where the ruling
party holds a two-thirds majority. The referendum
option, although possible under the Constitution,
has seemingly not been envisaged. The unsuccesful
candidate in the last presidential election, Mr. Jean
Ping, and his allies continue to challenge the re-election
in 2016 of President Ali Bongo Ondimba. In particular,
Mr. Ping continues to encourage his supporters to
hold public demonstrations in favour of his takeover
and persists in his refusal to engage in a dialogue with
President Bongo Ondimba.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains a source of concern, with ongoing attacks and
serious abuses by armed groups, including the killing of
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and aid workers deployed
to the country to provide assistance to the civilian
population. It is urgent that the peace process progress,
within the framework of the African Initiative, with
the implementation of the concrete actions defined
by the road map adopted at the meeting organized by
the African Union (AU) in Libreville on 17 July. That
should lead to an immediate cessation of hostilities and
the eventual disarmament and demobilization of all
armed groups in the country. I welcome the launch of
the activities of the African Union panel of facilitators
in Central African Republic in late November, followed
by its first contacts with the armed groups in December.
It is now important not to lose momentum during the
crucial period ahead.
The high-level meeting on the Central African
Republic, held on the sidelines of this year’s General
Assembly, and the Secretary-General’s visit to the

S/PV. 8134

country in October played a critical role in attracting
new attention from the international community on the
Central African Republic. In that context, the region’s
full engagement in the peace process remains vital,
not only to provide political support to the African
Initiative, but also to provide a collective response to
the cross-border dynamics affecting the conflict in
the Central African Republic, including transhumance
and trafficking. UNOCA, in close cooperation with
MINUSCA, will continue to work with ECCAS and the
countries of the subregion and play an active role in
resolving the crisis in the Central African Republic.
Despite considerable efforts at the national, regional
and international levels to combat Boko Haram, the
latter remains capable of perpetuating horrific attacks
and abuses that exacerbate the humanitarian, economic,
social and security situation in the affected areas. It
is therefore crucial that all stakeholders and partners
redouble their efforts to address the crisis caused by
Boko Haram in a comprehensive manner. To that end,
the conclusions of the recent regional conference for the
stabilization of the Lake Chad basin, organized by the
African Union Commission and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, are welcome initiatives that deserve the
full support of the international community for their
implementation.
(spoke in English)
Concerning the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
in addition to its abuses committed against local
populations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic and its poaching
activities, along with the increased security vacuum
following the withdrawal of Ugandan and United
States forces from the zone, it is important to recall
that the areas in which the LRA operates face a
myriad of security challenges, including issues related
to transhumance, the lack of State authority and
cross-border movements of poachers and a variety
of armed groups. Furthermore, it is important for the
African Union and countries that contribute troops to
the AU Regional Task Force to quickly agree on the
reconfiguration of the Task Force and to an increase in
support for the training of the Central African Armed
Forces. We also encourage the international community
to support the African Union Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the LRA.
The United Nations welcomes the advances in
regional integration, particularly regarding the free

17-439683/6

S/PV.8134

Central African region

movement of persons throughout the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC)
zone, which is now a reality. UNOCA has continued
to place emphasis on support for the overall process
of regional integration, including through advocacy
for institutional reform of the ECCAS secretariat and
the rationalization of ECCAS and CEMAC. In that
connection, UNOCA has organized multiple activities
designed to strengthen the capacity of the ECCAS
secretariat in mediation, early warning, collaboration
with civil society and gender mainstreaming. UNOCA
and the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel have strengthened their cooperation in
facilitating and enhancing interregional partnership
between ECCAS and the Economic Community of
West African States, which has culminated in plans
to sign a memorandum of understanding between the
two regional economic communities. Overall, UNOCA
and ECCAS continue to enhance their collaboration
through the establishment and execution of a joint work
plan and the holding of regular meetings at the senior
and working levels.
With regard to women and peace and security, on
16 November the Government of Cameroon launched
its national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). That will contribute to
solidifying the regional action plan for resolution 1325
(2000) in Central Africa, which is in the process of
being developed, with the support of UNOCA. It will
also encourage other countries to follow suit.
UNOCA, in cooperation with UNESCO and
ECCAS, presented their joint three-year programme on
youth at the Pan-African Youth Forum, held in Libreville
on 30 November and 1 December. The Forum aimed at
engaging young people in promoting a culture of peace
and non-violence and involving them in the prevention
of radicalization and the management of conflicts by
creating an early warning system.
Before travelling to New York, I participated in the
forty-fifth ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), held in Kigali from 4 to
8 December. For the first time, UNSAC held a closeddoor ministerial session, which focused on the situation
in the Central African Republic, including the report
from the October visit of the UNSAC Bureau to
Bangui, organized by UNOCA, as well as the reform of
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa.
A side event for youth and civil society was also
4/6

13/12/2017

organized to ensure greater visibility by leaders of the
region on the issues youth face, as well as their interest
and capacity for involvement in conflict-prevention
and peacebuilding.
UNOCA continues to place emphasis on efforts
to enhance the coherence and coordination of overall
United Nations activities in the subregion. This
includes collaborating with United Nations resident
coordinators and country teams to engage national
authorities on sensitive political issues as well as on
longer-term efforts to formulate national and crossborder peacebuilding plans, with the support of the
Peacebuilding Fund.
The President: I thank Mr. Fall for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Central Africa and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), Mr. Francois Louncény Fall, for his briefing
on the activities of the Office and his assessment of key
trends in the areas of the politics and the security of
the subregion.
Uruguay recognizes the important work carried
out by UNOCA in the area of good offices, preventive
diplomacy and mediation, as well as the support it
gives to United Nations initiatives and regional and
subregional initiatives related to peace and security.
As the report (S/2017/995) mentions, on 28 November,
the tensions caused by disputes related to the electoral
processes continued to affect the subregion of Central
Africa, although they were mitigated in some cases by
attempts to promote dialogue between the Governments
and the opposition groups. Similarly, the persistence
of social and economic difficulties continues to affect
negatively the lives of millions of people. In that
respect, we celebrate the various efforts carried out
by the countries of the subregion to reduce tensions
in a peaceful manner, through inclusive and authentic
dialogue processes. In addition, we encourage all
interested parties to cooperate with one another with
transparency and in good faith in order to resolve the
various political, social and economic issues.
One area that would allow for greater progress
in these processes is the increased participation of
women in decision-making, which still is still quite
17-43968

13/12/2017

Central African region

lacking in the subregion. On that point, although we
have borne witness to positive developments in recent
months, such as the mobilization and the creation of
a regional platform on the issue of women and peace
and security, and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), the object of which is to ensure the participation
of women in decision-making processes, it continues
to be an ongoing challenge in Central Africa. Uruguay
understands that more effective participation by women
in post-conflict transitions is essential to ensure
lasting peace.
I would like to focus on two aspects that are of
great importance to Uruguay and that reflect clearly
the difficult living conditions that affect a large number
of civilians in many countries of the subregion: the
humanitarian situation and the situation of human rights.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, according to
information provided by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, violence and insecurity
caused by Boko Haram have devastated families and
communities in the Lake Chad basin region, where
2.4 million people are displaced and over 7 million
need food assistance. Throughout the region, there are
more than 10 million people in need of humanitarian
aid, which makes it one of the largest humanitarian
crises in the world. In that respect, we commend the
collective efforts of the international community, and
in particular of the countries of the Central African
subregion, to tackle the threat of terrorist groups like
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army. Those
efforts have made it possible to mitigate, at least in part,
the great damage caused to the civilian population.
On the situation of human rights, Uruguay is
concerned the reference in the report to ongoing
human rights violations in many countries of the
subregion, where excessive use of force, detentions
and the arbitrary arrests of political opponents, civil
society activists and media professionals reflect a
trend towards the consistent contraction of the political
space. In addition, the climate of impunity that prevails
in some countries remains a cause of concern for
Uruguay and represents, among other things, a serious
impediment to the creation of an enabling environment
for the conduct of peaceful electoral processes and an
unimpeded transition towards a democratic regime.
In conclusion, I wish to express the support of
Uruguay to the Special Representative and to all

S/PV. 8134

UNOCA personnel in their efforts to promote peace
and security in Central Africa.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Francois
Louncény Fall, for his informative briefing. Bolivia
recognizes the work being carried out by the Office
in the areas of preventive diplomacy and mediation,
as well as the support that it provides to regional and
subregional organizations. We therefore wish it success
in its operations and express our support for the tasks
entrusted to it.
To begin, we recognize that the efforts of UNOCA
contribute to the reduction of tensions in the region;
we therefore commend its work. However, we must
also recognize that other challenges persist in the areas
of peace and security, humanitarian assistance and
economic development, which must be addressed. The
progress made to date, with the support of UNOCA,
should not be overlooked. On the contrary, further
progress should be made, with the help of all regional
and subregional organizations, in accordance with the
principle of respect for sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of every State in which it carries out
its mandate.
We recognize the complexity of such challenges.
Therefore, in order to achieve peace, security and
development in Central Africa, we believe that a
subregional approach should be taken to confront the
current and emerging threats with a view to reducing
the impact that these may have on the stability
of the subregion. In that regard, we welcome the
results obtained by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General during his visit to Burundi. I wish
to highlight in that respect the need for an inclusive
dialogue that contributes to stability. We also underline
ongoing interaction with subregional leaders in order
to address the situation of the Central African Republic
in the framework of the African Initiative and the
Libreville road map. We also highlight the initiatives
carried out in Chad and the collaboration of UNOCA
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) and the Economic Community of West
African States, among others.

17-439685/6

S/PV.8134

Central African region

13/12/2017

We are of the view that, although the realities of
each country differ, the conflicts in the region must
be resolved through mediation, preventive diplomacy
and mainly through constructive and inclusive political
dialogue. To that must be added coordinated efforts
between neighboring countries, regional organizations
and international cooperation. In that regard, we believe
that the initiative of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel could be replicated in Central Africa.
In that context, we highlight the progress made by
multinational joint force and regional and international
partners in the fight against Boko Haram in the Lake
Chad basin.

to avoid gaps that could later be exploited by members
of terrorist groups.

We believe that, in seeking to address terrorism,
both the countries of the region and the international
community as a whole should reflect on the root causes
underlying its existence, one of which is the lack of
control in the exploitation of natural resources, which in
turn are used to supply and finance the illicit activities
of these groups.

Finally, we urge the international community to
take into account the factors I have outlined, which
we believe could help to resolve the humanitarian
situation. In the Lake Chad basin region alone, there are
some 10 million people in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance and more than 2 million who are internally
displaced. We must continue our work and redouble our
efforts to achieve peace, stability and development in
the Central Africa subregion.

In his report, the Special Representative refers to
Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as a key source of poaching and gold mining
by the Lord’s Resistance Army. That systematic sacking
of resources is partly due to the recent withdrawal of
troops who had been fighting the Lord’s Resistance
Army. A new strategy must therefore be developed with
the African Union and the countries involved in order

6/6

Another aspect that Bolivia believes would
accelerate progress in peacebuilding in the region is
the greater participation of women in those processes
and in decision-making. We commend the initiative
of UNOCA, in collaboration with ECCAS, to create
a regional network of women’s media for peace
and security in Central Africa, which seeks to help
to mobilize women in the region and promote the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We support
the continuation of that work.

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion of
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

17-43968
