Re1olutiom adopted oa the reporb of the FOUl'lh Committee

transmitted insufficient information or have transmitted
information too late for its effective utilization by the
Special Committee;
3. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Goveming
Territory has attained a full measure of self-govemment in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter with
respect to that Territory;
4. Requests the administering Powers concemed to
trailsmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Charter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the
Territories concerned;
5. Reiterates its request that the administering Powers concerned transmit such information as early as
possible and, at the latest, within a maximum period
of six months following the expiration of the administrative year in the Non-Self-Governing Territories
concemed;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance
with established procedures, and to report thereon to
the Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3294 (XXIX). Question of Territories under
Portuguese domination

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Territories under
Portuguese domination,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 45
Having heard the statements made by the administering Power, 46 in particular the important statement
made by the Head of State of Portugal on 17 October
1974,47
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of the Movimento de Liberta~iio de Sao Tomé e Príncipe, the Frente Nacional para a Liberta~iio de Angola,
the Frente de Liberta9iio de M~ambique, the Movimento Popular de Liberta9ao de Angola and the Partido
Africano da Independencia de Guiné e Cabo Verde;"'
who participated in an observer capacity in the Fourth
Committee's consideration of the item,
Taking into account the important statement made
by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity before the General Assembly on 9 October 1974,
in which he referred to the present item, 49
4 ~ Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session. Supr,/ement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.1), chaps. IV-Vil.
4 8 /bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 2233rd,
2239th, 2269th and 2309th meetings and ibid., Fourth Committee, 2080th and 2092nd meetings.
47 /bid., P/enary Meetings, 2269th meeting.
48 /bid., Fourth Committee, 2080th 2081st, 2084th and
2088th meetings.
'
40 /bid., Plenury Meetings, 2262nd meeting.

105

Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970,
containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as ali other resolutions relating to the ítem adopted by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Special Committee,
Welcoming the declaration of the Government of
Portugal accepting to fulfH its obligations under the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and recognizing the right of the peoples to self-determination and independence, as well as Portugal's express readiness to co-operate in the work of the competent United · Nations bodies, as stated by the
Government of Portugal in íts declarations before the
General Assembly on 23 September and 17 October
1974,50
Cognizant that the changes in the policy of Portugal
towards its colonial Territories were brought about
mainly as a consequence of the heroic struggle and
persistent resistance of the peoples of the Territories
concemed, led by their national liberation movements,
for the achievement of their índependence and the
restoration of their human rights,
Cognizant a/so that the action carried out in Portugal
by the •movement of 25 April 197 4 represents a fundamental step in the process of decoloni7Ation occurring
in the Territories,
Reiterating that only total decolonization wili restore
peace in the Territories,
Deeply concerned at the activities of the fascist and
reactionary groups still in existence in Angola, Cape
Verde and Mozambique, which are trying to obstruct
the realization by the peoples of these Territories of
their aspirations for freedom and independence and
which are provoking racial confrontations that have
resulted on severa! occasions in deplorable incidents
causing death and injuries among the inhabitants,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to continue to render ali moral and material aid to the
peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination and their national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity in their
efforts to consolidate national unity and to reconstruct
their countries,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
the Territories under Portuguese domination to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
the I>eclaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV);
2. W eleo mes with satis!action the acceptance by the
new Government of Portugal of the sacred principie
of self-determination and independence and its unqualified applicability to ali the. peoples under Portuguese colonial domination;
3. Notes with particular satisfaction that, as a result
of the consultations held between the Govemment of
Portugal and the national liberation movements of the
Territories concerned:
(a) Mozambique will accede to independence on
25 June 1975;ll 1
oo /bid., 2239th and 2269th meetings.
111 A/9769, annex l.

106

General Assembly-Twenly-ninlh Ses■ion

(b) Sao Tomé and Príncipe will accede to independence on 12 July 1975;62
(e) Provisional governments will be established in
Angola and Cape Verde with a view to the attainment
by these Territories during 1975 of the goals set forth
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration;62
4. Strongly deplores the subversive aad criminal
activities of the fascist and reactionary groups in Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique and Sao Tomé and
Príncipe, which are attempting to obstruct the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their aspirations for freedom and independence, and requests the
Govemment of Portugal to continue and strengthen
its efforts to put an end to ali such activities;
5. Reiterates its affirmation that the national unity
and territorial integrity of these Territories must be
preserved, taking note in this connexion of the statement delivered by the administering Power;53
6. Realfirms its total support of, and constant solidarity with, the peoples of the Territories under Portuguese domination in their legitimate struggle to achieve
without further delay freedom and independence under
the leadership of their national liberation movementsthe Frente Nacional para a Liberta~ao de Angola, the
Movimento Popular de Liberta~ao de Angola, the
Partido Africano da Independencia da Guiné e Cabo
Verde. the Frente de Liberta~ao de M~ambique and
the Movimento de Liberta~ao de Sao Tomé e Príncipe
-which are authentic representatives of the peoples
concerned;
1. Ca/Is upon the Government of Portugal to pursue the necessary steps to ensure the full implementation of the Declaration contained in resolution 1514
(XV) and ali other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the Territories concemed, as well as other
recent measures geared towards total decolonization,
namely, the agreements concluded in Algiers and in
Lusaka and the continuation of the negotiations with
the above-mentioned national liberation movements,
in their capacity of qualified counterparts, for the total
transfer of powers to representatives of the peoples
concemed, by adopting forthwith ali necessary measores to remove any obstacle to the full and free exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence;
8. Requests the Govemment of Portugal to keep
the United Nations informed of the action taken or
envisaged in the implementation of paragraphs 4 and 7
above and of the related developments in these Terri-

tories;
9. Invites ali Governments to increase their efforts
with a view to contributing to the acceleration of the
process of decolonization in the Territories concemed;
10. Appeals to ali Govemments and the specialized
agencies and other institutions associated with the
United Nations to render to the peoples of the Territories concemed ali moral and material assistance towards the achievement of their national independence
and the reconstruction of their countries;
11. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declarali2A/988S.
G3 See Offecial Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2080th meeting.

tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to keep the situation in these
Territories under continuous review, in particular
through the dispatch of visiting missions as appropriate, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirtieth session.
2318th plerrary meeting
13 December 1974

3295 (XXIX). Question of Namibia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 54 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Jmplementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, 55
Having heard the statement of the representatives
of the South West Africa People's Organization,68 who
have participated in an observer caracity in the work
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
Special Committee, as well as in the consideration of
the ítem by the Fourth Committee,
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners,17
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the G1anting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question
of Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971,'18 delivered in response to the request addressed to it by the
Council in its resolution 284 ( 1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the resolutions on Namibia
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
eleventh ordinary session, held at Mogadiscio from
12 to 15 June 1974,
Reatfirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Strongly deploring South Africa's continued refusal
to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations, its continued illegal occupation of
Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian people
and its persistent violation of their human rights, as
well as its efforts to destroy the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia,
H /bid., Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/9624)
and Supplement 24A (A/9624/ Add.1).
55 lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rev.1), chapa. IV,
V and IX.
56 lbid., Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee 2100th
and 2103rd meetings.
'
:; 7 /bid., 2092nd, 2101st, 2103rd, 2106th and 2110th meetinp.
58 Legal Conseque11ces for States of the Continued Preunce
o/ South A frica in Namibia (South West A/rica) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolurion 276 (1970), Advi.rory Opin'ion,
J.C./. Reports 1971, p. 16.
