UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. ... .. .. .. ... .. ... . .... ... .. ... .. ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2391)

The situation in the Middle East:
(N) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);

(17) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.239 I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
,l/
_I,
‘;‘# I. I,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjciql Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council’, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2391st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 6 August 1982, at 11.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

Cuba, Egypt, India and Pakistan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Prc.se~zt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2391)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1.5162);
VI) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives
of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15316)

of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to apologize to
members of the Council for beginning the meeting
somewhat later than the hour which we had agreed on
last night.
Adoption

of the agenda

situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)

The

2.

The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with decisions
meetings [2374th, 2375th, 2377th,
2385th und 2389th meetings], I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the
Council table: I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place
at the Council table; I invite the representatives of

taken at previous

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/15346, which contains the text
of a letter dated 4 August from the representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the Secretary-General.
4. The first speaker is the representative
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization,
and I now call on
him.
5. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
While the Council is deliberating and Israel gains encouragement from the Council’s failure to act, that
country today, at 1430 hours Beirut time, bombarded
the Sanai area, killing a number of people. A military
spokesman announced this afternoon, Beirut time, that
an estimated 250 people had been killed or wounded,
most of them women and children, in an Israeli air
raid on a building in the Sanai area of west Beirut,
a site only some 100 metres from the office of the
Prime Minister of Lebanon, Chafik Al-Wassan. The
military spokesman said:
“This treacherous attack is a challenge to the
world and to the decisions of the Security Council.
It can only be explained as part of a campaign of
genocide against the Lebanese and the Palestinian
peoples.”
6. The building that was hit housed primarily Palestinian refugees who had been driven from the Jisr
Basha and Debai refugee camps in east Beirut in
1976. I hope that the Council feels that it is high time
that some action be taken, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, to put
an end to this genocide.
7. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I call on the representative

of

8. Mr. TUBNI (Lebanon): I should like to make my
country’s position ~~is-ir-l~is the draft resolution now
before the Council [S//5347] quite clear and unequivocal.

13. The PRESIDENT:
Is the Council ready to
proceed to vote on draft resolution S/15347, submitted
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics?
14. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inkrpwrtrtion
~?OIIJ Russirrn): Before we
proceed to the vote, I should like to make a very brief
statement.

9. We find it legitimate and natural that the Council
should react to the decisions of the Government of
Israel that were released today, decisions that could be
said to be negative. However, our main concern, on
behalf of which we have pleaded in the corridors of the
Council and with every single Council member, is that
the Council should preserve unanimity in its reaction
and a measure of consensus that will enable it to continue to influence events in a positive manner and not
give the Israeli Cabinet further licence to react in the
same way it has been reacting and to resume hostilities.

1.5. We are at the present time talking about the need
to implement the decisions taken by the Council, with
the agreement of all of its members, in connection
with Israel’s aggression in Lebanon. The Council,
whose patience has been exhausted, decided on
4 August, the day before yesterday, that if Israel did
not implement even the most minimum demands of
the Council, the Council would then consider the question of sanctions for such violations.

the Israelis
10. Our position is that no party-neither
nor others-should
in fact find in anything that happens here any encouragement
to lessen the chances
for peace. As representative of Lebanon, my main
interest is that the war be stopped in time to preserve
what is left of Beirut, what is left of Lebanon and what
is left of the chances for peace. I trust-indeed,
I am
sure-that
the Council will understand our plea and
approach the matter from that perspective.

16. Yesterday, 5 August, Israel rejected even the
minimum resolutions of the Council. In those conditions, the Soviet Union came to the Council, but not
for a propaganda victory, as some representatives of
the so-called free press have irresponsibly written.
We came here, at a time which is critical for the fate
of Lebanon and for the life of the Palestinian people,
to propose to all members of the Council a responsible political approach.

11. I would also like to make one final remark,
since the report of the Secretary-General
in pursuance
of Security Council resolution 5 17 ( 1982) [3//5345 und
Add./ J is before us here. My comment relates to document S/15345/Add.l.
Paragraph 4 of the Israeli reply
to the Secretary-General
is particularly unacceptable
to my Government for the following reasons. First, my
Government
stands firmly in support of Council
resolutions 508 (1982), 509 (1982) and the other resolutions of the Council that clearly call for two things:
a total and unconditional
withdrawal by Israel and
the cessation of all military activities in Lebanon and
across the Lebanese-Israeli
border.

17. Let us try once again, through our joint efforts,
to take a first step, which, though small, is qualitatively new. Let us try to deflect what is happening
on Lebanese territory and in the Middle East as a
whole away from this madness of the unilateral application of force by States. How can we do that? We
can do it if all the members of the Council, without
exception, show serious and responsible readiness
to implement the minimum provisions on which we
have agreed in resolutions 5 I6 ( 1982) and 5 17 (1982)+*
18. The Soviet delegation is ready to make yet
further efforts to achieve that constructive goal. It is
ready to insert a change proposed to it by the delegation of one of the States members of the Council.
We accept that change, which is that, in paragraph 3
of the draft resolution proposed by the Soviet Union,
we delete the words “as a first step” and, instead,
add the following words at the end of the paragraph:
“until the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from all
Lebanese territory”.
As my delegation accepts that
change, the revised paragraph 3 will read:

12. In addition,
the notion of symmetrical
withdrawal, which is once more expressed here, is a notion
that-as we have said before the General Assembly
and before the Council on more than one occasionwe fear might be conducive to symmetrical presence,
not to use the term ” symmetrical
occupation”.
My
Government has made it clear that we want all nonLebanese forces out of Lebanon, not because this is
an Israeli demand, but because this is a Lebanese
demand, one expressed long before the Israeli invasion. Indeed-and
I want to be very clear-we want
all non-Lebanese
armies, save, of course, for the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
that are not authorized, or are not eventually authorized by my Government,
out of Lebanon. We state
this not as an Israeli demand, but as a Lebanese
demand. We cannot conceive of Israeli withdrawal
being contingent on the withdrawal of others, nor can
we conceive of the withdrawal of other, non-lebanese forces as being contingent on Israeli withdrawal.

“3. Deides
that, in order to carry out the
above-mentioned
decisions of the Security Council, all the States Members of the United Nations
should refrain from supplying Israel with any weapons and from providing it with any military aid until
the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Lebanese territory.”

‘li Mr.

2

Blum (Israel)

took

a place

at the Council

table.

19, ln the light of the importance of this moment,
tl,e Soviet delegatior Insists that the .draft resolution
proposedby the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
asorally revised, be put to the vote immediately,

account the views of some of the parties to the conflict,
especially the. views of the Government of Lebanon,
which were indicated by Mr, Tu&i just now, we do
not consider that this draft resolution will make any
Positive contribution to the peace process in the
Middle East. On the contrary, it is being widely predictedthat this draft resolution wiII lead to a veto.

20, The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council will
“ate that the representative of the Soviet Union has
put forward a revised version of paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution and has read It out to us clearly.

28. We agree with the view of Mr. Tukni that it is
exceedingly important at this juncture that the Council should endeavour to continue to proceed by consensus. The consequence of a veto, if there be a veto,
will be not to build on the modest progress which we
made in adopting resolutions 5 16 ( 1982) and 5 I7 ( 1982);
indeed, it is liable to send the wrong signal to Jerusalem.

21, I would ask at this stage whether the members
ofthe Council are ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union in
document S/ 15347.
22. I call now on those members of the Council who
wishto make statements before the voting.

29. To conclude, we have heard nothing constructive in the debate on this draft resolution. The most
eloquent contribution to the proceedings of the Council in the early hours of this morning, in the view of
this delegation, was the silence of the representative
of Lebanon. No good, in our view, has been done by
the introduction of this draft resolution. For those
reasons, we will abstain.

23, Mr. LOUET
(France) (intcrprct~~tion fkom
~renchl: The Council has adopted unanimously, or
nearly unanimously, a number of resolutions on Lebanon. In spite of the repeated appeals of the Council
and the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General,
my
delegation notes that Israel has thus far refused to
comply with those resolutions. The situation in Beirut
is becoming increasingly tragic, especially for the
civilian populations and, in view of what is happening
in Beirut, for Lebanon as a whole.

30.

Mr. LING

Qing (China) (interprrtation
J%YI
authorities openly refuse to
implement resolutions 5 16 ( 1982) and 5 17 (1982), refuse
to accept deployment by the Secretary-General of
United Nations observers in and around Beirut to
monitor the cease-fire and refuse to withdraw their
aggressor troops to the positions they occupied prior
to 1325 hours New York time on 1 August 1982.
Chinese): The Israeli

24. Another draft resolution has been submitted to
US[S/15347]. It envisages certain measures regarding
military supplies. My delegation is convinced that
those measures are justified until the full withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all Lebanese territory. That is
why we shall vote in favour of this draft resolution.

3 I, The Chinese Government strongly condemns the
position of the Israeli authorities of openly violating
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and of stubbornly persisting in aggression. The situation in Lebanon is further deteriorating: the city of
Beirut is faced with the danger of complete destruction; the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples may face
even more IargeLscale massacres.

25. Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): My delegation
hassaid it before, but we say it again: my Government
is appalled by what is happening in Beirut. We have
heardno acceptable justification for the carnage which
is being wreaked by the Israel Defence Forces in
Lebanon.
26, We voted in favour of Council resolutions 516
(1982)and 517 (1982); we want a cease-fire: we want
United Nations observers. When we consider the
draft resolution on which we are about to vote, we note
that we are indignant at the refusal of Israel to comply
with the decisions of the Council: we do condemn
Israel for not implementing
those resolutions; we do
demand that Israel immediately
implement
those
resolutions: and, concerning operative paragraph 3
of the draft resolution, my Government announced
more than a month ago, at the end of June, that it had
decided that no further licences for the supply of military equipment to Israel would be issued until furthet
notice, That remains the policy of my Government.

32. In accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution
5 17 (1982), in case of failure to comply by any of the
parties to the conflict, the Council should consider
adopting effective ways and means in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations to
impose sanctions against Israel. It is now imperative
that the Council fully discharge its duty of safeguarding
international peace and security.
33, The Chinese delegation is of the view that, as
a first step, the Israeli aggressor troops should immediately lift their siege of the city of Beirut, halt their
offensive against west Beirut, withdraw their troops
to positions occupied prior to I August and accept the
presence of United Nations observers to monitor the
cease-fire. After that, the Israeli authorities must also
immediately,
totally and unconditionally
withdraw
their troops from Lebanon.

27. However, we do not support this draft resolution. Bearing in mind the hasty manner in which it was
introduced by its sponsor, and given that there has
been no serious attempt, in our opinion, to take into
3

34. The Chinese delegation is of the view that the
text of draft resolution S/15347 represents the minimum. We also feel that the text is not sufficient: it
falls short of what is required for immediately
halting
Israel’s aggression. The Council should consider
adopting stronger measures to sanction Israel.

39. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements after the voting,
40. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The delegation of
Jordan voted in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet Union because it reflects the deep
outrage of all members of the international community towards the holocaust which aggressive Israel has
been inflicting upon Lebanon, an independent sovereign State, and upon its people and their Palestinian
refugee guests, whom Israel uprooted from their
ancestral homeland 34 years ago.

35. Although draft resolution S/ 15347 is insufficient,
we consider it acceptable as a preliminary
measure
of sanction. Therefore, the Chinese delegation will vote
in favour of it.
36. The PRESIDENT:
As there are no more speakers before the voting, I would propose to put the draft
resolution to the vote. Since the draft resolution has
been revised orally, and since it is short, I propose,
in the interests of clarity, to read the revised version
of the draft to the Council before we come to vote
on it.

41. In addition, the draft resolution strongly condemns Israel for not implementing
resolutions 516
(1982) and 517 (1982), adopted unanimously,
which
demanded a cease-fire and the deployment of United
Nations observers to monitor the situation on the
ground, particularly in the light of Israel’s deliberate
duplicity and its deception of the world in alleging that
it was in favour of adopting a diplomatic solution,
when all along it was determined to resort to the genocidal military option which it has been relentlessly
pursuing for 62 days.

37. The draft resolution, in the form revised and
presented orally by the representative of the Soviet
Union, reads as follows:

“Deeply indignant
at the refusal of Israel to
comply with the decisions of the Security Council
aimed at terminating the bloodshed in Beirut,

42. In its resolution 517 (1982), the Council specifically decided to meet
Lb * . * in order to consider the report of the Secretary-General and, in case of failure to comply by
any of the parties to the conflict, to consider adopting
effective ways and means in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.”

“1. Strongly c~nd~n~~s Israel for not implementing resolutions 5 16 ( 1982) and 5 17 ( 1982);
“2. Doncrnds that Israel
ment these resolutions fully;

immediately

imple-

Hence, operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution
on which the Council has just voted includes an arms
embargo until all Israeli forces have totally withdrawn
from Lebanon.

“3. Dwides that, in order to carry out the
above-mentioned
decisions of the Security Council, all the States Members of the United Nations
should refrain from supplying Israel with any weapons and from providing it with any military aid until
the full withdrawal of Israeli forces from all Lebanese territory.”

43. It is sad to think that any country would continue
to provide to an aggressive and expansionist Israel
military hardware with which to finalize the destruction of a whole country-Lebanon,
its people and the
Palestinian people residing therein. We regarded the
proposed punitive measure as no more than a first
step, which should be followed by much sterner
measures in the diplomatic,
economic, military and
other fields, as spelled out meticulously in the Chapter
of the Charter of the United Nations dealing with
enforcement measures. As I said, we regard this as
a first step. As for the beleaguered and cannibalized
people of Lebanon-whether
Lebanese or their
Palestinian refugee guests-their
motto is: “We da
not want your prayers; we want your assistance.”

38. I now put to the vote draft resolution S/15347/
Rev.1, as orally revised and as just read out by me.

In ~~IWLII’:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics
Agrrinst: United
Ahstrriaing:
and Northern

States of America

Togo, United Kingdom
Ireland, Zaire

of Great Britain

44. Israel has a stockpile of weapons and it is still
being supplied with those weapons which are literally
destroying every quarter, every building, every house
in the capital of Lebanon. Surely, there must be a
way for the collective will of the international Cornmunity to put an end to this holocaust, which will
4

remain in infamy in the records of the period since the
Second World War,

52. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprettrtion
jwm
Russitrn):
The Soviet
delegation, as I have already said, came to the Council with constructive intentions. That is the very reason
why the Soviet delegation accepted the change suggested by one delegation, and I referred to that before.
But I think that all the members of the Council are
entitled to know one more fact.

45. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): As representatives
of my Government
have
stated many times before, the United States, particularly through the mission of Mr. Philip Habib, has
been working intensively and with profound commitment to help bring about a negotiated settlement of
the crisis in Beirut and in Lebanon. We believe that
this mission offers the best hope for a settlement that
will avoid further bloodshed, secure the withdrawal
from Lebanon of all foreign for&s and enable Lebanon
to regain its sovereignty, its independence and its
territorial
integrity.

53. Approximately
half an hour before this meeting
of the Council began, the Soviet representative was
approached by one delegation, a responsible delegation member of the Council. The Soviet representative
was asked a question: would the Soviet Union be
ready to consider the possibility of reaching agreement with regard to a final text of the Soviet draft
resolution that would enable us to have a positive vote,
at least by all five permanent members of the Security
Council? I shall be blunt: we were talking about a
positive vote by the United States delegation.

46. We shall support any action in the Council that
will assist Mr. Habib in his mission. We have supported such actions in the Council. We have worked
hard to achieve consensus in the Council during this
crisis. At the same time, we shall do nothing that might
in any way affect this mission adversely.

54. The representative
who approached me with
that question was given the following answer: the
Soviet delegation is of course prepared to consider
a concrete proposal, concrete wording, by the United
States with regard to the Soviet draft resolution in the
Council.

47. The United States has supported many resolutions during this protracted crisis in Lebanon. Last
Sunday, we supported resolution 516 (1982), which
authorized
the Secretary-General,
at the request of
the Government
of Lebanon, to deploy United Nations observers in and around Beirut. We wish to reaffirm our support for resolution 516 (1982) and its call
for observers. We wish to emphasize as well that it is
important
that the modalities of the deployment should
contribute
to the negotiations and to the peaceful resolution of the conflict.

55. At that time it was emphasized that the Soviet
delegation was prepared to do that only if a concrete
amendment was involved and not some vague kind of
wording. A short while later, the Soviet delegation
was informed that the United States delegation had
nothing to say to the delegation of the Soviet Union.

48. The Government of Lebanon has made it clear,
as stated unequivocally
to the Council, that it wishes
the complete withdrawal of foreign forces from Lebanon, starting with the withdrawal of foreign forces
from Beirut. My Government has always supported
and continues to support the Government of Lebanon
in this desire. We can only regret that the Council has
been unable clearly to state this same support for the
Government
and for the people of Lebanon, the chief
victims of this continuing tragedy.

Thus, the responsibility
of the United States
for what has taken place today is clear. For each
further step of the Israeli occupiers into Lebanese
territory,
for each Lebanese and Palestinian
child
who is killed, for each old person who is killed, for
each woman who is killed, I say that the responsibility
for all of that will be borne not only by Israel but also
by the United States.
56.

57. Mr, LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I wish to commend my distinguished friend from
the Soviet Union for being a loyal and dedicated servant of his Government. In common with his Government, he chooses to remake and recast history to his
own devices.

49.
As President Reagan said, we support a ceasefire in place, and by the term “a cease-fire in place”
the President meant the position offorces on 1 August.
50.
We voted against the draft resolution because it
called for sanctions against Israel and because it was
Ltnbalanced
and would not have contributed to our
goal of achieving,
through negotiations, a peaceful
settlement.
51.

58.

The United

States made it clear to many reprethis table, to you, Mr. President,
and indirectly therefore to the representative
of the
Soviet Union, that we were prepared at all times to
consider any reasonable alternative
text, any productive alternative text, any text of a draft resolution
that in our judgement would contribute to the peace
process in Lebanon.
We remain committed
to that
goal.
sentatives around

We regret that one member

of the Council has
to polarize the situation within the Council.
Indeed,
my Government would like to suggest that the
time has come to declare a cease-fire within the Council itself. This, we hope, will give the peace process
a chance to work and to succeed.
tried

5

59. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
wishes to speak. Before I call on him, I should like
to make one comment as President.

from a letter received yesterday
I have never met. He writes:

from a gentleman

“Allow me to thank you for your support and
understanding of our problem. Without any doubt,
all Lebanese people who believe in freedom pledge
their support behind your action in Lebanon. It has
been unfortunate that Israel’s action was erroneously characterized as invasion. But we have
confidence that the truth will always shine, and
only those who are blind will not see that Israel’s
action was to liberate not only Lebanon but the
whole free world from PLO terrorists and Syrian
murderers.

60. We began the meeting by inviting him, among
others, to take a place at the Council table in accordance with our previous decisions. We did in fact begin
before he took his place. But I should like to assure
him that no discourtesy was intended on my part.
It was simply that, having announced last night that
the meeting today would begin at 1 I .30 a.m., and
having deferred it for some time while I undertook
certain consultations, at a certain moment I felt that
I had to begin the meeting. I would assure him, and
indeed any Member of the United Nations invited to
the Council table, that no discourtesy was intended
on my part.

“For generations to come,
remember our friends.”

61. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Some of the speakers here
today have in their statements distorted the position
of my Government with regard to the issue before us.
Although that position is well known, I deem it my
duty, for the sake of clarity, to repeat it very briefly.

we Lebanese will

And here there is a quotation from what apparently
is a proverb in Arabic: “Your friend is your needs
answered”, by Kahlil Gibran. “My family here and in
Lebanon thank you for your support for our just
cause.” The letter is signed Elie Adam Naim, of
Englewood, New Jersey.

62. Israel fully supports the restoration of the sovereignty of Lebanon under the authority of its lawful
Government
within its internationally
recognized
boundaries, free from any foreign intervention.
Israel
supports the withdrawal of all foreign forces from
Lebanese territory. Lebanon legitimately
belongs to
its people and to its people alone, and, as I have
repeatedly stated in the Council and elsewhere, Israel
has no territorial ambitions whatsoever in Lebanon.

67. It is not my intention to respond to the statements we have heard from the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I did so extensively at an earlier meeting of the Council today. Let
me therefore only briefly say that I see no need on
my part to respond to the expressions of vilification
on the part of the leading imperialist Power of our
time, the leading expansionist Power of our time, a
Power that has installed the gulags to suppress and to
oppress its own people. We are in no need of being
taught decency and proper behaviour by the representative of the Soviet Union-any
representative of the
Soviet Union-so
1 will not address myself to his
statements here today.

63. We are entitled to demand that proper arrangements be made to prevent Lebanese territory from
being used again in the future as a staging ground fol
hostile activities and terrorist acts against Israel and
its population.
64. Those are the basic principles on which our position with regard to the situation in Lebanon rests,
and 1 believe they are shared by others in many parts
of the world. They are certainly shared by the vast
majority of the Lebanese people.

68. But I do wish to say a few words and address
myself to the representative of another member of
the Council, and I do so more in sorrow than in anger,
because we have tremendous respect and admiration
for his country. We believe not only that it is a great
country but that its people is a great people, a people
that has stood for many generations for those ideals
that make life worth living. It is therefore with sorrow
that we note that, as far as that particular country is
concerned, today, 6 August 1982, will live on as a day
of shame in infamy.

65. As the dust gradually settles, and as the picture
emerges more clearly, it becomes obvious how relieved the population of the southern part of Lebanon
is at the fact that the terrorist presence in that part of
their country has been removed after seven long years
of agony and suffering. We, at our Mission, receive
a great number of communications
from ordinary
Lebanese, both in Lebanon and in this country, communications
that contain encouragement
for the
Government and people of Israel and expressions of
gratitude to them for having brought about the disappearance of the terrorist presence in the southern part
of their country.

69. Let me read out to the representative of France
a passage from the verbatim record of a previous
meeting of the Council, and I shall do so in his own
language:
“An army which sets up machine-guns in the
centre of an area occupied by civilians assumes a
heavy responsibility
with regard to this civilian
population. A town from which guns are fired on

66. I am not going to detain the Council with all of
those communications.
Let me just read out passages
6

troops elsewhere cannot claim to be an open town,
immune from bombing.““: [8/Yth rncvting,
pcrrcr.
72.1

thus making itself responsible for the death of the
head of the school and of his family.

Those words were spoken in the Council by the representative of France, Mr. Georges-Picot, on 2 June
1958.

“While the fighting was going on. the Remada
school was used by Tunisian armed units as a point
from which to fire against the hordj occupied by the
French troops.” [82&h mecjtilqy,
prrras.
37 und 39.1

70. Of course, the event that prompted that statement by the representative of France was the episode
of Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef.
Just to refresh the memory
of those members of the Council who may be in need
of it, Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef,
on Tunisian territory,
was
used as a terrorist base from which French troops
and civilians across the Tunisian border were harassed. And the French representative, rightly, made
a point of emphasizing that fact. On the same occasion, he said:

71. And the conclusion? It is to be found in Mr.
Georges-Picot’s
statement at the 8 19th meeting:
“France is justified in contending that the Tunisian Government
has taken advantage of all the
facilities accorded to it by France in order to give
open and constantly increasing encouragement
to
supporters of a rebellion on French territory and
that, in doing so, Tunisia has committed
a definite
breach of faith. The Tunisian Government has also
failed to fulfil its obligations under the United Nations Charter, which requires it to live in peace and
as a good neighbour with the other Members of the
United Nations. Its attitude is directly contrary to
the spirit of decisions taken by the General Assembly, which, in its resolution 288 A (IV) concerning the situation in Greece, called upon ‘Albania, Bulgaria and the other States concerned to
cease forthwith rendering any assistance or support to the guerrillas in fighting against Greece,
including the use of their territories as a base for
the preparation
or launching of armed actions’.
Are we not facing a similar situation?”
[8/W?

II I . I I consider it my duty, in order to enable the
Council to form an objective appraisal of the situation, to fill in the gaps in the Tunisian statement
and to correct certain points which will make it
clear to the President and the members of the Council that Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef
was not an open town,
but a military
centre of the Algerian rebels, supported by the Tunisian Army and administration,
a
centre from which attacks were continually launched
against the French forces.
“Long before the incident of 8 February 1958”,
-which
was the reason why the Council was discussing the issue-“Sakiet-Sidi-Youssef
and its mine
were used as a training centre for the rebels and as
a transit point for the supply of arms to the Algerian
rebellion.
What amounted to a rebel garrisonaveraging
500 to 700 men”-not
5,000 to 7,000
- “was permanently established at the mine, while
the families lived in the village. Units of recruits
were stationed there, drew arms and for six weeks
carried out intensive military training consisting
of technical instruction on the spot, combat exercises in the hills to the north of the mine buildings,
firing practice in the hills . . .” [Hid.,
ptrr~!s.
70
trild

mcjeting,

The
French Government
therefore concluded that
in order to stop those terrorist activities it had to
act. And how was that action characterized? Here
I quote from the statement of Mr. George+Picot
at
the 820th meeting of the Council, on the same date:

I should like first to make a
73. The PRESIDENT:
brief statement as President and then to make a statement in my capacity as representative of Ireland.

“The French retaliation was no more than an act
of legitimate
self-defence. The local command in
particular
took constant care to avoid civilian
losses, opening fire only as a last resort. A commando
unit of armed Tunisian civilians, on the
other hand, did not hesitate to set fire to two dwelling
houses nor deliberately to use the village school as
a base for directing fire on the French garrison,
in French

/01,]

72. We have been exposed here, over the years, to
a great deal of hypocrisy and bigotry and cynicism,
and we know full well that when it comes to my country, a double standard is traditionally
applied here.
This has become the rule. We do not agree with this,
we do not acquiesce in this, but we are not nai’ve.
When the representative of France, however, engages
in such exercises, I confess we find it very painful
indeed, not for our sake but for the sake of France,
which we respect and admire and which we will continue to respect and admire, despite its day of shame.

71.1

* Quoted

pnr-a.

74. First, as President, I wish to state the following,
in view of certain comments made earlier in our debate today. As President, I conceive it my duty, first,
to preside over the proceedings of the Council and to
try to order the business of the Council under the
guidance of its members. I wish to do so fairly at all
times. I believe it is also right for me, as President,
to try wherever possible to maintain the unity and,
common purpose of the Council in dealing w,ith any
serious subj,ect or situation,

by the speaker.

7

75. In accordance with this view of my duties as
President, I undertook certain contacts on an informal
basis and on my own responsibility
before our meeting
started this morning. I would not normally refer to
those contacts here, but since reference has already
been made to them I think it right to clarify the situation. I would simply say that those contacts were
informal, they were undertaken on my responsibility
and they were undertaken in a wish to maintain the
unity and common purpose of the Council, which
I think has been broadly maintained since I assumed
my functions on Sunday last.
76. At a certain point, I decided, on the basis of my
own judgement, that those efforts were not likely to
bear fruit. At that point, in response to the wishes
of members of the Council, I began the present proceedings.
77. I make that statement simply to cIarify references that have been made and to explain my own
view of my functions as President.
78. I should now like to make a statement
sentative of IRELAND.

as repre-

79. The Council has been considering the situation
created by the Israeli invasion of Lebanon since that
invasion began two months ago. It has adopted a total
of seven resolutions. None of these has so far been
implemented.
I think it necessary to summarize
briefly what has happened here since early June.

ration of the normal supply of vital facilities such as
water, electricity,
food and medical provisions.
Israel, however, maintained
its blockade of west
Beirut.
84. On 29 July, by resolution 515 (1982), the Council demanded that Israel lift the blockade immediately
in order to permit the dispatch of supplies to the civilian population and allow the distribution of aid. That
resolution was not complied with.
85. A new stage in our work began last Sunday,
I August. At that time, military activities in and
around Beirut had intensified and repeated ceasefires had broken down. On Sunday last, by resolution 516 (1982), we again demanded an immediate
cease-fire, and we authorized the Secretary-General
to deploy immediately,
on the request of the Government of Lebanon, United Nations observers who
would help to maintain it in place by monitoring the
situation. This, in our view, was very important, It
would consolidate the fragile cease-fires, and we saw
no reason why, without prejudice to larger issues,
this should not be acceptable immediately to all parties.
Two of the parties involved immediately
accepted
the deployment of observers. The third, Israel, responded that the matter had to be decided by its
Cabinet, and that it would be so decided on 5 August
[S/15345, pl//vr. 31. The hostilities continued.
86. On Tuesday last, 3 August, I, as President, was
authorized to make a statement expressing the serious
concern of members of the Council and insisting that
all parties observe strictly resolution
516 (1982)
[S//5342].
Immediately
thereafter,
Israeli forces
engaged in further major military activity, moving
further into west Beirut and subjecting the city to
further bombing and shelling. Firing continued on both
sides in these circumstances.

80. On 5 June, immediately
after the invasion, we
adopted resolution 508 (1982). In that resolution, we
called upon the parties to cease immediately
and
simultaneously
all military
activities
within Lebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli
border, and
we set a deadline of 0600 hours local time on 6 June.
That request was not complied with.

87. On Wednesday, 4 August, the Council adopted
resolution 517 (1982). We again demanded an immediate cease-fire and demanded that Israeli troops
return to the positions they had occupied on Sunday,
when resolution 5 I6 (1982) was adopted, and we went
so far as to censure Israel for its failure to comply
with the Council’s resolutions.

81. On the following day, 6 June, the Council adopted
resolution 509 (1982). We demanded that Israel withdraw all its military forces forthwith and unconditionally to the internationally
recognized boundaries
of Lebanon, and we demanded that all parties observe
strictly the terms of resolution 508 (1982). That resolution was not complied with. Israel’s forces moved
rapidly further into Lebanon, occupying the whole of
southern Lebanon, and took up positions in and around
the capital.

88. Yesterday, Israel specifically declined to COoperate with the Secretary-General in the deployment
of observers in and around Beirut, in accordance (with
resolution 516 (1982) [SW S//5345/Add.l].
Israeli
troops have also not withdrawn to the positions they
held last Sunday. Instead, there have been renewed
attacks on Beirut.

82. On 19 June, we adopted resolution 512 (1982).
Among other things, that resolution chilled upon all
parties to respect the rights of the civilian population,
The conflict continued, and Israeli forces contitiued
to press forward. The civilian
population,
particularly in west Beirut, suffered grievously,

89. Today, we have been called upon to consider
once again the situation as I have described it. We are
faced not with the problem of the non-implementation
of a single resolution, but rather with a consistent and
repeated failure to implement
over several months
and with the continuation of military activities and
hostilities on both sides.

83. In resolution 513 (1982), adopted on 4 July, we
repeated our call for respect for the rights of the civilian populations, and we called further for the resto8

90, We have therefore had to address ourselves to
the present draft resolution [S//5347/Rc~.Ij.
In the
statement which I made just now as President, I indicated that I, as President, had tried to maintain the
common purpose of the Council which it had shown
since Sunday last. Nevertheless, that effort did not
succeed, and we addressed ourselves to the draft
resolution placed before us.

of the Council and all Member States agree to accept
and to carry out the decisions of the Council in accordance with the Charter. As a member of the Council
for a short two-year period, we feel it our duty to
uphold this system and to uphold the authority of the
Council.
97. Faced with the gravity of the present situation,
we therefore carefully considered our attitude to the
present draft resolution. We did not feel that the Council could simply accept that its decisions, taken over
a period of two months, should remain unimplemented
while present fighting, destruction and serious loss
of life on both sides continued. We thought it right,
therefore, for the Council to signal the seriousness of
its intentions,
and we therefore voted in favour of
the draft resolution, before the Council, which called
on States to be prepared, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter, to apply certain
measures until the authority ofthe Council was upheld.

91. Ireland is fully aware that the situation in the
Middle East is complex. The roots of the Arab-Israeli
conflict lie deep in the past. Successive wars have not
made it easier to resolve. I have set out several times
in the Council the views of my Government as to the
basic principles
on which we believe any lasting
solution to the conflict must be based: I do not need
to repeat them here.
92. We want in all sincerity to see the rights of all
parties and all peoples in the region reconciled through
negotiation
and dialogue. We support the idea of a
comprehensive,
just and lasting peace settlement, and
we wish in every way possible to encourage the parties to work towards that.

98. That is the end of my statement as representative of Ireland.
I now resume my function as
PRESIDENT.

93. In regard to the particular situation, we are
aware that intensive negotiations have been undertaken for some time now to resolve the immediate
crisis. These have involved many parties, including
the ministers of Arab League States and the special
representative
of the President of the United States,
Mr. Philip Habib. We still hope that these efforts,
despite the many difficulties involved, will be successful.

99. Mr. LOUET
(France) (i/ztcJ~p~c~trrtion
jbn
Frcnc*h): I wish to speak in exercise of my right of
reply.

94. Aware, as we are, of the complexity of the underIying issues and of the diplomatic efforts relating to
the immediate
crisis, we believe that it is essential
that there be an end to present fighting, and we support
very strongly the idea of United Nations observers
to uphold and consolidate the cease-fire.

101. It is deplorable that lies, invective and intimidation have become common rhetorical devices in the
Counci I, thanks precisely to that representative.
Indeed, this brings back unhappy memories. When
I heard references to “shame”,
“infamy”
and “cynicism”, I said to myself: “But this is impossible! Let me
reread my statement.”

100. I am going to try to reply to the statement made
a moment ago by the representative of Israel, although
I fear that I may not be as qualified as he to engage
in invective.
Besides, my respect for the Council
prevents me from stooping to that level.

95.
Because of our view that a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute involving the reconciliation
of conflicting rights is a matter to be reached
by negotiation and dialogue, we have never taken the
view that a settlement could be imposed on any party.
It must begin with a dialogue, leading to a negotiation, and ending, we hope, in a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace settlement. For this reason, we have
always had doubts about the wisdom of the use by the
international
community
of the various enforcement
provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations in this
particular
dispute. We believe, however, that it is
essential
that the system established by the Charter
for the maintenance
of international peace and security and the authority of the Council, which is the
body, under the Charter, with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security,
be upheld.

102. I found that I said: “my delegation notes that
Israel lias thus far refused to comply with those resolutions” [pctrcr. 23 trho~c]. I think that is a moderate
statement. Everyone has noted that. Israel itself has
said that it is not implementing
the resolution. How
can the statement that Israel has thus far refused to
comply with these resolutionsjustify
such an outburst?
103. I said that the situation in Beirut was tragic.
Does that justify such an outburst from Mr. Blum?
104. Finally, I said, in a very brief statement, that
my delegation was convinced of the soundness of the
measures that were proposed, Does that justify his
response?
10.5. I am dumbfounded
at the level to which one
must stoop in trying to prove certain arguments,
I should like to strike a lower profile, if I may, in

96.
Under Articles 24 and 2.5 of; the Charter, all
Member
States recognize this primary responsibility
9

connection with the word “cynicism”.
1 had that word
in mind as I listened to Mr. Blum explain, a moment
ago, how sad he was over the situation in Lebanon and
how his country wished to help Lebanon. That reminded me of a fable of La Fontaine, “The Bear and
the Gardener”.
I think there is someone opposite
me who knows what I am getting at.
106. La Fontaine recounts the tale of a bear whose
gardener friend was in the habit of sleeping under a
tree and upon whose face flies would often alight. To
be friendly, the bear would shoo the flies away, but the
flies always came back. So the bear took a heroic
decision: he picked up an enormous stone and threw
it at the face of his friend, who obviously died. The
story does not say whether the fly disappeared or not.

the Nazis. Let me name some: the Soviet Union, the
United Kingdom, Poland, and today France. Eventually, the turn of the United States will come. I was
wondering why there was this outrage against those
Powers that defeated the Nazis, that defeated those
who started the holocaust. Why are the representatives of Tel Aviv maintaining the holocaust against
the Palestinians and against the Lebanese? And then
I came across something that might explain it. Power
in Tel Aviv is basically with the Herut Party, which
is the political creation of the Irgun Zeva’i Leumi,
known as the National Military Organization. That
organization had a proposal for what it called the sotution of the Jewish question in Europe. I shall quote
only parts of that solution:

107. Need I explain that our Israeli friends are the
“friendly” bear; the fly . . . as far as the poor gardener
is concerned, I pray that he is still alive.

“It is often stated in the speeches and utterances
of the leading statesman of National Socialist Germany”-that
is, the Nazis--‘&that
a new order in
Europe requires as a prerequisite the radical solution of the Jewish question through evacuation

108. The PRESIDENT:
the Palestine Liberation

(‘Judmreines

I call on the representative
Organization.

of

Ewopcr’).

“The evacuation of the Jewish masses from
Europe is a pre-condition for solving the Jewish
question; but this can only be made possible and
complete through the settlement of these masses in
the home of the Jewish people, Palestine, and
through the establishment of a Jewish state in its
historical boundaries,

109. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): It seems that the inaction-or
lack of action, or
the prevention of action-in
the Council encourages
Israel to execute its criminal aggressive designs against
the sovereignty of Lebanon and to continue with its
campaign of genocide against the Palestinian
and
Lebanese peoples.

“The solving in this manner of the Jewish problem and thus the bringing about with it of the liberation of the Jewish people once and for all is the
objective of the political activity and the yearslong struggle of the Jewish freedom movement:
the National Military Organization (NMO) (Irgun
Zeva’i Leumi) in Palestine.

110. We shall hold the Council-or,
to be more
precise, the permanent member that obstructed the
functions of the Council today-responsible
for any
military action by Israel, in particular in or around
Beirut, in pursuing its criminal acts of aggression and
in resuming its barbarous attacks against Beirut.

“The NMO, which is well acquainted with the
goodwill of the German Reich Government and its
authorities towards Zionist activity inside Germany
and towards Zionist emigration
plans, is of the
opinion that:

11 I. The PLO still believes that, eventually,
the
Council will unanimously
adopt concrete and effective means to sustain a cease-fire and to put into
effect the immediate
deployment
of United Nations
observers as a first step towards the unconditional
implementation
of resolutions
508 (1982) and 509
(1982). The Council must not lose sight of its responsibilities. Members of the Council with the power
to do so must refrain from obstructing the functions
of the Council. Hundreds of thousands of human
lives-Palestinian,
Lebanese and Israeli alike-must
be spared. The mad barbarians, the Judeo-Nazis, must
be placed in strait-jackets and not be seated in this
chamber.

“I.
Common interests could exist between the
establishment of a new order in Europe in conformity with the German concept and the true national
aspirations of the Jewish people as they are embodied by the NMO;
“2, Co-operation between the new Germany”
-that is, Nazi Germany-.‘and
a renewed folkishnational Hebraium would be possible; and

112. We have been sitting here for a few weeks,
and I have sometimes wondered why the representative of the Judeo-Nazis
has been constantly directing such a barrage against the Powers that brought
about the defeat of nazism, against those that brought
about the downfall, collapse and elimination
of Hitlerism and against those that gave up the lives of 40 million or more of their citizens in their fight to eliminate

“3. The establishment of the historical Jewish
state on a national and totalitarian basis and bound
by a treaty with the German Reich would be in the
interest of a maintained and strengthened future
German position of power in the Near East.
“Proceeding
from these considerations,
the
[It-gun Zeva’i Leumi] in Palestine, under the condi10

tion that the above-mentioned

national aspirations
of the Israeli freedom movement are recognized on
the side of the German Reich, offers to actively take
part in the war on Germany’s side.

onslaught. Only one and a half hours ago, a whole
building of eight floors-and
this was reported to me
by the father-in-law of the representative of Lebanoncollapsed and more than 250 persons, mostly women
and children evacuees from the south of Lebanon,
lost their lives.

“This offer by the [Irgun Zeva’i Leumi], covering
activity in the military, political and information
fields, in Palestine and, according to our determined
preparations,
outside Palestine,
would be connected to the military training and organizing of
Jewish manpower in Europe, under the leadership
and command of the [Irgun Zeva’i Leumi]. These
military units would take part in the fight to conquer
Palestine, should such a front be decided upon.

I 17. ,Yesterday a reference was made to Deir Yassin.
It is incredible to have to say that the Deir Yassin
carnage has shrunk in historical perspective, given
the dimensions of the holocaust being inflicted on
the people of Beirut. Yet there is built-in indifference
to the human tragedy as a logical sequence of Israel’s
built-in contempt for the international
community.
Because of its behaviour pattern, Israel considers that
the whole world is answerable to it while Israel is
accountable to nobody. It is this premise which has
introduced
the polarization
between Israel and its
addiction to aggression, expansion and violations of
human, national and territorial rights, on the one hand,
and the world consensus as a whole, on the other.
This is where the polarization
lies, and not in the
introduction
of a draft resolution,
whether by the
United States or by the Soviet Union. It is the substance of a draft resolution, not its source, that is
important.
And although there might have been a
preference for having an institutional
resolution from
the Council as a body, the source of a resolution or
amendments to it should not constitute a bar to examining it on its merits.

“The indirect participation of the Israeli freedom
movement in the new order in Europe, already in
the preparatory stage, would be linked with a positive-radical solution of the European Jewish problem in conformity
with the above-mentioned
national aspirations of the Jewish people. This would
extraordinarily
strengthen the moral basis of the
new order in the eyes of all humanity.
“The co-operation of the Israeli freedom movement would also be along the lines of one of the
last speeches of the German Reich Chancellor, in
which Hitler emphasized that he would utilize every
combination
and coalition in order to isolate and
defeat England.”
The source of that quotation is a book entitled The
Pde.stim
Problem in Gertncrn Politics, 1899-t 945, by
David Yisraeli.

118. However, remarks have been made today concerning which I should like to provide an input of our
Arab collective thinking
represented by the Arab
League. It is interesting that when France submitted its
amendment to accommodate any growing consensus,
there followed an exercise in semantic acrobatics in
which Israel brought back the memory of a colonial
period, not realizing that many changes have taken
place in the world, and within France itself, and that
since that period Algeria has become independent
and France has developed the closest of relations
with it.

113. Perhaps the members of the Council can find an
explanation
in that for this intrinsic hatred of the members of the Irgun Zeva’i Leumi for those Powers that
gave up millions of lives in their struggle against the
Nazis.
1 14. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis Maksoud, the Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States, to whom the Council extended an
invitation,
at the 2374th meeting, under rule 39 of its
provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

119. We are in a period in which colonialism has lost
its legitimacy, not only among the peoples that were
colonized but among the peoples that were colonizers.
It is this historical evolution
which Israel and its
Zionist philosophy seems to be missing. Israel seeks
to reintroduce colonialism. Therefore, the world community must realize the nature of this onslaught on
Lebanon and the Palestinians and see in it further evidence of the pursuit of what the distinguished National
Broadcasting Company (NBC) commentator
Mr. John
Chancellor has described as imperialism.

115. Mr. MAKSOUD:
I should like again to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
for this very crucial month, when the tragedy in Lebanon is unfolding in an unprecedented manner. Your
grace and diplomatic
skills, and your tremendous
objectivity
when today you refocused the debate on
this question in its proper framework, are deeply
appreciated.

120. It is also revealing that whenever anybody
questions
Israel’s
behaviour,
that questioning
is
treated as residual and lingering anti-Semitism,
Thus,
Israel seeks not only to silence its critics but to paralyse the international
community,
as it has been doing
since the beginning of the invasion of Lebanon, by

116.
I havejust been in touch with Beirut and I should
like to preface my remarks this afternoon by informing
the Council that, while it has been debating a ceasefire and Israel’s contempt for various Council resolutions,
Israel has been continuing its carnage and
II

paralysing the various draft resolutions,
as if the
meetings of the Council must be considered exercises
in futility.

S//532Y, trnne.r] have been factored into the Council’s
consideration and deliberations.
As for Mr. Habib’s
mission, to which the representative of the United
States has referred and which we have welcomed and
encouraged, every time he comes close to the brink
of achieving a breakthrough,
Israel torpedoes it. It
wants to pre-empt the Habib mission and every other
attempt from any quarter to defuse the crisis and the
tension. Therefore, we are eager for something to be
done as soon as possible, because we can no longer
afford the haemorrhaging of our people in Lebanon
or the disasters that are continually
being inflicted
upon us.

121, When it addresses itself to this august body,
the whole Arab world takes the Charter of the United
Nations seriously, takes the resolutions of this body
seriously, takes the requests of this body seriously.
And it is dumbfounded when it finds that resolutions
are becoming documents in Secretariat drawers and
no means and vehicles of implementation
are being
found, The world community
wants to know: is the
whole world, gathered in one arena, and the judgement of the world community,
irrelevant and incapable of deterring Israel from continuing
obvious
carnage?

125. In spite of the veto that has been cast, we are
eager to have the Council remain seized of the necessary priorities,
namely, a credible, sustained ‘and
effective cease-fire: the lifting of the blockade that is
being undertaken by a brutalized army in order to
dehumanize the population
of Beirut; and the beginning of the emergence of a solution that is dignified
and honourable, dot only for the people and country
of Lebanon, not only for the Palestinians and the
various Arab countries, but for this body and the
international community.

122. For the last few days, the whole thrust of the
debate has again been focused on basically marginal
issues-a cease-fire, the lifting of the blockade so that
the people of Beirut can have water-while
so-called
PLO strongholds such as the American University
of Beirut Hospital have been attacked. It was hit nine
times yesterday. Is the American University
Hospital, hit nine times by Israel, a PLO stronghold? Is
the French Embassy, on Clemenceau Street, a PLO
stronghold? Assuming that there are 5,000 Palestinian
guerrillas, assuming that Israel is intent on a so-called
final solution similar to the Hitlerite
final solution,
is the whole thing worth while? Is it worth while to
destroy buildings, to obliterate an orphanage? Is it
worth while turning a whole city that has been the
centre of the cultural and intellectual renaissance of.
the whole Middle East into the rubble that it is today?
Is it worth while seeing children stunned, maimed?
What kind of peace is going to emerge-and
the whole
world community wants us to have a comprehensive,
just and durable peace-when
mothers and fathers
are going to see their children maimed for life to accommodate the self-aggrandizing
objectives of Israel?
One cannot silently witness this unfolding of the most
catastrophic events since the Second World War, this
deliberate plan of carnage. And yet Israel wants us to
be hopeless and wants the members of the Council to
be helpless.

126. I plead with you, Mr. President, and, through
you, with the members of the Council to lose no time
in your efforts to bring about a resolution, whatever
it might be, that carries within it a credible chance of
inhibiting and deterring Israel; otherwise, Israel will
have achieved much more than its holocaust of Beirut
and the people of Lebanon: it will have achieved its
goal of rendering us hopeless and the Council helpless.
127. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
128. Mr. MOUSSA (Egypt): I submit that this is
not the finest hour for anybody, least of all for the
Council. In our opinion, the situation in Lebanon will
not benefit from the exercise through which we have
gone today.
129. True, operative paragraph 3 of the Soviet draft
resolution
[S/15347/R~v.I],
had it been adopted,
would have constituted one of the steps and measures
needed to check, even to a limited extent, Israeli
policies and measures within the framework of its
invasion of Lebanon, But the exercise itself was
uncalled for at this precise moment, especiahy in light
of the expected United States position. In this respect,
I wish to pay a tribute to the President’s untiring
efforts to contain the situation and put us back on the
right track.

123. If Israel can achieve that objective and render
us hopeless-because
we are targeted by Israel to be
a doomed society in Lebanon, and Beirut is targeted
to be a doomed city-in
order to accommodate
its
vengeance against Palestinians who have been denied
their right to self-determination
and against the population of Lebanon which has suffered unprecedented
tragedies, then the answer must be clear and unequivocal. We do not want to resign ourselves to hopelessness, and we do not want you, Mr. President, and the
other members of the Council to resign yourselves to
helplessness.

130. The question now is: what next? We have at
hand a serious situation. We heard only moments
ago reports of violations of the cease-fire in Beirut.
Other reports indicate that a massive assault against
west Beirut is now in progress. I wish to address t*

124. Of course, the League of Arab States has undertaken all efforts to accommodate and complement
the Council’s efforts, and the Jeddah resolutions [SPP
12

you, Mr. President, and to the Secretary-General
a
question about the nature of those reports and whether
a massive attack has indeed taken or is now taking
place, because in that case the Council must act accordingly, and swiftly.
13 1. The developments in the area and the exercise that we have been witnessing since the early
hours of today and are still witnessing behove us to
conclude that only a comprehensive
settlement will
deal responsibly with this situation. We find no other
path but to reaffirm the right of all States in the region
to existence and security, in accordance with Council
resolution 242 (1967); to affirm the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people, including its right to
self-determination
with all its implications,
and the
right of the PLO to participate in such contacts and
negotiations;
and to call for mutual and simultaneous
recognition
between the parties concerned. I have
repeated, almost verbatim, words from the draft resolution submitted by Egypt and France [S/15317] at an
earlier stage,
132. At this stage of our deliberations,
I wish to
underline the importance of resorting to the comprehensive approach and, to that end, of taking up the
draft resolution submitted by my country and the
French Government.
133, The PRESIDENT:
I note that the representative of Egypt addressed a question, through me, to
the Secretary-General,
and I am sure that the representatives
of the Secretary-General
here have also
taken due not of it.
134. There are three further names on the list of
speakers, and while I appreciate that the hour is late,
I feel it would probably be the wish of members of
the Council that we continue to work through the list
and finish our proceedings, at least for the moment,
by continuing with the present meeting.
135.

I therefore call on the representative

138. I wish to thank the representative
of France
for having acquainted us with La Fontaine’s fable,
I enjoyed it: I would like to carry it one step further.
I think it is essential, first of all, that we identify the
bear in the fable and that we give it its proper name.
I would propose the name Mishka, which I think is
very appropriate. It reminds all of us of the Olympic
Games in Moscow in 1980, the symbol of which’was
that very pleasant little bear, Mishka.
139. Now, another Mishka-not
so small and not so
pleasant-has
been roaming the gardens of the Middle
East for some time. And not just one garden, but quite
a number of gardens. Indeed, he has hit the gardenet
in one of those countries, directly and indirectly. I am,
of course, referring to Lebanon.
Here, however,
I would like to ask the representative of France-and
I regret that he is not here, although I do hope that
my question will be relayed to him-what
the duty
of the gardener’s friends are under such circumstances. You see a bear in the garden of your friend,
and he is there for a number of years, and he destroys
your friend’s garden, and you stand by and watch idly,
with the utmost indifference,
for seven years and
more. Is that true friendship, especially when it comes
from a traditional friend, of decades and centuries?
140. There is another question with regard to that
bear and that gardener of La Fontaine, for that bear
also roams the adjacent gardens. What are the gardeners in the other gardens supposed to do? Do they
also have to wait until the bear hits them with the
rock? And I think I would identify the rock as well:
the Syrians and the terrorists. Do other gardeners
also have to wait for that? La Fontaine would, no
doubt, have had his answers to all these ,questions.
141. I spoke of a day of shame. Indeed it is, because
of the vote that was cast here by the representative
of France. He spoke of his statement; he never mentioned his vote. I would like to remind him that when
I spoke of a day of infamy, I had his vote in mind.

of Israel.

136.
Mr. BLUM (Israel): I intend to be very brief
indeed. It is not my intention to address myself to the
collective
thinking of Mr. Maksoud. There was,
however, one remark to which I would like to address
myself.
137.
Mr. Maksoud, speaking of my country, accused
Tsrael of “imperialism”.
Members of the Council
should
know that the imperial Israel to which he
referred has a territory smaller than that of such major
countries
as Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium and
Switzerland
and roughly approximates the size of the
State of New Jersey. The non-imperial Arab States
for which he spoke, and on behalf of whose collective
thinking
he spoke, have a combined territory larger
than that of the United States or China, not to speak
of their economic resources. So much for Mr. Maksoud’s statement.

142. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I now call.
143. Mr. TUENI
(Lebanon): The gardener of La
Fontaine was not as lucky as we are, for we now
appear to have too many friends and, indeed, too
many bears, for all of them are bears.
144, As the representative
of the invaded country
-although
it is not a member of the Council-I
cannot
but welcome the proposal to have a cease-fire within
the Council, not only between the super-Powers, but
seriously and among everybody.
We support this
because-and
let me say this very candidly-we
fear
that a non-cease-fire in the Council might produce, as
it appears already to be producing, further repercussions inside the so-called Lebanese arena or theatre
of operations.
While thanking those members who
expressed their support, and while thanking you,

Mr. President,
in particular
for your tremendous
patience and courage, in whatever form or manner
that support is presented, I would address the representative of the United Kingdom in particular and
make a concrete proposal. That may not be wholly in
order, since I am not a member of the Council, but
1 make the proposal all the same.
145. I would propose that he consider using his skill
and the credit of his country, if encouraged by the
President, to initiate another draft resolution that
may restore unity-and,
1 dare say, sanity-in
the
Council and enable it again to act significantly and to
have a forceful and credible impact on the search for
a practical peace in Lebanon.
146. Speaking of resolutions in support of Lebanon
and of the Council’s attitude his-ir-rpis my country’s
policy, I would ask the Council’s indulgence at this
late hour in order that I might specify once more that
we do not share the concern of some that the Council
has not expressed its support for the policy of Lebanon vis-ir-vis the non-Lebanese forces. The ‘Council
has supported that attitude ever since it adopted resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982). Indeed;as I stated
earlier today and at previous meetings of the Council,
the Council’s constant call for the cessation of all
military activities in Lebanon and across the LebanonIsraeli border must be understood in this manner, as
a clear invitation by the Council for all non-Lebanese
forces to withdraw from Lebanon and as a clear support for Lebanon’s policy in this respect.
147. Furthermore,
the Council has twice before
examined two draft resolutions embodying Lebanon’s
policy with regard to this issue in particular. I am
thinking of the draft resolution submitted by France
[S/1525.5 trnd Rev. I trnd 21, one which, despite the
tremendous patience of the French Ambassador, who
was then in the Chair, was not adopted. A second
draft resolution that embodies those same principles
was recently submitted by Egypt and France [S/153 171,
and there has been reference here earlier to that initiative.
148. The time may have come-1 do not know-for
the Council to cast its support for my Government’s

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

policy in a clear and definitive form. As I hinted here
before the Council on Wednesday, my delegation is
contemplating initiating such a draft resolution, even
though it is not a member of the Council. Perhaps
other members would like to consider setting forth
in full clarity the broad and definitive framework for
a solution to this problem, to the problem of Lebanon,
to the problem of saving Beirut from a war that seems
to be knocking again, not at our door, but in every
heart in Lebanon and among Lebanon’s friends.
149. Such a draft resolution, embodying in definitive
and clear form a proposed solution to the problem,
may be a practical way of approaching this situation.
Lebanon must have its freedom and strength restored
to it. Lebanon proposes this not to challenge the friendship of its friends or to embarrass them or to test their
friendship, but merely to indicate that we and all our
friends in the world are determined to rebuild a Lebanon for the Lebanese, but not in the shadow of any
guns. Unlike La Fontaine’s gardener, we have not
yet been killed. A Lebanon restored to health and
strength is still possible, and it will bear, as always,
its Arab responsibilities
and will assume fully and
freely its mission in regional and international affairs.
150. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to speak
and I call on him.
IS I. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organizationl:
At the commencement
of this meeting, we brought
some bad tidings. I am afraid that I have some more
bad tidings for this meeting.
152. I have just received news that as of I830 hours,
Beirut time-that
is, 1230 hours local time-Israeli
tanks opened fire on the areas of Lailaki and Burj
AI-Barajneh,
and on Fakhani and Hamad streets;
Israeli warships simultaneously
opened fire with
long-range artillery on Mazraa, Burj Abu Haidar,
Sanayeh and Hamra. There was an attempt by Israeli
tanks to advance on the axis of Museum and Al-Holit
streets. I wonder whether that was in the expectation
of preventing the Council from taking action.

88.60989-June

l(lX9--?.~50
