S/2011/124

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 March 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 10 March 2011 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 3 March 2011,
which I have received from the Deputy Secretary-General of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, Claudio Bisogniero, transmitting the quarterly report on the
operations of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, covering
the period from 1 November 2010 to 31 January 2011 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-26088 (E) 180311

*1126088*

S/2011/124

Annex
Letter dated 3 March 2011 from the Deputy Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1943 (2010),
I attach a report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) in Afghanistan covering the period from November 2010 to January 2011
(see enclosure). I would appreciate your making the report available to the Security
Council.
(Signed) Claudio Bisogniero

2

11-26088

S/2011/124

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, pursuant to the request under Security Council resolutions
1386 (2001) and 1943 (2010), informs the United Nations on the progress of the
mission of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) covers the period
from 1 November 2010 to 31 January 2011. As at 3 February 2011, total ISAF
strength stood at 131,983 personnel provided by 28 North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) nations and 20 non-NATO nations. No additional nation has
been added since the last report.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF continued to assist the Government of
Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. From
1 November 2010 to 31 January 2011, ISAF suffered 1,347 casualties, including 114
killed in action, 1,222 wounded in action and 11 non-battle-related deaths.
3.
Over the last reporting period, ISAF and the Afghan National Security Forces
continued the high operational tempo and made promising security gains across
Afghanistan. ISAF assessment recognizes the insurgent momentum to be broadly
arrested, even reversed in some key areas. Recent nationwide survey results suggest
that Afghans are more comfortable moving outside their villages and
neighbourhoods during the day. However, corruption in Afghanistan 1 poses a
serious risk to mission success and progress across all sectors. Although still
addressing the challenge of attrition and leadership deficits, Afghan National
Security Forces growth remains ahead of schedule with continued positive
recruiting trends. Focusing on the ultimate objective of enabling Afghanistan to
become self-reliant and sustainable in the very near term, NATO and ISAF invite
additional States Members of the United Nations to support this United Nationsmandated mission by providing trainers and mentors for the Afghan National
Security Forces as well as the civilian sectors of governance and development.
Noteworthy points for this reporting period include the following:
(a) On 13 November 2010 the first meeting of the Joint Afghan NATO
Inteqal Board was held to review progress made thus far in the Inteqal (transition)
process and to finalize the way forward. The Board, chaired by Ashraf Ghani,
agreed to a joint assessment; to set guidelines for the evolution of the Provincial
Reconstruction Teams; to complete the first joint assessment of provincial transition
readiness by the end of February 2011 and to make recommendations for those areas
which might be ready to begin the transition in 2011;
(b) At the Lisbon Summit meeting of 19-20 November 2010, Heads of State
and Government of NATO/ISAF nations agreed that together with the Government
of Afghanistan they are entering a new phase of the joint effort, which allows helping
to set the conditions for irreversible transition to full Afghan security responsibility
and leadership. They reaffirmed their support for President Karzai’s objective for
__________________
1 Transparency International, Corruption Perception Index 2010, Afghanistan was placed 176 of

178 countries worldwide.

11-26088

3

S/2011/124

the Afghan National Security Forces to lead and conduct security operations in all
provinces by the end of 2014. They also announced a long-term partnership between
Afghanistan and NATO, demonstrating that the alliance’s commitment to
Afghanistan will endure beyond the current mission of ISAF and is intended to be
consistent with broader international efforts under United Nations leadership;
(c) On 6-7 December 2010, former President Rabbani (Chairman of the High
Peace Council) and Minister Stanekzai (Director of the High Peace Council) led the
first Regional Reintegration Conference in Kandahar, in order to encourage governors
and generate more momentum for reintegration efforts. This event was followed by
additional conferences in other regions that endorsed reintegration councils in an
effort to support their emergence across the country. ISAF will continue to support
further development and implementation of the reintegration programme;
(d) President Karzai inaugurated the Afghan National Assembly on 26 January
2011, after having resolved key differences in the days leading up to the event. The
inauguration took place with wide participation from the international community
and Afghan-led security operations prevented any major security incidents.
Security situation
4.
During this reporting period, significant security gains were made, especially
in the south of Afghanistan, the traditional heartland of the insurgency. Earlier gains,
such as those in the Afghan capital, were successfully consolidated. The Afghan
National Security Forces and ISAF operations have continued to increase pressure
on insurgent networks over the past several months, with larger and more focused
security operations. Reducing civilian casualties remains a fundamental mission
priority and continues to pay dividends, as the number of those caused by ISAF
continues to drop year by year. The insurgents’ freedom of movement, logistical
capacity and command and control has been degraded. However, the Afghan
security environment remains complex, with a resilient and adaptive insurgency that
still retains the ability to attack the Government of Afghanistan, Afghan National
Security Forces and ISAF. Many of the regional and domestic factors that sustain
the insurgency and impede effective counter-insurgency operations remain in place.
The insurgents are likely to retain some freedom of movement, mainly in rural areas
with less Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF presence, as long as they have
access to external safe havens and support networks. The strategic goal of the
insurgency remains unchanged: surviving in order to remain an alternative to the
Kabul Government and causing significant losses to ISAF in order to undermine
international support for the mission and prompt a withdrawal of foreign forces
from Afghanistan before the mission is complete.
5.

Regionally, the security situation can be described as follows:

(a) Regional Command Capital. The security situation in Kabul can best be
described as calm, with Afghan National Security Forces firmly in control of the
capital. However, even the most stringent security measures cannot prevent
occasional insurgent attacks such as the 28 January 2011 suicide attack, which,
among others, killed the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commissioner, Hamida
Barkai, and her family;
(b) Regional Command North. The Afghan National Security Forces and
ISAF clearing operations have successfully displaced insurgents from key areas for

4

11-26088

S/2011/124

security in the region and are currently denying the insurgency their freedom of
movement and hampering their intent to distract ISAF and the Afghan National
Security Forces with increased presence in the north;
(c) Regional Command West. Continuing ISAF and Afghan National
Security Forces operations conducted during this reporting period have had a
significant impact on the insurgency. Numerous reintegration opportunities have
emerged, particularly in Badghis and Farah provinces, which could indicate that
insurgent losses are having an impact on their morale and willingness to continue
fighting against the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF;
(d) Regional Command South. The large security operations in and around
Kandahar city have resulted in a significantly improved security situation.
Responsibility for the security of Kandahar city is now largely in the hands of the
Afghan National Security Forces, assisted by ISAF;
(e) Regional Command Southwest. The Afghan National Security Forces
partnered with ISAF have been conducting major operations in the region in order to
assert government control. A number of traditional insurgent sanctuaries in Helmand
Province have been cleared, and the last remaining insurgent sanctuaries are
gradually being reduced. Operations to connect the security bubble in Helmand east
towards Kandahar city have commenced, and the key districts in this area are no
longer considered among the most violent districts in the south;
(f) Regional Command East. The eastern part of Afghanistan, bordering the
Pakistan Federally Administered Tribal Areas, remains an important area for the
insurgency, providing access to external sanctuaries and resupply areas. The Afghan
National Security Forces and ISAF have started operations to deny the insurgents
freedom of movement in this area of Afghanistan, seeking to cut insurgent supply
routes.
6.
The improvised explosive device still remains the most significant threat to the
International Security Assistance Force, the Afghan National Security Forces, the
Government of Afghanistan and Afghan civilians. To address these challenges, ISAF
has invested considerably into defeating the threat by detecting and clearing the
devices, disrupting insurgent networks and training the Afghan National Security
Forces in counter-improvised explosive device techniques, all of which lead to an
increase in clearance operations and improvised explosive device finds
(representing 60 per cent of all improvised explosive device events). Additionally, at
the end of the reporting period, the weapons cache finds have risen significantly.
This may indicate the increasing cooperation of the Afghan population.
Afghan National Security Forces
7.
The Afghan National Security Forces has made significant progress during the
period and the capability and capacities of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of
Interior to man, train, equip and support their police and soldiers have increased.
The Afghan National Security Forces training capacity has continued to grow with
roughly 30,000 soldiers and policemen now participating in various training
programmes. All members of the Afghan National Security Forces are now
attending basic training, which includes survivability, professionalism and literacy
training (approximately 47,000 enrolled as of 18 January 2011) before being
assigned. A dedicated focus on developing Afghan leaders has led to increased

11-26088

5

S/2011/124

leadership capability and accountability at all levels. Approximately 1,000 Afghan
National Security Forces personnel are involved in training in 21 countries outside
Afghanistan and 11 out of 12 planned Afghan National Army branch schools are
now operational in Afghanistan. Finally, salaries have been increased to provide a
living wage and improved distribution methods have reduced the potential for
predatory corruption.
8.
The second group of Afghan women officers started on 26 December 2010.
These women were the second group to enter the rigorous Officer Candidate School.
However, women are still drastically underrepresented and make up only 0.5 per
cent of the Afghan National Security Forces.
9.
The progress in these areas has enabled the Afghan National Army and the
Afghan National Police to attain their 2010 strength goals and begin to
professionalize and increase the Afghan National Security Forces to 171,600 Afghan
National Army and 134,000 Afghan National Police personnel by October 2011. For
2011, the Afghan National Security Forces and ISAF will maintain the momentum
established during 2010 and reinforce efforts dealing with attrition, leader shortfalls,
and corruption within the Afghan National Army and Afghan National Police, all
challenges that could severely undermine professionalization, delay growth and
degrade quality. However, the single greatest driver of successful Afghan National
Security Forces growth and improved quality is the national contributions of highly
qualified trainers that in sufficient numbers ultimately will enable the Afghan
National Security Forces to develop self-sustaining security systems and enduring
institutions. The future growth of the Afghan National Security Forces is under
review and is expected to be decided by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board on 8 March 2011.
Afghan National Army
10. During the reporting period, the Afghan National Army strength expanded to
approximately 152,000 with about 23,000 soldiers and officers assigned to various
training programmes as of 26 January 2011. Overall, the Afghan National Army
continued to make progress towards its October 2011 target of 171,600.
11. In general terms, the Afghan National Army enjoyed success during the period,
most notably operating more independently or in the lead of operations, thwarting
planned attacks, responding to complex attacks and handling of improvised
explosive devices/countering improvised explosive devices, thereby increasing the
Afghan population’s confidence in the Afghan National Army. These successes are
tempered by sporadic negative incidents where ISAF soldiers are attacked by rogue
Afghan National Security Forces personnel.
12. The effectiveness of Afghan National Army forces is constantly improving.
More than 65 per cent of all Kandaks are now rated as either “effective with
advisers” or “effective with assistance”, compared to 51 per cent during the last
reporting period. It is likely that this development can be linked to a similar
improvement in the overall partnering ratio, where 67 per cent of all Kandaks are
now either “embedded” or “partnered” compared to 55 per cent during the last
reporting period. Challenges to operational capabilities of the fielded Afghan
National Army are still in the areas of staff planning, Tactical Operations Centre
management, logistics, and leadership.

6

11-26088

S/2011/124

Afghan Air Force
13. The Afghan Air Force continues to make steady progress in increasing its
capabilities. The NATO Air Training Command Afghanistan has received valuable
training support from several nations. These national teams will add vital expertise
and capabilities for the growth and professionalization of the Afghan Air Force. The
Afghan Air Force also recently received 8 new Mi-17 helicopters, bringing the total
number to 35. In addition, they have nine Mi-35 helicopters, three An-32 aircraft
and eight C-27 aircraft as of 12 January 2011.
14. The Afghan Air Force increased its operational capability by establishing
routine medical evacuation flight sorties between Kandahar and Kabul. In December
2010, the Afghan Air Force air operations took a noteworthy step forward with the
successful support provided to the President of Afghanistan during his visits to
various parts of the country.
Afghan National Police
15. During 2010, the Afghan National Police strength grew by close to 21,000,
expanding the force to approximately 116,856 as of 12 January 2011. Overall, the
Afghan National Police continued to make progress towards its future October 2011
target of 134,000 with about 8,800 policemen currently assigned to various training
programmes.
16. The effectiveness of Afghan National Police forces is continuously increasing
and more than 69 per cent of all Afghan Uniformed Police elements rated are now
rated as either “effective with advisers” or “effective with assistance” compared to
40 per cent during last reporting period.
17. The Afghan National Police training capacity is increasing as existing training
sites are being expanded, with an estimated increase from 11,252 to 15,272 training
seats next quarter. New training sites are being brought on line and opportunities for
training outside the country are developed.
18. Attrition still remains the largest challenge for the Afghan National Police,
frequently higher than the monthly goal of 1.4 per cent, particularly for Afghan
National Civil Order Police and Afghan Border Police. To address the ongoing
challenges the Ministry of Interior has implemented policies to address attrition,
corruption and low literacy rates. The personnel policies have been modified to
ensure that all newly recruited personnel receive formal training prior to
assignment. The sequence is now “Recruit — Train — Assign”. The NATO Training
Mission-Afghanistan, in cooperation with the Ministry of Interior, has initiated a
four-week intensive literacy course for Afghan National Civil Order Police recruits
prior to the beginning of the normal programme of instruction. This initiative has
facilitated the dramatic increase in recruiting by opening a much larger recruiting
pool previously unavailable to the Afghan National Civil Order Police.
Institutional capacity
19. Development of the institutional capabilities of the Ministry of Defence and
the Ministry of Interior has continued to make progress this quarter. The Ministry of
Defence has made substantial changes to increase accountability, improve
efficiency, and build security. Change is supported by new laws to improve
personnel policies such as the Inherent Law on Officers and Non-Commissioned

11-26088

7

S/2011/124

Officers and new regulations to improve retention, information sharing, and
cooperation. Several of the high-level leaders within the Ministry of Interior have
been replaced, resulting in increased coordination between the Ministry of Interior
and Ministry of Defence. Additional positive changes are that Ministry of Interior
logistics continues to progress towards a national-level system.
20. The newly revised and released Afghan National Police National Police
Strategy will be an imperative and adaptive framework for building the future
Afghan police system. The strategy specifies the objectives for continued
development of the police, law enforcement activities and associated system,
including the Ministry of Interior six priorities for the next five years:
(a)

Training and education;

(b)

Police leadership development;

(c)

Anti-corruption (including code of conduct and ethics for the police);

(d)

Improve the living standards and working environment of the police;

(e)

Review and modify the Tashkil;

(f) Develop a system of rewards and punishment to ensure greater
accountability.
Private security companies
21. On 6 December 2010, the Ministry of Interior announced that the remaining 52
legal private security companies would be able to continue to operate in
Afghanistan, although with some regulations and uncertainties regarding their
future. Crucially, it seems that those private security companies providing static
guarding for Embassies and key international community sites remain exempt from
the ban. The dissolution of private security companies, for many groups,
organizations and foreign governments, has the potential to limit development
projects and restrict aid organizations in the conduct of their work. ISAF is working
with the Government of Afghanistan to develop an acceptable bridging solution that
encourages a decreasing reliance on private security companies and an increasing
use of the nascent Afghan Public Protection Force of the Ministry of Interior.
Afghan Local Police
22. The growing Afghan Local Police initiative, under the supervision of the
Ministry of Interior, is gaining traction with increasing numbers of sites and greater
Afghan responsibility. The current status of the Afghan Local Police is 16 operational
sites, with a total number of approximately 3,150 Afghan Local Police recruits.
ISAF and coalition forces are working together with the Ministry of Interior to
determine the correct resources required to effectively partner the Afghan
Presidential authorization of 10,000 personnel Afghan Local Police members.
Civilian casualties
23. The overall number of civilian casualty incidents is continuing to decrease,
following the seasonal trend, and the number of ISAF-caused civilian casualties is
also down slightly as compared to 2009. However, the number of civilian casualties
caused by ISAF this quarter slightly increased in comparison with the same period

8

11-26088

S/2011/124

last year. ISAF maintains its commitment to minimize civilian casualty incidents.
Insurgents caused more than 84 per cent of casualties among the Afghan civilians.
Counter-narcotics
24. There has been progress in reducing narcotic production in Afghanistan during
the last reporting period. However, increased prices for opium will result in strong
economic pressure to increase poppy cultivation for 2011. Last year, significant
local seizures of narcotics occurred but it was the poppy blight that was most
significant in reducing opium production. While estimates vary, the profits from
narcotics remain a significant source of local funding for the insurgency. Counternarcotic activities require constant pressure by the Government of Afghanistan with
international and ISAF support to maintain and augment counter-narcotic gains.
25. The provision and promotion of alternative livelihoods to opium cultivation
has largely been limited to programmes that incentivize the planting of alternative
licit crops. Wheat and saffron are only two of the more prominent among a wide
variety of licit crops. Furthermore, a regional approach involving the Russian
Federation, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan and the Central Asian Republics
supported a holistic strategy on counter-narcotics, with a focus on justice initiatives,
demand-reduction, law enforcement operations and medical care.
Governance
26. The improving security environment that ISAF and the Afghan National
Security Forces are creating in and around the major population centres have
produced additional opportunities for development of local governance. Noteworthy
for the reporting period are the following:
(a) ISAF and the Government of Afghanistan outreach in the south have
shown some signs of improvement to existing low levels of district governance. The
increasing numbers of newly assigned governors, police chiefs, mediators and
prosecutors, noted by local shuras, can improve the preconditions to provide the
population with governmental options to resolve disputes;
(b) ISAF is coordinating closely with the various ministries in Kabul to help
provide the subnational levels with the additional tools and authorities to expand the
civil service sector. On 27 January, the Afghan Civil Service Institute graduated its
inaugural class of over 3,200 students from across Afghanistan;
(c) More Afghans believe that the Government of Afghanistan is heading in
the right direction than it was six months ago. Also, 74 per cent of the Afghans say
that the Government of Afghanistan has more influence in their village compared
with 68 per cent in mid-2010. Although less than 50 per cent believe the
Government of Afghanistan is currently able to do its job, more people seem to have
increased confidence (46 per cent) in its capacity to ensure the security;
(d) In areas where security is good or improving, people tend to be more
satisfied with their overall quality of life and more confident in the overall capacity
of the Government of Afghanistan to do its job. The performance of the local,
district and provincial governmental institutions is reflected in the way people
perceive the central Government.

11-26088

9

S/2011/124

27. The reporting period witnessed an increase in reintegration opportunities for
insurgents that are attributable to the effects of the counter-insurgency campaign,
the increased operational tempo of ISAF and the Afghan National Security Forces
and increased visibility of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme. The
increased awareness of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme is a
result of the High Peace Council working with Provincial Governors and improved
Government of Afghanistan support. In recent polling, 70 per cent of the Afghan
people reported that they would welcome back these insurgents into the community
if they would stop fighting.
28. The Provincial Reconstruction Teams have been seeking to engage with
Afghan authorities at all levels of governance to gradually create the preconditions
for transition to Afghan authorities. In addition, the Joint Afghan NATO Inteqal
Board agreed to set guidelines for the Provincial Reconstruction Teams in order to
progressively achieve civilian leadership.
Development
29. Facilitated by ISAF and Afghan National Security Forces operational progress,
this reporting period continued to witness improved coordination of security and
development efforts. Although there is great potential in Afghanistan, there was only
slight real economic improvement during this reporting period. Noteworthy for this
reporting period are the following:
(a) With ISAF support, the Afghan Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and
Livestock initiated a Wheat Seed Distribution Programme in December 2010 to give
360,000 Afghan farmers 50 kilograms of seed and 150 kilograms of fertilizers each;
(b) On 11 December, leaders of Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and
India signed an inter-governmental agreement for the trans-Afghan gas pipeline
project. This project will ultimately provide thousands of new jobs for Afghans and
solve energy needs of the nation and in the end offer strong support for
improvements made in the security sector;
(c) In Kandahar city, the Afghan national power utility turned on the first of
two 10MW diesel power-generation plants in December 2010. This important ISAFsupported project will supply 8MW of continuous power for at least 16 hours a day
throughout the city. Improved electrical infrastructure, with the attendant increase in
jobs and economic opportunities, will reinforce security gains by demonstrating to
the people that the Government of Afghanistan has more to offer than the insurgents;
(d) The mining industry has shown great promise to sustain economic
development with an estimate of up to $3 trillion of untapped mineral resources.
The generated increase in the revenues of the Government of Afghanistan is a first
sign of fiscal sustainability in the medium term. However, this positive economic
context generated by a favourable security climate in several regions remains
fragile.
30. The explicit link between security, governance and development has once
again been highlighted during the reporting period. Simultaneous steps forward in
all three areas are required in order to support transition to Afghan authorities and
enable them to effectively take over the security leadership in 2014.

10

11-26088
