S/PV.8620

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8620th meeting

Tuesday, 17 September 2019, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alfassam
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2019/703)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-28174 (E)
*1928174*

S/PV.8620

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.

revision. Of course, we have discussed this with our
co-penholder and with the Chinese delegation, with
which we were discussing and negotiating until late last
night. Finally, I note that the proposed change is agreed
language from previous resolutions.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2019/703)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Afghanistan to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/749, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Germany and Indonesia.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/703, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
The representative of Germany has asked for
the floor.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): We appreciate the fact
that the Council is ready to vote on draft resolution
S/2019/749. We have been discussing the text with
delegations. A revision has been proposed at the last
minute by Afghanistan and is extremely important to
Afghanistan. I am sorry to bring it up now at such a late
stage, but it was submitted at the last minute.
I turn to sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 5 of the
draft resolution, where it says, “provide outreach as well
as good offices to support the Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process”, the Government of Afghanistan
insists on adding “if requested by and in close
consultation with the Government of Afghanistan”.
As I said, I apologize for the late text revision. I
think the words “Afghan-led” convey that idea clearly,
but the Afghan Government has asked us to submit the
revision. We are here to help the Afghan people and
the Afghan peace process. We are here to support that
country, which is in a difficult situation. The revision
just came up now and we feel responsible to our
Afghan friends. I therefore propose the aforementioned
2/9

17/09/2019

The President (spoke in Russian): Before
commenting on the proposed revised, I would like to
turn the members of the Council to see if there are
any remarks. If we proceed from the premise that this
paragraph is agreed, even if it was at the very last
minute and despite the protracted consultations on this
issue with the interested delegations, if delegations
consent to the inclusion of this oral revision to the draft
resolution and there are no objections, then we will vote
on the resolution as revised.
As there are no objections, I request that the
Secretariat inscribe this oral revision to the text of
the resolution.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution, as orally revision, has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2489 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First, I would like to
thank my colleagues around the table for accepting a
revision in this way. I very much appreciate that. As I
said in my previous statement, what we are doing here
today is supporting a people that has been under strain
and embroiled in conflict and has been the victim of
terrorist attacks. Last night, we saw two more terrorist
attacks in Kabul.
I think that the adoption of resolution 2489 (2019)
at this juncture sends a very important signal to the
19-28174

17/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghan people. It is a signal that the United Nations and
the Security Council stand by the people of Afghanistan.
We are sending the Afghan people the message that the
United Nations stands by them. We do not just roll over
the mandate but we add substantive points.
With regard to the peace process, I think it is very
important that we now have a clear statement that it
is Afghan-led and Afghan-owned. For us, it is very
important to focus now on the elections ahead, which
is what the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan is tasked with.
The text also considers the situation of women in
the country, which is very high on the Council’s agenda.
The Deputy Secretary-General travelled to Afghanistan
and reported to the Security Council about the situation
of women. It is very important for that to be reflected in
the text of the resolution. It is also critical that the text
also addresses sexual violence and accountability. We
note that the resolution also recognizes and highlights
that both women and children are victims of the conflict
and stresses respect for human rights.
I would like to thank our Chinese friends, who came
to the negotiations with a different position and were
able, after a long discussion, to strike a compromise that
took all views into account. I also thank our Indonesian
colleagues. Our teams worked for hours and did not
sleep last night. I thank the entire Council for sending
this strong message to the Afghan people today.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Before proceeding with
my statement, let me too begin by expressing our
condolences to the people and the Government of
Afghanistan following the brutal attack in Kabul,
which targeted an election rally in Parwan. Thus far,
the attack has claimed the lives of at least 38 people.
We condemn this attack in the strongest terms and hope
that its perpetrators will be brought to justice.
Like my German colleague, allow me to thank
the many delegations that supported Indonesia and
Germany throughout the drafting of resolution 2489
(2019). Afghanistan is at a critical juncture and we
want to make sure that the Council can best support
the people of Afghanistan through the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). It
is simply our core business to give UNAMA a solid
and clear mandate that fully respects Afghanistan’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

S/PV. 8620

During the debate on UNAMA on 10 September
(see S/PV.8613), many countries sent a signal. We have
listened to their positions very carefully. We have also
listened to the views of all Council members, as well
as to the calls of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on the Council. During the course of
several negotiations, including one that continued until
late last night, we tried to accommodate the positions
and interests of various countries, and indeed we tried
our best to strike a delicate balance.
The result is the current co-penholder text that we
have just adopted. This text is acceptable to all and,
most importantly, unifies the Council once again.
That is the message that we want to send, and we are
happy that Council members could join consensus in
unanimously adopting the resolution, which we can be
proud of. We have always believed that the unity of the
Council would send a strong message of support to the
people of Afghanistan and foster full confidence in the
work of UNAMA.
We would like once again to thank all Council
members for their flexibility, support and active
engagement, which resulted in the adoption of a
resolution that extends the UNAMA mandate for 12
months. We would also like to particularly thank our
Chinese brothers, who were constructive throughout
the process. The resolution is critically needed, bearing
in mind that UNAMA’s mandate will expire tonight.
As witnessed, we are always at the last minute, but the
Council has proven, once again, that it is able to reach
a consensus decision. At this juncture, UNAMA’s work
is of crucial importance for the people of Afghanistan,
as well as for the international community. Through the
resolution, UNAMA will be able to fully support the
Government of Afghanistan in holding the upcoming
election scheduled for next week, on 28 September. We
hope that the people of Afghanistan will have a credible,
transparent and inclusive election. The international
community stands with the people of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, as my colleague Mr. Heusgen did
before me, I would like to thank all our experts and our
political coordinator for their excellent work. I am quite
sure that a promotion is in store for them. I would also
like to thank all the experts from the other missions
involved in the discussion. Once again, my thanks for
reaching a consensus resolution. We hope this marks a
new beginning.

19-281743/9

S/PV.8620

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: What can I say but better late
than never? We are happy that we managed to reach
consensus on the resolution.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): First,
we wish to thank the co-penholders, Germany and
Indonesia, for their diligence and commitment to
drafting a new mandate that will provide the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
the guidance needed to advance its core mission. The
United States voted in favour of resolution 2489 (2019)
today to renew UNAMA for one year, with an updated
mandate to address new developments on the ground.
Just last night, terrorist attacks targeted President
Ghani’s election campaign rally, claiming at least 26
lives. We condemn those horrific attacks and convey our
sympathies to the victims. The attacks are yet another
reminder of the critical role of UNAMA in supporting
the people and the Government of Afghanistan and
underscore the importance of the Security Council’s
duty to provide UNAMA with a strong and full
mandate. This mandate renewal empowers the Mission
to support elections, facilitate peace and reconciliation
efforts and promote good governance and human
rights. However, I should note that the reason we cannot
empower the Mission with a stronger substantive
mandate today is a member’s insistence on language
that highlights national political priorities rather than
ways in which we can most effectively assist the people
and the Government of Afghanistan.
We remain steadfast in our commitment to the
people of Afghanistan and to peace in their country.
We look forward to working with the Mission, the
Government and the people of Afghanistan and all
Security Council members to advance peace, security
and human rights in Afghanistan.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2489 (2019). I
am delighted that the Security Council succeeded in
demonstrating its renewed support for Afghanistan.
I would like to address my condolences to the
Afghan people for the attack on an electoral rally of
President Ghani last night.
I would like to express France’s appreciation to
Germany and Indonesia for their efforts to achieve
a balanced text that provides the tools and political
support that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) needs. We have heard
4/9

17/09/2019

Afghanistan’s request, expressed in this Chamber,
for the maintenance of a strong and stable UNAMA
presence. The mandate we have just adopted is in line
with previous renewals, but also with the adjustments
that were necessary to support Afghanistan at a crucial
moment in its history, less than two weeks before the
presidential election.
The presidential election must be credible and
transparent. Its winner will bear the heavy responsibility
of leading an inter-Afghan peace process in order to
move forward on the road to peace. But Afghanistan
cannot take that path alone. The international
community’s commitment must be unfailing, and it
is that commitment that we have expressed today in
renewing UNAMA’s mandate for one year.
UNAMA contributes in an essential way to the
pursuit of lasting peace in Afghanistan. We have
just given it the necessary means to act during this
uncertain time that is beginning by recalling what
constitutes the core of its mandate, namely, support
for peace efforts and the preparation of presidential
elections, the coordination of development aid and
humanitarian assistance and the promotion of human
rights, particularly those of women.
The adoption of this resolution shows that the
international community remains united in supporting
Afghanistan on the path to peace, democracy and
development. France will continue to work alongside
its partners in that regard.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First, we would like to join others in condemning the
regrettable attacks in Kabul and Parwan province
and in extending to the people and the Government
of Afghanistan our sincerest condolences for the loss
of life.
Peru joined in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2489 (2019) because we believe that, in the current
political and security context, it is vital to expand the
scope of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to account for new
developments. As the presidential elections draw near,
we believe that the resolution will contribute to the
objectives of stability, reconciliation, sustainable peace
and the fight against corruption in Afghanistan.
In thanking Germany and Indonesia for their
efforts to achieve consensus among all the members
of the Council during the discussions on UNAMA’s
19-28174

17/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

mandate renewal, we highlight the flexibility shown
by all participants in the negotiations and stress the
importance of continuing to work to provide adequate
monitoring and decisive support for UNAMA’s work in
its various functions.
I wish to conclude by welcoming the fact that,
importantly, the Council is united in its commitment to
Afghanistan and to the peace process undertaken and
led by Afghans themselves.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to
congratulate the Russian presidency, China, Germany
and Indonesia for their flexibility in the negotiations.
The Dominican Republic voted in favour of
resolution 2489 (2019), on the understanding that it is
an appropriate text that supports the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for a full year. At a time when efforts for lasting peace
in Afghanistan seem uncertain, it is important that
UNAMA continue to play a leading role in supporting
the Afghan people in safeguarding and promoting the
economic, political and social gains achieved thus far.
Equally essential is the support that the United Nations
can provide to the various peace talks and opportunities
for dialogue taking place that address key issues in
reducing violence and promoting a ceasefire.
The success of the peace process in Afghanistan
requires not only political will, leadership and
representation from all sectors of Afghan society, but
also strong support from the international community
and the Security Council. In that regard, UNAMA
and all United Nations agencies firmly support efforts
towards reconciliation and the promotion of human
rights, especially the rights of women and children.
We urgently call for the implementation of initiatives
focused on the elimination of violence against
women, the implementation of the national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and the protection of
children’s rights.
We want to emphasize the importance of an
inclusive electoral process that allows for the active
participation of women and youth and of ensuring
that all measures are taken to safeguard the physical
integrity of candidates and the security of polling
stations, especially hospitals and schools.
We urgently call on the Taliban to halt its offensive
on polling stations and electoral activities, as happened

S/PV. 8620

today in Kabul and in Parwan province in an attack
on the campaign rally of President Ghani, at which
approximately 50 people died and 80 were injured.
Last but not least, we express our deep concern
about the high number of civilian casualties, displaced
persons, the severe humanitarian crisis, constraints on
access to vulnerable areas and the adverse effects of
climate change in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, a resolution such as the one we
adopted today reaffirms our commitment to achieving
peace for the Afghan people and acknowledges the
sacrifices and challenges that the personnel of UNAMA
face every day.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium today voted in favour of the
compromise resolution 2489 (2019), on extending the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). The language of the resolution
provides UNAMA with a significant mandate, as
well as the necessary political guidance to carry out
its mission. We regret, however, that reaching a more
substantial outcome was not possible owing, frankly, to
an issue not pertaining to the mandate.
We thank both co-penholders for their efforts to
ensure a transparent process and take into account the
views of every delegation. During the negotiations, our
delegation was fully and actively engaged in shoring
up the guidance that the Security Council will provide
the Mission. We placed particular focus on the issues
concerning the situation of children; women and peace
and security; demining; international humanitarian
law; and climate and security.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Belgium’s support for
UNAMA and the Afghan people and express our
unwavering solidarity with the latter on the heels of the
latest attack that they just experienced.
Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I join previous speakers in condemning the two
terrorist attacks in Afghanistan yesterday. We express
our heartfelt condolences to the Government and the
people of Afghanistan and wish those who were injured
a speedy recovery.
The State of Kuwait voted in favour of resolution
2489 (2019), as we believe that it is important to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan to provide the necessary support for the

19-281745/9

S/PV.8620

The situation in Afghanistan

Government and the people of Afghanistan during the
next phase.
In conclusion, we express our appreciation for
the great efforts of the co-penholders — Germany
and Indonesia — which enabled the adoption of
the resolution unanimously, thereby reflecting the
unity of the Security Council regarding the situation
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
condemns the bombing that occurred in Afghanistan
on 17 September. China expresses its sympathy to the
Government and the people of Afghanistan. We hope
that the victims and their families will rebound from
that tragedy as soon as humanly possible.
China is pleased by the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2489 (2019), on the technical renewal of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), as it meets the expectations of the Afghan
people and enables UNAMA to continue its work to
fulfil its mandate. It also addressed all parties’ concerns.
As an immediate neighbour, China would like to see
nothing more than peace and stability in Afghanistan.
China hopes for the realization of development and
prosperity in that country. China places the utmost
importance on the interests and well-being of the Afghan
people. The interests of the people of Afghanistan are
a most sincere priority for China. In order to achieve
lasting peace in Afghanistan, we strongly believe that
there must be impetus for economic development.
In order to maintain security and stability in
that country, we must resolve security concerns. The
unity of the Security Council must be maintained,
and, to that end, we must respect the past consensus
that we achieved. It must be stressed that helping the
Afghan economy is vital to achieving lasting peace and
stability in the country. That is what the Afghan people
want, and no country has the right to deprive them of
a better life.
China continues to emphasize that now is not the
time to adopt a comprehensive resolution. A resolution
concerning a technical renewal is the only solution.
China has always participated in consultations with
a responsible and constructive attitude on extending
UNAMA’s mandate and proposed revisions on adopting
a comprehensive resolution. We regret that several
countries refused to keep the consensus text previously
agreed and to address other parties’ core concerns. The
6/9

17/09/2019

text also failed to address the possible security vacuum
in Afghanistan. All of that led to serious divisions
among parties.
It must be pointed out that someone said that
promoting Afghanistan’s regional cooperation and
connectivity has nothing to do with the UNAMA
mandate. That is an utter distortion of the UNAMA
mandate. China would welcome the return of the
countries concerned to the pathway of consultations
on resolving problems and reaching consensus on the
technical renewal of UNAMA’s mandate. Facts show
that confrontation is not the answer. We can rely only
on cooperation to resolve issues, which is the shared
expectation of the international community for the
Security Council.
The situation in Afghanistan is at a critical
juncture. China supports Afghanistan in the holding
of its general elections as scheduled, advancing the
peace process, strengthening the capacity-building of
the Afghan security forces and actively participating
in regional cooperation and connectivity to lay a solid
foundation for achieving lasting peace and stability.
China hopes that UNAMA will continue to act
in accordance with its mandate to help Afghanistan
with the holding of elections, connectivity, regional
cooperation, security, counter-terrorism, anti-narcotics
efforts and reconstruction, among other areas. China
will continue to contribute to achieving peace, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): It is very nice to
have the Afghan Ambassador with us.
As a number of people said earlier, this is a very
significant time for Afghanistan, a country in which I
had the honour to serve, on which I have worked many
times in my diplomatic career and which I know well.
Others referenced the horrific suicide attack in
Parwan province targeting President Ghani’s election
rally, which has reportedly killed 26 people and has
been claimed by the Taliban. The United Kingdom joins
others in condemning this unacceptable act of violence.
We offer our condolences to the victims, their families
and the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
Let me reiterate what I said last week (see S/PV.8613).
The leaders of the Taliban have a choice: they should
condemn violence when it occurs and undertake to do
everything in their power to stop the rest of their groups
from carrying out violence. They should take sincere
19-28174

17/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

steps for peace and to protect Afghan civilians. They
do not speak for Afghanistan, and their claims to do
otherwise are hollow.
We join others in being pleased that the Council
has been able to agree on resolution 2489 (2019),
which gives the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) a renewed mandate for 12
months. That means we have substantively strengthened
our ability to offer support to Afghanistan and its
people. We welcome UNAMA’s ability to support the
Afghan elections, including the presidential elections
scheduled for 28 September. We are pleased that ability
has been strengthened through the resolution. We were
pleased that consensus was possible. We pay tribute
to the co-penholders, our partners from Germany and
Indonesia, who did a good job at managing a difficult
process and, in particular, in managing to strengthen
the language on human rights and women.
The United Kingdom has a long interest and history
in Afghanistan. We are one of 39 countries providing
troops to Afghanistan. And, sadly, we have seen our
own troops die in Helmand province and elsewhere.
When I was Ambassador we did a lot of work to
foster economic progress for all the Afghan people in
Kabul and many of the provinces. Hence the future of
Afghanistan is something that I and my Government
take extremely seriously. The Afghan Ambassador can
rely on our commitment. She and I together chair the
friends of women in the Afghan peace process.
However, I did want to join the representatives
of the United States and Belgium in expressing my
regret that the negotiations were made more difficult
because of the position of one Council member,
based on extraneous issues and exacerbated by initial
non-engagement. That position prevented the Council
from adopting an even stronger text, which was
available yesterday. I am afraid that it also means that
part of the text is, frankly, not comprehensible in the
English language, which we regret because, pursuant to
presidential note S/2017/507, we ought to be striving for
focus and clarity in all texts of the Security Council. It
means, in turn, that paragraphs of the resolution lack
the clarity that UNAMA needs and requests in order to
deliver its mandate at such a difficult time.
We therefore believe that the Council should strive
for concision and clarity in its resolutions so that all
stakeholders, including the missions mandated by
the Council, are clear about the Council’s intent. I

S/PV. 8620

nonetheless wish to reassure the Ambassador of our
strong message of commitment and support at a critical
time. I hope that all Council members will reflect
carefully on the result we have been able to achieve
today and focus in future on what really matters: what
the Council can achieve to the benefit of Afghanistan
and its people, and not bilateral national initiatives.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me express
our most heartfelt condolences to the people and the
Government of Afghanistan over the recent terrorist
attacks in Kabul and Parwan province. Those attacks
have demonstrated what kind of challenges the people
and the Government of Afghanistan are facing in
their struggle to achieve peace, security and stability
for their own people. They have also demonstrated
how important it is for the Security Council and the
international community to send a strong signal of
support for all the efforts of the Government and the
brave people of Afghanistan on a daily basis. That is
why Poland voted in favour of resolution 2489 (2019).
We are happy that the Security Council united today to
send this very strong signal.
Poland actively participated in the negotiations that
led to be adoption of the new mandate for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
I wish praise the co-penholders, our colleagues from
the Permanent Missions of Indonesia and Germany,
for the tireless and, ultimately, very successful efforts.
Nevertheless, this document is not perfect.
We would have liked to have seen stronger and
clearer language on the protection of civilians and
on women’s empowerment and their profound role in
peace and security. We are disappointed with the lack
of any reference to the role and significance of NATO
and the European Union in Afghanistan. And we are
particularly disappointed because more than 40 Polish
soldiers perished serving the people of Afghanistan
within the NATO-led coalition. We also hoped to
include references to climate change affecting the
security and social situation in Afghanistan.
However, we voted in favour based on our
understanding that the text reflects the compromise
required in this Chamber. We voted in favour because
we managed to achieve our primary goal, which was
to provide UNAMA with a mandate that allows the
Mission and the international community to support the
Afghan people on the path to peace and prosperity. A

19-281747/9

S/PV.8620

The situation in Afghanistan

17/09/2019

technical rollover would, to be certain, not have served
that purpose.

wake of the tragic terrorist attack that occurred in the
country on 17 September.

Afghanistan is facing another important challenge
over the coming weekend. The presidential election
elections scheduled for 28 September should prove
that the country’s political elite is determined to bring
peace and sustainable development to the people of
Afghanistan. We strongly believe that the election will
be held in a credible, inclusive and transparent manner
with the full and safe participation of women and other
marginalized communities.

Today the Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2489 (2019), extending the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
12 months. We attach great importance to the role of the
Mission in coordinating the provision of international
humanitarian assistance to the country. We note the
selfless efforts of United Nations staff in the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.

By adopting this new resolution on UNAMA’s
mandate, the Security Council has proved that we
can all unite and strike a compromise when serious
challenges must be addressed. We believe that in the
future negotiations members of the Security Council
should seek to reach such a compromise without
postponing it to the last minute. But I cannot agree
more with Ambassador Meza-Cuadra: better late than
never. Nevertheless, we should do our best to be more
predictable and renew mandates before the very last
minute, as such an approach would strength trust and
cooperation among Council members.
Mr. Adom (Cote d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I take
the floor on behalf of the three African States that are
non-permanent members of the Council to condemn in
the strongest possible terms the two attacks perpetrated
in Kabul during an electoral rally organized by President
Ashraf Ghani. We express our sincerest condolences to
the Afghan people and Government.
I would also like, on behalf of the three African
States members of the Security Council, to welcome
the unanimous renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We commend the co-penholders, Indonesia and
Germany, as well as China, for the spirit of compromise
and flexibility they demonstrated in the course of
the negotiations. We can now only hope that resolution
2489 (2019) and the presence of UNAMA will help the
Afghan people to speedily restore an atmosphere of peace
and security conducive to comprehensive development.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
First, like other members of the Council, I extend
our deepest condolences to our Afghan friends — the
people and the Government of Afghanistan — in the
8/9

We believe that the consensus-based document
adopted by the Council will send a message to the
people of Afghanistan that the entire international
community is committed to long-awaited peace in that
long-suffering country. That policy is more important
than ever before, at a time when fundamental changes
are under way in Afghanistan. Making the peace
process in Afghanistan as inclusive as possible is
of critical importance. The main goal is to seek a
sustained national reconciliation arrangement with the
involvement of all of the country’s social and political
stakeholders. At the same time, it is of course crucial to
ensure that the Afghan people continue to play the key
role in resolving their own issues.
The Russian Federation works to ensure that all
Afghan political forces, without exception, and all key
external players operate on a unifying platform towards
the same objective. We reaffirm our commitment to
working in close cooperation with the Government
of Afghanistan, all political forces in the country
and regional and international partners. We also look
forward to the resumption of the United States-Taliban
dialogue and the prompt conclusion of an agreement
between the United States and the Taliban, as well as
the launch of direct intra-Afghan negotiations.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): We thank the Security
Council for adopting resolution 2489 (2019), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan for 12 months. It signifies the Council’s
support for Afghanistan at a time when the people of
Afghanistan are entering a new and crucially important
phase of their long-standing efforts to achieve peace
and prosperity.
19-28174

17/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

On 28 September, our people will vote in the
upcoming presidential election and again prove their
everlasting commitment to consolidating democracy as
a key imperative for a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
The Government and the people of Afghanistan are
fully prepared for that important national event, which
will strengthen the pillars of constitutional governance
and the rule of law in our country. At the same time,
consistent with our long-standing commitment to
peace, we stand fully committed to advancing an
effective peace process that conforms with and meets
the fundamental needs of our people — a dignified
peace that holds and protects human rights and our
democratic gains, which are embraced and accepted by
the people of Afghanistan.
I wish to reiterate the importance of the principle
of Afghan ownership and leadership in the context
of peace efforts and that all international support
measures should serve to complement and reinforce
our national efforts. In that regard, we thank the
United Nations — the Council in particular — and
other partners in the international community for
their continued support in our journey for a stable and
representative Afghanistan, especially in our joint
efforts to further empower women in the country. That
expression of support was highlighted in the Council’s
meeting on Afghanistan last week (see S/PV.8613), for
which we are grateful.
Afghanistan also places great importance on the
region and regional cooperation. In that regard, we

S/PV. 8620

prioritize economic projects that help us and Afghanistan
to better strengthen connectivity. Looking ahead, we
are aware that the future is not void of challenges and
difficulties. That said, I can state with full confidence
that the determination of Afghans to achieve success is
greater than the challenges we confront. In that regard,
I would like to make reference to last night’s attack by
the Taliban, in Parwan at an election campaign rally,
which took the lives of more than 26 people. Once
again, we request the Council to call on the Taliban to
stop the killing of civilians, especially those who will
participate on election day.
We in Afghanistan look forward to continuing
our partnership with the Council and the brotherly
international community to complete the mission on
which we embarked together in 2001. I must say that we
have made tremendous achievements since then, which
we all need to preserve and build on. Allow me to again
thank the United Nations and the Security Council for
accompanying us in this very difficult journey and
standing beside us, in support and solidarity, as we
prepare to hold that important election on 28 September
and to secure democracy and peace in Afghanistan.
I will conclude by thanking the delegations of
Germany and Indonesia for leading the difficult
negotiations in the lead-up to the adoption of today’s
resolution. I think our colleagues need a raise.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-281749/9
