A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/107
13 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 108
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/640)]
52/107. The rights of the child
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/76 and 51/77 of 12 December 1996, 51/186 of 16 December 1996 and
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1997/78 of 18 April 1997,1
Also recalling the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development of Children and
the Plan of Action for Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development
of Children in the 1990s adopted by the World Summit for Children, held in New York on 29 and 30
September 1990,2 notably the solemn commitment to give high priority to the rights of children, to their
survival and to their protection and development, and reaffirming the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993,3
which, inter alia, states that national and international mechanisms and programmes for the defence and
protection of children, in particular those in especially difficult circumstances, should be strengthened,
including through effective measures to combat exploitation and abuse of children, such as female

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23),
chap II, sect. A.
2

A/45/625, annex.

3

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

98-76711

/...

infanticide, harmful child labour, sale of children and organs, child prostitution and child pornography,
as well as other forms of sexual abuse, and which reaffirms that all human rights and fundamental
freedoms are universal,
Underlining the need for mainstreaming a gender perspective into all policies and programmes
relating to children,
Profoundly concerned that the situation of children in many parts of the world remains critical as a
result of inadequate social and economic conditions, poverty, natural disasters, armed conflicts,
displacement, exploitation, racism and all forms of intolerance, unemployment, rural-to-urban migration,
illiteracy, hunger, disability and drug abuse, and convinced that urgent and effective national and
international action is called for,
Inviting Member States to promote the values of peace, understanding and dialogue in the education
of children, as well as awareness of the urgent need to combat poverty, malnutrition and illiteracy
worldwide,
Recognizing that legislation alone is not enough to prevent violations of the rights of the child, that
stronger political commitment is needed and that Governments should implement their laws and
complement legislative measures with effective action,
Recommending that, within their mandates, all relevant human rights mechanisms and all other
relevant organs and mechanisms of the United Nations system and the supervisory bodies of the
specialized agencies pay attention to particular situations in which children are in danger and where their
rights are violated and that they take into account the work of the Committee on the Rights of the Child,
Stressing the need to strengthen partnerships between Governments, international organizations and
all sectors of civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations, in order to achieve these
objectives,
Reaffirming that the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration in all actions
concerning children,
I
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONVENTION ON THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD
1. Welcomes the unprecedented number of one hundred and ninety-one States that have ratified or
acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child4 as a universal commitment to the rights of the
child;
2. Once again urges all States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify or accede to the
Convention as a matter of priority, with a view to reaching the goal of universal adherence established
by the World Summit for Children and reiterated in the Vienna Declaration and Programme for Action;
3. Recognizes the important role of the Committee on the Rights of the Child in creating awareness
of the principles and provisions of the Convention and in providing recommendations to States parties on
its implementation;

4

Resolution 44/25, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 3

4. Invites the Committee to enhance further the constructive dialogue with the States parties to the
Convention and the transparent and effective functioning of the Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision of appropriate staff and facilities for the
effective and expeditious performance of the functions of the Committee, and takes note of the Plan of
Action of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to strengthen the implementation of
the Convention;
6. Calls upon States parties to implement the Convention fully, to cooperate closely with the
Committee and to comply in a timely manner with their reporting obligations under the Convention, in
accordance with the guidelines elaborated by the Committee;
7. Also calls upon States parties to the Convention to withdraw reservations incompatible with the
object and purpose of the Convention and to consider reviewing other reservations;
8. Recalls that the amendment to paragraph 2 of article 43 of the Convention, which would increase
the membership of the Committee on the Rights of the Child from ten to eighteen experts, was adopted
by the Conference of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on 12 December 1995,
that this amendment was approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/155 of 21 December
1995, and, therefore, calls upon States parties to the Convention to take appropriate measures so that
acceptance of the amendment by a two-thirds majority of States parties may be reached as soon as
possible in order that the amendment may enter into force;
9. Calls upon States parties to the Convention to ensure that the education of the child shall be
carried out in accordance with article 29 of the Convention and that the education be directed, inter alia,
towards the development of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, the Charter of the
United Nations and for different cultures and towards the preparation of the child for responsible life in
a free society, in the spirit of understanding, peace, tolerance, gender equality and friendship among
peoples, ethnic, national and religious groups and persons of indigenous origin;
10. Also calls upon States parties to the Convention, in accordance with their obligation under article
42 of the Convention, to make the principles and provisions of the Convention widely known to adults
and children alike, and further calls upon States parties to encourage training on the rights of the child
for those involved in activities concerning children, for example through the programme of advisory
services and technical cooperation in the field of human rights;
11. Stresses that the implementation of the Convention contributes to the achievement of the goals
of the World Summit for Children, as emphasized in the report of the Secretary-General on the progress
at mid-decade on implementation of General Assembly resolution 45/217 of 21 December 1990 on the
World Summit for Children;5
12. Encourages the Committee, in monitoring the implementation of the Convention, to continue
to pay attention to the needs of children in especially difficult circumstances;

5

A/51/256.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 4

II
CHILDREN WITH DISABILITIES
1. Welcomes the increased attention given by the Committee on the Rights of the Child to the equal
enjoyment by children with disabilities of the rights of the child;
2. Calls upon all States to take all necessary measures to ensure the full and equal enjoyment of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms by children with disabilities and to develop and enforce
legislation against discrimination against children with disabilities;
3. Also calls upon all States to promote a full and decent life for children with disabilities, in
conditions which ensure dignity, promote self-reliance and facilitate the child's active participation in the
community;
4. Emphasizes the right to education as a human right, and calls upon States to make education
accessible to children with special educational needs in a manner conducive to the child's achieving the
fullest possible social integration and individual development and to adopt an integrated approach to
providing adequate support and appropriate education for such children;
5. Welcomes the decision by the Economic and Social Council6 to request the Special Rapporteur
on Disability of the Commission for Social Development, in monitoring the implementation of the
Standard Rules on the Equalization of Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities,7 to pay special attention
to children with disabilities and the invitation to enhance the cooperation between the Special Rapporteur
and the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and requests the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations Children's Fund to work closely with him;
6. Calls upon all States, in complying with their reporting obligations to the Committee under
paragraph 1 of article 44 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, to include, in accordance with the
Committee's guidelines on the rights of the child,8 information on the situation and the needs of children
with disabilities, including disaggregated data, and on the measures taken to ensure to such children their
enjoyment of the rights under the Convention;

6

E/1997/INF/3/Add.1, resolution 1997/20. For the final text, see Official Records of the Economic
and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 1 (E/1997/97).
7

Resolution 48/96, annex.

8

CRC/C/58.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 5

III
PREVENTION AND ERADICATION OF THE SALE OF CHILDREN AND OF THEIR SEXUAL
EXPLOITATION, INCLUDING CHILD PROSTITUTION AND CHILD PORNOGRAPHY
1. Welcomes the interim report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,9 and expresses its support for her work in
examining, all over the world, the question of the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with all necessary human and
financial assistance to make the full discharge of the mandate possible and to enable her to submit an
interim report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session and a report to the Commission on Human
Rights at its fifty-fourth session;
3. Supports the work of the open-ended inter-sessional working group of the Commission on
Human Rights on the elaboration of a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
related to the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and expresses the hope that it will
make further progress prior to the fifty-fourth session of the Commission with a view to finalizing that
work before the tenth anniversary of the Convention;
4. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention to fulfil their obligation under article 34 of the
Convention, and also calls upon all States to support efforts in the context of the United Nations system
aimed at adopting effective national, bilateral and multilateral measures for the prevention and eradication
of the sale of children and of their sexual exploitation, including child prostitution and child pornography,
in particular by criminalizing the sexual exploitation of children;
5. Requests all States to implement on an urgent basis measures to protect children from all forms
of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, including measures in line with those outlined in the Declaration
and Agenda for Action of the World Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, held
at Stockholm from 27 to 31 August 1996;10
6. Calls upon States to criminalize all forms of sexual exploitation of children, including
commercial sexual exploitation, and to condemn and penalize all those offenders involved, whether local
or foreign, while ensuring that children victims of this practice are not penalized;
7. Also calls upon States to review and revise, where appropriate, laws, policies, programmes and
practices to eliminate all forms of sexual exploitation of children, including commercial sexual
exploitation;
8. Further calls upon States to enforce relevant laws, policies and programmes to protect children
from sexual exploitation, in particular by penalizing all those offenders involved, and to strengthen
communication and cooperation between law enforcement authorities;
9

A/52/482.

10

A/51/385, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 6

9. Stresses the need to combat the existence of a market that encourages such criminal practices
against children;
10. Urges States, in cases of sex tourism, to develop or strengthen and implement laws to
criminalize the acts of nationals of the countries of origin when committed against children in the
countries of destination, to ensure that a person who exploits a child for sexual abuse purposes in another
country is prosecuted by competent national authorities, either in the country of origin or in the country
of destination, to strengthen laws and law enforcement, including confiscation and seizure of assets and
profits and other sanctions, against those who commit sexual crimes against children in countries of
destination and to share relevant data;
11. Requests States to step up cooperation and concerted action by all relevant law enforcement
authorities and institutions with a view to dismantling national, regional and international networks in
trafficking in children;
12. Invites States to allocate resources to provide comprehensive programmes designed to heal and
to rehabilitate into society child victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation, including through job
training, legal assistance and confidential health care, and to take all appropriate measures to promote their
physical and psychological recovery and social reintegration;
IV
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN AFFECTED BY ARMED CONFLICT
1. Expresses grave concern at the numerous damaging effects of armed conflict on children,
including the use of children as combatants in such situations, and emphasizes the need for the world
community to focus increased attention on this serious problem with a view to bringing it to an end;
2. Invites all States to accede to relevant international human rights and humanitarian law
instruments, and urges them to implement those instruments to which they are parties;
3. Calls upon all States and other parties to armed conflict to respect international humanitarian
law, and, in this regard, calls upon States parties to respect fully the provisions of the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 194911 and the additional protocols thereto of 1977,12 while bearing in mind resolution 2 of
the twenty-sixth International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held at Geneva from 3 to
7 December 1995, and to respect the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child which
accord children affected by armed conflict special protection and treatment;
4. Calls upon States and United Nations bodies and organizations to treat children during conflict
and in post-conflict situations as a priority concern in human rights, humanitarian and development
activities, including in field operations and country programmes, to enhance coordination and cooperation
throughout the United Nations system and to ensure effective protection for children affected by armed
conflict;
11

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

12

Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 7

5. Recommends that the humanitarian concerns relating to children affected by armed conflict and
their protection be fully reflected in United Nations field operations, which, inter alia, promote peace,
prevent and resolve conflicts and implement peace agreements;
6. Underlines the importance that measures to ensure respect for the rights of the child, including
in the areas of health and nutrition, formal, informal or non-formal education, physical and psychological
recovery and social reintegration, be included within emergency and other humanitarian assistance policies
and programmes;
7. Stresses the need for Governments and other parties to armed conflict to take measures,
including the establishment, for example, of "days of tranquillity" and "corridors of peace", to ensure
humanitarian access, the delivery of humanitarian relief and the provision of services, such as education
and health, including immunization of children affected by armed conflict;
8. Supports the work of the open-ended inter-sessional working group of the Commission on
Human Rights on a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child related to the
involvement of children in armed conflict, and expresses the hope that it will make further progress prior
to the fifty-fourth session of the Commission with a view to finalizing this work;
9. Urges States and all other parties to armed conflict to adopt all necessary measures to end the
use of children as soldiers and to ensure their demobilization and reintegration into society, including
through adequate education and training, in a manner that fosters their self-respect and dignity, and invites
the international community to assist in this endeavour;
10. Welcomes increased international efforts in various forums with respect to anti-personnel mines,
recognizes the positive effect on children of those efforts, and, in this regard, takes due note of the
conclusion of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction and its implementation by those States that become parties
to it, as well as of the amended Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby-traps
and Other Devices (Protocol II)13 of the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate
Effects;14
11. Calls upon all States and relevant United Nations bodies, including the United Nations Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance, to contribute on an ongoing basis to international mine
clearance efforts, and urges States to take further action to promote gender- and age-appropriate
mine-awareness programmes and child-centred rehabilitation, thereby reducing the number and the plight
of child victims;
12. Reaffirms that rape in the conduct of armed conflict constitutes a war crime and that under
certain circumstances it constitutes a crime against humanity and an act of genocide, as defined in the

13

See CCW/CONF. I/16 (Part I).

14

See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, Vol. 5: 1980 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 8

Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,15 and calls upon all States to
take all measures required for the protection of women and children from all acts of gender-based
violence, including rape, sexual exploitation and forced pregnancy, and to strengthen mechanisms to
investigate and punish all those responsible and bring the perpetrators to justice;
13. Urgently requests that appropriate measures be taken by Member States and United Nations
agencies, within the scope of their respective mandates, to ensure humanitarian access to children affected
by armed conflict, to facilitate the extension of humanitarian assistance, including education, and to ensure
the physical and psychological recovery and reintegration into society of child soldiers, victims of
landmines and victims of gender-based violence;
14. Recommends that whenever sanctions are imposed their impact on children be assessed and
monitored and that humanitarian exceptions be child-focused and formulated with clear application
guidelines;
15. Recalls the importance of preventive measures such as early warning systems, preventive
diplomacy and education for peace to prevent conflicts and their negative impact on the rights of the
child, and urges Governments and the international community to promote sustainable human
development;
16. Calls upon all States, in accordance with the norms of international humanitarian law, to
integrate in their armed forces' training and education programmes, including those for peacekeeping,
instruction on responsibilities towards the civilian population, in particular women and children;
17. Welcomes the appointment of Mr. Olara Otunnu as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on the impact of armed conflict on children, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
51/77 of 12 December 1996;
18. Invites Governments, the specialized agencies, relevant United Nations bodies, notably the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund and regional, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, as well as the Committee on the Rights of the Child, to cooperate with
the Special Representative and to contribute to his work, including to his annual report;
19. Recommends that the Secretary-General ensure that the necessary support is made available to
the Special Representative for the effective performance of his mandate, encourages the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to provide support to the Special Representative,
and calls upon States and other institutions to provide voluntary contributions for that purpose;
20. Invites Member States and relevant United Nations bodies and non-governmental organizations
to consider how the subject of the impact of armed conflict on children can best be integrated into events
designed to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the World Summit for Children and the entry into force
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

15

Resolution 260 A (III).
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 9

V
REFUGEE AND INTERNALLY DISPLACED CHILDREN
1. Urges Governments to pay particular attention to the situation of refugee and internally displaced
children by continuing to design and improve the implementation of policies for their care and well-being,
with the necessary international cooperation, in particular with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's Fund and international humanitarian
organizations;
2. Calls upon States and United Nations bodies, in recognizing the particular vulnerability of
refugee and internally displaced children, to protect both their safety and their developmental needs,
including health, education and psycho-social rehabilitation;
3. Expresses its deep concern about the growing number of unaccompanied refugee and internally
displaced children, and calls upon all States and United Nations bodies and agencies to ensure the early
identification and registration of unaccompanied refugee and internally displaced children, to give priority
to programmes for family tracing and reunification and to continue monitoring the care arrangements for
unaccompanied refugee and internally displaced children;
4. Calls upon all States and other parties to armed conflicts to recognize the particular vulnerability
of refugee and internally displaced children to the damaging effects of such conflicts, stresses the special
vulnerability of child-headed households, and calls upon Governments and United Nations bodies to give
these situations urgent attention, to enhance protection and assistance mechanisms and to involve women
and youth in the design, delivery and monitoring of measures taken to this effect;
5. Invites the representative of the Secretary-General on internally displaced persons to take into
account the situation of internally displaced children in his preparation of guiding principles which are
to form part of a comprehensive framework for the protection of internally displaced persons;
VI
ELIMINATION OF EXPLOITATION OF CHILD LABOUR
1. Reaffirms the right of the child to be protected from economic exploitation and from performing
any work that is likely to be hazardous to or interfere with the child's education or to be harmful to the
child's health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development;
2. Welcomes the measures taken by Governments to eliminate the exploitation of child labour,
while recalling the Programme of Action for the Elimination of the Exploitation of Child Labour,16 and
calls upon relevant United Nations agencies, in particular the United Nations Children's Fund and the
International Labour Organization, to continue to support national efforts in this regard;

16

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap.
II, sect. A, resolution 1993/79, annex.
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 10

3.
labour;

Also welcomes the recent holding of various international conferences on various forms of child

4. Further welcomes the efforts by the Committee on the Rights of the Child in the area of child
labour, takes note of its recommendations,17 and encourages the Committee as well as other relevant
human rights treaty bodies, within their respective mandates, to continue to monitor this growing problem
when examining reports of States parties;
5. Calls upon all States to translate into concrete action their commitment to the progressive and
effective elimination of all forms of exploitative child labour, and urges them, as a matter of priority, to
eliminate all extreme forms of child labour, such as forced labour, bonded labour and other forms of
slavery;
6. Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying the conventions of the
International Labour Organization concerning the abolition of forced labour and the minimum age for
employment, including for particularly hazardous work for children, and to implement those conventions;
7. Calls upon all States to support the negotiation, with a view to its early finalization, by the
International Labour Organization of a future instrument aimed at eradicating the most intolerable forms
of child labour;
8. Also calls upon all States to set specific target dates for eliminating all forms of child labour that
are contrary to accepted international standards and for ensuring the full enforcement of relevant existing
laws and, where appropriate, enacting legislation necessary to implement their obligations under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and International Labour Organization standards ensuring the
protection of working children;
9. Further calls upon all States to recognize the right to education by making primary education
compulsory and by ensuring that all children have access to free primary education as a key strategy in
preventing child labour;
10. Calls upon all States to systematically assess and examine, in close cooperation with
international organizations such as the International Labour Organization and the United Nations
Children's Fund, the magnitude, nature and causes of the exploitation of child labour and to develop and
implement strategies for combating these practices, with a specific emphasis on the situation of girls, their
right to education and to access to schools on an equal basis with boys, in close cooperation with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
11. Calls upon all States and the United Nations system to strengthen international cooperation as
a means of assisting Governments in preventing or combating violations of the rights of the child,
including the exploitation of child labour;

17

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 41 (A/51/41).
/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 11

VII
THE PLIGHT OF CHILDREN LIVING AND/OR WORKING ON THE STREETS
1. Expresses grave concern about the large number of children living and/or working on the streets
and at the continued growth in incidents and reports worldwide of such children being affected by serious
crime, drug trafficking and abuse, violence and prostitution;
2. Welcomes the continuing efforts of Governments, the United Nations system and civil society
to tackle this multifaceted problem;
3. Calls upon Governments to continue actively to seek comprehensive solutions for the problems
of children living and/or working on the streets, including by helping to alleviate the poverty of such
children, their families or guardians, by taking measures to ensure their reintegration into society and by
providing, inter alia, adequate nutrition, shelter, health care and education, taking into account that such
children are particularly vulnerable to all forms of violence, abuse, exploitation and neglect;
4. Emphasizes that the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other relevant
human rights instruments must constitute the standard in efforts to deal with this problem, and
recommends that the Committee on the Rights of the Child and other relevant human rights treaty
monitoring bodies continue to give attention to it when examining the reports of States parties;
5. Strongly urges all Governments to guarantee the respect for all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, in particular the right to life, to take urgent measures to prevent the killing of children living
and/or working on the streets, to combat torture and violence against them and to ensure strict compliance
with the Convention and other relevant human rights instruments, including the requirement that legal and
juridical processes respect the rights of the child;
6. Calls upon the international community to support, through effective international cooperation,
the efforts of States to improve the situation of children living and/or working on the streets, and
encourages States parties to the Convention, in preparing their reports to the Committee on the Rights of
the Child, to take full account of the particular needs and rights of such children and to consider
requesting technical advice and assistance for initiatives aimed at improving their situation;
VIII
Decides:
(a) To request the Secretary-General to submit a report on the rights of the child to the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session containing information on the status of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the problems addressed in the present resolution;
(b) To request the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the impact of armed conflict
on children to submit to the General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights an annual report
containing relevant information on the situation of children affected by armed conflict, bearing in mind
existing mandates and reports of relevant bodies;

/...

A/RES/52/107
Page 12

(c) To continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-third session under the item entitled
"Promotion and protection of the rights of the child".
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
