S/PV.8573

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8573

rd meeting
Monday, 15 July 2019, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mrs. Charrier
Mr. Glossner
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Davies
Mrs. Dickson
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 17 May 2019 from the Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2019/407)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-21612 (E)
*1921612*

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 17 May 2019 from the Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/407)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the
Investigative Team established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2379 (2017), to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/407, which contains a letter dated
17 May 2019 from the Special Adviser and Head of
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Khan.

15/07/2019

in some way, shape or form by the crimes of Da’esh,
and their message has been clear and consistent. Their
demand is a simple one, but it goes to the heart of the
mandate. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) must be held responsible for the crimes that
were committed.
In Mosul to Tikrit, from Erbil to Dahuk and Sinjar,
and elsewhere in Iraq, victims have given harrowing
accounts to our Team of mass killings, of whole
families being wiped out and women and children
taken as slaves. The courage those individuals have
demonstrated in coming forward and giving their
accounts about Da’esh underlines, in very real terms,
their commitment to justice, their heroism and the
urgency with which we at UNITAD must work, together,
if we are to fulfil the hopes, aspirations and promises
that were made in September 2017 by the Council in
resolution 2379 (2017).
Perhaps most striking, to me at least, has been
the fact that when I have engaged with these victim
communities among the various components of Iraq,
their message is one of seeking not revenge or reprisals,
but justice. They seek justice, not as an abstract but
rather based on proper, solid evidence — without
hearsay or gossip — that can be presented in a court of
law and subjected to challenge so that independent and
impartial judges may make determinations that will
stand the test of time The resilience and the fortitude
of the people of Iraq from all communities need to be
applauded right at the outset. It is only through fair
trials that the corrupt and perverted ideology of Da’esh,
as well as its most un-Islamic practices, can be fully
and completely exposed in a manner that will brook no
answer at all.

It is indeed an honour to present to the Council the
second report (see S/2019/407) of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD).

Over the past six months, we have sought to harness
our resources and the unity of purpose that we have
seen in Iraq and the Council in the most effective way.
I am pleased to report that since my last briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.8412), very significant progress has
been made. We are now receiving evidence, information
and witness statements in all forms — digital, electronic,
documentary — in line with the investigative strategy
that I detailed in my previous report (see S/2018/1031).

From the outset of our work in Iraq, we have sought
to ensure that the experiences and voices of survivors,
witnesses and communities are placed at the centre of
our work. These survivors come from all communities
across Iraq. All communities have been impacted

The Team is expanding rapidly. At the beginning
of the year, we had 10 staff members in UNITAD.
As of today, we have 79 staff members from all
geographical regions of the United Nations. In line with
the Secretary-General’s policy on gender parity, I am

Mr. Khan: I would like to start by congratulating
Peru on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month.

2/18

19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8573

extremely pleased to announce that more than 55 per
cent of the Team is female and more than 50 per cent of
the senior leadership of UNITAD is also female.

or Sunni, Kaka’i or Turkmen or Shabak, for that matter.
All of those communities suffered horrendously at the
hands of that most un-Islamic State.

In May, I was delighted, together with His
Excellency the Prime Minister of Iraq, to announce
my appointment of Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji.
She is sitting right behind me. I really want to take
this opportunity, in this Chamber, to publicly applaud
Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji for her extraordinary
commitment to the rule of law and to justice. Already,
her experience, wise counsel and sincere efforts
to deliver accountability have made a meaningful
contribution to the Team. Her appointment shows in
a very vivid and obvious manner the support of the
Government of Iraq and how, by harnessing the quality,
ability and experience of the people of Iraq, we can
complement the investigative capacity within Iraq and
hopefully also feed evidence into the court systems of
other Member States.

In conducting the work of UNITAD, we have sought
to draw on its independent and impartial status in order
to engage with all actors — whether international,
regional or local — so that we can get the greatest
body of material and collect it in line with international
standards. That inclusive and collaborative approach
is reflected in the evidence collection that we have
undertaken only in the past few weeks. In the past
10 days alone, we have had a team out that has been
in the village of Kojo, in Sinjar, collecting evidence
or supporting the Iraqi authorities in collecting
evidence and giving them guidelines regarding what
international standards require so that we have the
greatest opportunity to feed evidence into domestic
courts, in line with legal considerations.

In April, we were fortunate in leaving the hotel where
we were based and then the engineering compound on
the premises of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). We have our own facilities where
we can safely store our material and the evidential work
product that we generate. Importantly also, we now
have videoconference facilities, so that we can use our
offices to transmit testimony not only into the courts
of Iraq, but also, more immediately, the courts of other
Member States.
I want to thank UNAMI and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq for
their constant support as we move from being a startup entity into the operational stage of our work. All
along, we have been endeavouring to move the mandate
from the paper of resolution 2379 (2017) into something
concrete, and we have done that initially by focusing
on three main areas: first, in the Sinjar area, attacks
against the Yazidi communities; secondly, in Mosul,
which is, as I have said repeatedly, a microcosm in many
respects of the crimes of Da’esh, we see crimes against
religious minorities and women and children, crimes
of sexual slavery and crimes of sexual and genderbased violence; and thirdly, we have been focusing on
this awful massacre to create an academy in June 2014.
The team is preparing evidentiary files with respect
to a broad category of other crimes. This is important
because all communities, as I said at the outset, have
been targeted by Da’esh. There was no preference or
mercy shown whether one was Christian or Yazidi, Shia

In northern Iraq, we have been conducting
interviews with Yazidis, Turkmen Shia, Christians and
Sunni Arabs. It is very encouraging that we have already
found very important evidence from individuals and
witnesses who had not hitherto given a statement to any
investigative entity or non-governmental organization
(NGO). In addition, we have received 600,000 videos
in the past two weeks that are very relevant to our
investigations and more than 15,000 pages of insider
ISIL documents that they themselves produced,
which were collected from the battlefield by leading
investigative journalists.
I have repeatedly stated that the collection of
evidence in itself does not represent satisfactorily
the culmination of our work. It is not an end in itself,
and that needs to be underlined. It is not sufficient
for UNITAD simply to have an archive of interesting
material, important though that is. To fully deliver on
our mandate, we must ensure that our work contributes
tangibly to domestic accountability efforts. In
recognition of that imperative, the Investigative Team
has already held in-depth discussions in recent months
in order to create, identify and strengthen potential
channels for evidence collected by the Team to feed
into domestic proceedings in a manner consistent with
UNITAD’s terms of reference.
I am also pleased to be able to inform the Council
that a number of other Member States have — at this
early stage, six or seven months after our deployment
to Iraq in terms of the new year — already approached

19-216123/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

us in relation to ongoing domestic proceedings within
their jurisdictions. Based on our discussions with
relevant national authorities, it is my hope that within
the next two weeks we will be able to provide tangible
support with respect to at least one ongoing case before
a national court of a Member State, which would mark
an important milestone in the young life of UNITAD.
Our cooperation and collaboration with the
Government of Iraq and Iraqi national authorities have
remained crucial to the ability to deliver on our mandate.
I take this opportunity to express my thanks for the
support that has been given to me and to UNITAD by
the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister of Iraq, the
Foreign Minister of Iraq, the President of the Judicial
Council and, indeed, the Permanent Representative of
Iraq to the United Nations, who is at this meeting today.
In addition, the support of the Kurdistan Regional
Government has been unrelenting and extremely
significant, and I extend my thanks to the President,
Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of the
that Government for the assistance they have provided
in the formative stages of UNITAD’s work.
Our effective working-level engagement with Iraqi
and local authorities, in line with the terms of reference,
has, in my respectful submission, been one of the most
notable and greatest successes of UNITAD in these
initial stages. Tangible evidence of that cooperation
can be found in the collection of forensic material from
mass grave sites, in line with international standards,
and the transmission of evidence and case files from
national and local authorities to the Investigative Team
to ensure that our work is conducted in a manner that
is complementary to ongoing domestic proceedings.
They have also facilitated, in the past few days before I
came to this meeting, my visit to some of the detention
centres in Iraq. I am also extremely grateful for the
unfailing support provided by the relevant national
security agencies and the National Operations Centre,
which has facilitated our nimble, mobile investigative
work in the field of Iraq itself. In short, the cooperation
that the Government of Iraq has extended to UNITAD
thus far has been, in my considered view, exemplary.
While significant progress has been made in the
past six months, I wish to underline that the ability of
the Team to deliver on its mandate remains dependent
on the consistent and continued support of the Council
and the international community more broadly. In
that regard, we have been greatly assisted by the very
generous contributions to the trust fund that Member
4/18

15/07/2019

States have provided to UNITAD. We have used the
funds for very good purposes. They have helped us
with exhumations in the field and to purchase the
leading technology for DNA analysis, drones and 3-D
scanners. They have been used to recruit psychological
and psychosocial support for the victims. I would like
once again to express my thanks to the Member States
that I highlighted in particular in the written report
presented to the Council. I am also pleased to announce
that last week we were given a commitment by the
United Arab Emirates of another generous contribution
and the Government of Qatar is planning on financing
and supporting an international conference in Doha at
the end of this year.
Apart from financial assistance to the trust fund,
gratis personnel are sorely needed. I would like to
applaud and thank Germany, Saudi Arabia, Sweden and
Turkey for their very generous contributions to UNITAD,
which have filled a need. The latter three — Saudi
Arabia, Sweden and Turkey — have promised and made
commitments to provide gratis personnel to forensics
and other areas. Those contributions are essential not
only in further strengthening our capacity to conduct
effective investigative activities but also in reinforcing
the message that the Council and the international
community remain ad idem and united and that the
imperative of justice is not simply an incantation but
that the Council and international community are
committed to ensuring that it is realized by way of not
only proper investigations but also fair trials that will
stand the test of time.
Through our work in Iraq to date, our engagement
with victims, our cooperation with national and regional
actors and our dialogue with religious bodies and
leaders, two fundamental truths have become apparent.
The first is that, despite the scale, depravity and
barbarity that were unleashed by Da’esh on innocent
civilians, they have not succeeded in dividing the
people of Iraq. Rather, the gaps that existed have been
narrowed and a great deal of unity has been created,
which, if properly harnessed, can be very important
not only to the future of Iraq but also to the continued
fulfilment of the UNITAD mandate. The call from all
Iraqis for justice is resolute and clear. The courage and
strength that we have seen among the religious divides
and across political divisions from all parts of the
political spectrum and of Iraq and, most notably, the
courage of survivors to come forward with unbelievable
bravery to recount what has befallen them, what they
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

have seen and what they have known have demonstrated
quite eloquently the abject failure of Da’esh to sow
lasting division in the territory of Iraq, nor has Da’esh
succeeded in intimidating the people of Iraq into
silence. Every time a witness comes to UNITAD and
gives their account, that is a very eloquent and powerful
riposte to Da’esh.
Secondly, we have understood that the ultimate
success of our work will depend on our ability to draw
on our independent and impartial status to harness this
unity of purpose and to make our work a product of
a collective endeavour between the Council and the
people of Iraq, between the national authorities and
local actors and between NGOs and universities. The
whole of humanity — all those groups — needs to come
together and be harnessed. Hopefully, we will then have
an opportunity to deliver on the mandate and ensure
justice, not in the abstract but by way of evidence
collected by UNITAD that can feed into independent
and impartial trials. Only if we succeed in both parts
will the full purpose of UNITAD be fulfilled.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to present the second report of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Khan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like
to start by thanking Special Adviser Karim Khan for
his informative updates on the recent progress made
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). I would
also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge and
welcome the recent appointment of his Iraqi deputy,
Ms. Al-Khafaji. The United Kingdom is grateful to them
and to their Team for the excellent work that they have
undertaken so far. The United Kingdom emphasizes the
importance of recruiting further Iraqi members of the
Team as soon as possible. That recruitment, alongside
training and development opportunities, will provide
an important legacy for Iraq in building capacities and
sharing expertise.

S/PV. 8573

We welcome the strong and positive engagement
of the Team with the Government of Iraq, both in
Baghdad and here in New York. We are grateful to
the Government of Iraq for its continued commitment
to and support for UNITAD’s work. That message of
commitment was conveyed strongly to the Council
during its recent visit to Baghdad by the highest levels
of the Government of Iraq. We also welcome the
continued collaboration between the Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government with the
Team to agree modalities for cooperation. Over the next
reporting period, we encourage the Team to redouble
and prioritize its engagement with the Government
of Iraq in order to ensure the greatest possible use
of evidence collected in Iraqi domestic proceedings,
including allowing for the prosecution of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide under domestic
law. That would constitute a remarkable step forward in
promoting accountability for survivors and the families
of victims of Da’esh. Maintaining and strengthening
that close engagement with the Government of Iraq,
the international community, non-governmental
organizations and the people of Iraq will be essential
over the coming months.
Less than 12 months after UNITAD received
its first budget, the Team has made remarkable
progress. Over the past six months, it has established
a new official headquarters, developed an investigative
strategy and conducted excavations in Sinjar, as well
as making important progress towards putting in place
the necessary systems to ensure that evidence is safely
stored. We welcome that progress and hope that the
digital storage system will be fully up and running by
the time of our next briefing. We also look forward to
the planned excavation in Mosul and to the remaining
field units becoming operational soon.
The Council’s recent visit was also an important
reminder to us all of the scale of the path ahead for the
Government of Iraq in transitioning into a post-conflict
environment. Reconciliation, reconstruction and
accountability for all survivors of Da’esh violence are
essential. The enormity of the task ahead for UNITAD
in gathering further evidence is also clear. The
collection of forensic, physical and biological material
from mass grave sites in Iraq is an essential first step
to providing closure for the families of the victims. We
urge the Team to continue to focus on that important
task and to share further details on its investigative

19-216125/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

15/07/2019

strategy as it develops, as well as any challenges that
it may face.

today and for his thorough and serious briefing to the
Security Council.

The United Kingdom also acknowledges the
volume of work that the Team has undertaken so far
in gathering witness testimonies. We urge all United
Nations bodies in Iraq to work collaboratively so as to
ensure that they avoid duplication of effort and mitigate
the risks around the potential retraumatizing of victims.
In that regard, we urge the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, UNITAD and the United Nations Iraq
team of experts to work together to coordinate their
efforts and share best-practice and technical expertise.

The plight of Iraq’s ethnic and religious minorities
is of critical importance to the United States. We will
not waver from holding the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) accountable for the atrocities it has
committed against all Iraqis. The United States remains
a strong, committed supporter of the Security Council
mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
to collect, store and preserve evidence of ISIS atrocities
that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.

In November, the United Kingdom will host a
conference on preventing sexual violence, entitled
“Time for justice: putting survivors first”. We hope that
all Council members will send senior representatives
of their Governments to signify their commitment to
preventing sexual violence in conflict and ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators of those crimes and
support for survivors, their children and relatives.
When resolution 2379 (2017) was adopted
unanimously in September 2017, it demonstrated
the Council’s full support for efforts to bring Da’esh
to justice. Since its inception, when Nadia Murad
addressed the Council (see S/PV.8052), survivors and
victims have been at the heart of the Team’s efforts.
We commend the Team’s approach in emphasizing that
there is no hierarchy of victims and the recognition that
all Iraqis suffered at the hands of Da’esh. Its work will
be important in supporting the Government of Iraq in
its efforts to achieve national reconciliation.
The United Kingdom is proud to support the
important work of the Investigative Team, and I am
pleased to announce today an additional £1 million
in funding to the Investigative Team, taking the
total contribution of the United Kingdom so far to
£2 million. We thank the growing number of Member
States that have also pledged support to the Team, and
we encourage other countries to consider providing
financial and in-kind support to ensure that the Team
can continue with and accelerate its valuable work.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
Kingdom’s full support for the efforts of the Special
Adviser and his team. We look forward to the unanimous
renewal of the Team’s mandate in September.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I
thank Special Adviser Khan for being with us in person
6/18

We are pleased that the Security Council reiterated
its unanimous support for UNITAD’s mandate during
the Council’s first-ever trip to Iraq last month, where
Council members had a chance to engage with Special
Adviser Khan and his team. The United States welcomes
the rapid initiation of UNITAD’s critical activities on
the ground in Iraq over the past year and the details
that Mr. Khan provided us this morning. The recent
appointment of Iraqi experts to UNITAD, working
alongside international experts, is critical to the Team’s
success, as demonstrated by the appointment of Deputy
Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji, who joins us today and
whom I welcome.
The United States contributed $2 million in support
of UNITAD’s first exhumation of mass graves sites in
Sinjar, which took place earlier this year. UNITAD’s
access to those sites is vital to the professional and
impartial evidence collection of the unimaginable
atrocities that the Yazidis suffered under ISIS. We
express our thanks to Member States that have also
stepped up to contribute to UNITAD’s operations
through funding and support means, including the
United Kingdom, Germany, Qatar, the Netherlands,
the United Arab Emirates, Sweden, Turkey and Saudi
Arabia, and call on other Member States to swiftly
support UNITAD in order for the Team to collect
critical evidence before it is too late.
Of course, money alone will not guarantee effective
evidence collection. We welcome the Government of
Iraq’s commitment to working closely with UNITAD.
Such close cooperation between UNITAD and the
Iraqi Government is essential for the Team’s success,
as demonstrated by Special Adviser Khan’s frequent
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

meetings with key Iraqi political, religious and societal
leaders over the last year.
We call on the Government of Iraq to continue
to give UNITAD the space to operate effectively.
Independence and impartiality will be essential to the
Team’s credibility moving forward. No segment of
Iraqi society has escaped ISIS terror, and it is important
to develop a balanced and accurate account of events.
That will give voice to all Iraqis, including members
of all Iraq’s religious and ethnic groups who have been
subjected to unspeakable atrocities.
Iraq needs accountability and reconciliation to
begin in order to recover from the trauma that ISIS
inflicted on the Iraqi people. In recent weeks, UNITAD
has taken the important step of beginning evidence
collection in Mosul — once a former ISIS stronghold.
UNITAD’s work there will send an important message
to all Iraqis, including the Sunni community, that the
international community has not forgotten the atrocities
that they too endured.
It is especially important for Iraq to work through
a law-based process to hold ISIS perpetrators and
collaborators accountable. UNITAD plays a critical role
in that effort, including by ensuring that exhumations
and evidence collection are conducted in accordance
with international standards.
We extend our appreciation to the entire UNITAD
team for aiming to assure that justice is never beyond
the reach for the heinous acts that ISIS committed.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I join those who spoke before me in thanking
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017), for his
valuable briefing. We also welcome the appointment of
Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji, Deputy of the Special
Adviser, and welcome her participation with us in
this meeting.
We also recall our meeting with Mr. Khan during
the Council’s visit to the Iraqi capital of Baghdad,
which was successful in achieving its goal of showing
support for Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and UNITAD.
We reiterate our every wish for the success of the
Special Adviser and his team with its international and

S/PV. 8573

national members in their difficult and sensitive mission.
We hope that it will be carried out in accordance with
international standards and the investigation strategy
put forward by UNITAD for collecting and storing
evidence and protecting witnesses in support of local
and international efforts aimed at attaining justice for
the most atrocious crimes committed against the Iraqi
people. That is an important part of the comprehensive
framework to eliminate terrorism.
The mechanism established pursuant to resolution
2379 (2017) upholds achieving justice, ensures
providing redress to victims and is a response to the
request by the Iraqi Government to guarantee that
there be no impunity for those who perpetrated these
crimes, which may amount to the level of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and genocide, with full
respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction
over crimes committed in its territory under Iraqi law
and Constitution.
We are well aware that the judicial responsibility for
dealing with all kinds of terrorism is of an international
nature. We support the efforts of the Government of
Iraq in combating terrorism and we appreciate the
determination that the country has demonstrated
to eliminate extremism, violence and terrorism,
with the support of its friends and partners from the
international community and the United Nations. In
that regard, we welcome the ongoing cooperation
and collaboration between UNITAD and the Iraqi
Government in accordance with the Team’s mandate,
which has contributed to expeditious progress in the
field operations of the Team.
We also note the international efforts of the Global
Coalition against Da’esh. However, much remains to be
done in the same unified international spirit, which we
believe to be necessary in combatting Da’esh sleeper
cells and completely eliminating their potential threat,
while exploring ways to deal with the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters and to ensure reintegration.
It is especially alarming that Da’esh continues to
threaten the security and stability of the region as a
whole. We all shoulder the responsibility of eliminating
Da’esh in a flexible and effective way that will curb
its ambitions and dry up its financing and resources,
ensure that its ideology does not re-emerge by resolving
the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism, and
guarantee a smooth transition to reconstruction and
the return of stability. We continue to support Iraq

19-216127/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

in its efforts to overcome the ordeal that it suffered
under Da’esh within the framework of the International
Coalition aimed at defeating that organization, as
well as to face the great challenges that brotherly Iraq
continues to face following the defeat of Da’esh.
The Emir of our country, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, took the initiative by calling for
the convening of the Kuwait International Conference
for the Reconstruction of Iraq in February 2018, which
garnered pledges amounting to $30 billion that would
require the establishment of a follow-up mechanism to
ensure that these pledges are honoured and that stability
and security are restored in Iraq.
In conclusion, we reiterate our solidarity with Iraq,
its Government and its people in any step it takes to
combat terrorism. Moreover, we will spare no effort in
supporting Iraq and standing by its side in its attempts
to contain Da’esh and its practices, hold accountable
those who have perpetrated such heinous crimes and
reconstruct areas that have been damaged by Da’esh.
We will also support Iraq in its efforts to consolidate
national unity among all Iraqi people, based on its
territorial integrity and political sovereignty.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s briefing on the progress
made in implementing the principle of accountability
for serious crimes and mass atrocities committed
in Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We commend Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan,
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), established by resolution
2379 (2017), for his excellent briefing, in support of the
efforts of the Iraqi authorities to collect, protect and
preserve evidence relating to acts that may constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
First and foremost, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
support for Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and his entire
team for the work they have already conducted, in spite
of the many difficulties. Côte d’Ivoire remains deeply
concerned about the ongoing complex and multiple
challenges that could hinder UNITAD’s work in the
context of its cooperation with the Iraqi authorities.
Crimes within the scope of UNITAD’s investigation are
taken into account by Iraqi legislation only as terrorist
crimes. Similarly, the transnational nature of ISIL’s
activities between June 2014 and June 2016 requires us
8/18

15/07/2019

to identify areas of judicial cooperation among States
in the region so that individuals detained beyond Iraqi
borders are held accountable for crimes committed
by Da’esh.
Despite those obstacles, my country remains
convinced that cooperation between UNITAD and
the Iraqi authorities will allow for the development of
consensus-based legal mechanisms that will include
the crimes perpetrated by ISIL in the Iraqi legal arsenal
so that they do not go unpunished. In that regard,
we encourage the Special Adviser to continue his
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities, affected ethnic
and religious communities and civil society, whose
contributions could further boost UNITAD’s action,
while ensuring its impartiality, independence and
credibility. It also recalls the need to ensure the greater
involvement of women in investigations.
My country welcomes the excavation of mass graves
conducted to date, in particular in the village of Kojo, in
the Sinjar district. We are of the opinion that mapping
ISIL’s command structure between June 2014 and June
2016 will enable us to identify the perpetrators of the
crimes committed and initiate subsequent legal action.
My delegation also welcomes the establishment
of the UNITAD witness protection strategy, as well
as its cooperation with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and INTERPOL. We also believe that
it is important to resolve as soon as possible differences
in interpreting resolution 2379 (2017) and address the
concerns expressed by certain members of the Council,
for which the evidence gathered by UNITAD could
lead to the application of the death penalty at the end of
the expected trials.
In spite of such differences, which should not affect
UNITAD’s work, my country remains convinced that
our collective commitment to translating into concrete
actions the principle of accountability for mass crimes
committed during conflicts and by terrorist groups,
in particular, goes well beyond the Iraqi and regional
framework. Above all, it is a challenge for international
peace and security, which requires the mobilization of
the entire United Nations system and all actors involved
in the fight against terrorism.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls for increased
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
and the transnational organized crime that fuels it. That
was the subject of the open debate convened by the
Peruvian presidency on 9 July (see S/PV.8569). In that
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

regard, my country stresses the need to find sustainable
responses to the structural causes of insecurity and
instability in our countries and regions.
Combating poverty and unemployment must
remain at the heart of our priorities as it is closely
linked to the creation of socioeconomic environments
that would ensure the well-being of populations
and that young people are far removed from radical
rhetoric and the temptation to join terrorist groups. In
that regard, there is an urgent need for national and
regional economic and social development strategies
to receive the greatest attention and support from the
international community through investments that
generate employment and provide basic social services.
That is true of the much-needed economic and social
reconstruction in Iraq, as well as that of other regions
ravaged by terrorism, cross-border organized crime
and community conflicts.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
and best wishes to Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and
the United Nations Investigative Team. My country
remains convinced that the success of UNITAD
will undoubtedly constitute a virtuous example and
a decisive step forward in the action of the United
Nations and the international community in the full
and effective implementation of the principle of
accountability for all terrorist actors or organizations
that commit mass crimes.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We would like to thank
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and
Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, for his
briefing today, as well as his engagement with us
during our mission to Baghdad last month. I think we
learned a great deal from that mission. We commend
the efforts of the Investigative Team, as mandated by
resolution 2379 (2017), as an important first step in
fighting impunity and holding those responsible for the
atrocities carried out by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant to account. We commend the work of the
Team and hope that it continues to perform consistently
within the mandate and framework agreed upon by
the Council.
Accountability is critical to delivering on the
Council’s aims of reconciliation and sustaining peace.
Following the discussions in Baghdad last month, I
would like to make three points.

S/PV. 8573

First, the victory over the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant was the result of the commitment and
resilience of the Iraqi Government and people. Yet, in
some ways, that victory is only the beginning of a long
road ahead. The hard work of healing the wounds left on
Iraqi society has just begun. The Iraqi Government and
people must now turn their attention to reconciliation
and to building an Iraqi State that represents all Iraqis.
Protecting and supporting survivors should be at the
centre of its work, as well as the importance of ensuring
evidence-based and witness-based investigation. Of
course, that will take political courage and cooperation.
We, the Council, must again stand with the Iraqi people
in that critical phase and not let crimes against humanity
happen again in the future.
Secondly, States have the primary responsibility
to protect all communities within their borders from
mass atrocity crimes. Indonesia continues to hold the
view that the primary jurisdiction for holding those
responsible for the atrocities committed within Iraqi
borders must lie with the Iraqi national authorities.
Therefore, we urge the Investigative Team to operate
in full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its
jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory.
Fighting impunity is an urgent and imperative matter,
but we need to be fully aware that it must also respect
the principle of the sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of States. In that regard, I believe that the
international community should continue to support
Iraq in order to strengthen its judicial system and law
enforcement capabilities. That is a very crucial point.
Thirdly, cooperation and collaboration with all
relevant stakeholders are crucial. We believe that the
ability of the Investigative Team to successfully fulfil
its mandate will depend also on its ability to maintain
the trust and support not only of the Government of Iraq
but also of the people of Iraq, including relevant civil
society organizations and local community leaders.
Reflecting on that principle, we fully support the
efforts of the Investigative Team to engage and develop
relations with a broad range of religious community
groups, as reflected in the report (see S/2019/407).
We would further like the Team to engage Iraqi
national professional personnel. I also concur with the
point raised by my colleague from Côte d’Ivoire on
including women in that regard, because, at the end of
the day, they are among those who are severely affected.
Moreover, there is a need to cooperate with the United

19-216129/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

15/07/2019

Nations on the ground. Such coordination has always
been the most important aspect.

barbaric crimes that were committed by ISIL/Da’esh to
go without accountability.

Lastly, as the Team has now been able to begin
the collection of evidentiary material, a crucial phase
of its activities, allow me to close by once again
offering Indonesia’s support for the work of the Team
and expressing our hope that the noble intentions of
UNITAD will contribute to healing the wounds of the
many survivors and to healing the pain of the past.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating South
Africa’s support for the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), whose important,
multifaceted work is providing hope in assisting the
rebuilding of Iraq and healing its wounds. We encourage
all stakeholders to continue to support and engage with
the efforts initiated by UNAMI to achieve effective
post-conflict reconstruction and sustainable peace in
Iraq, including by supporting the invaluable work that
UNITAD is doing in its respective role.

Mr. Davies (South Africa): We thank the Special
Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
Mr. Khan, for his informative briefing on the work
of the Team, and commend him and his team on the
progress achieved in their challenging task.
As experience has taught us in South Africa,
accountability, truth and justice are fundamentally
important to the process of healing. We therefore
welcome the important work that UNITAD is engaged
in, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), in supporting
Iraqi domestic efforts in seeking accountability for
the grave crimes committed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the country, as well as
its broader role in promoting accountability for ISIL/
Da’esh crimes internationally.
UNITAD’s role as an impartial, independent and
credible body, operating within the Charter of the United
Nations, employing United Nations best practices,
in line with relevant international law, including
international human rights law, is vital in assisting the
uncovering of the atrocities that have been committed
and bringing their perpetrators to justice. UNITAD’s
painstaking efforts to collect and preserve various
forms of evidence are particularly important, and it is
to be commended for the important progress that it has
made in that regard, under difficult circumstances.
South Africa notes with concern the recent report
of the Special Adviser (see S/2019/407), which indicates
that despite the setbacks that it has suffered, ISIL/
Da’esh remains a pervasive threat in Iraq. That threat
must be addressed, as the continued presence of ISIL
has ramifications, not only for the destabilization of
Iraq but also for the entire region. UNITAD’s role is
invaluable in sending a clear and unequivocal message
that the international community, under the leadership
of the United Nations, will not sit idly by and allow the
10/18

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Khan for his second briefing
to the Security Council on the report of the Special
Adviser (see S/2019/407).
The work of the Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is an important
element of the counter-terrorism strategy in the Middle
East. The Middle East region remains a stronghold
for the leadership of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and the group continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security.
The question of holding accountable those who
fought for and assisted ISIL must be addressed as
effectively as possible. We understand from the report
and following the recent meeting between Mr. Khan
and members of the Security Council in Baghdad that
the mission of the Special Adviser enjoys the support
of the Iraqi authorities and the country’s multireligious
society, which is extremely important.
The collection, analysis and transfer of evidence to
the courts must be carried out in strict accordance with
international law and in full respect for sovereignty of
the States where ISIL committed its crimes. We believe
that the main role in bringing terrorists to justice
remains the responsibility of the Governments of the
States that were affected by the atrocities committed.
That is precisely the principle that underpins resolution
2379 (2017), which established the Investigative Team.
We note with satisfaction that the Team has begun
its practical work on the ground and has been closely
documenting evidence in Iraq. We expect that the Iraqi
judicial system will soon start to use that data, inter
alia, to instigate terrorist-specific proceedings. At the
same time, it would likely be wrong to foist all the
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8573

issues regarding conducting judicial proceedings solely
on Iraq or other countries of the region.

and it is crucial that the victims and survivors of all
origins receive equal access to justice.

In that regard, we are concerned about the unresolved
problems related to the repatriation of foreign terrorist
fighters to their countries of origin and holding them
to account. Various alternative ideas for the relevant
courts have been discussed, although sometimes they
are quite utopian in nature. We are sure that Mr. Khan
may prove to be a very helpful at a certain point in
time in many discussion platforms. We urge him to not
succumb to political or legal temptations and strictly
follow his core mandate, as established in resolution
2379 (2017), which is to support national efforts to
prosecute ISIL members for the most serious crimes
under international law that were committed in Iraq.

In April, under the German presidency, the Council
adopted resolution 2467 (2019), which, for the first time,
enshrined within the Council’s documents a survivorcentred approach to preventing and responding to
conflict-related sexual violence. Such a survivorcentred approach is, of course, needed in addressing
other crimes as well. Like other Council members, we
therefore commend the Special Adviser and his team
for paying specific attention to maintaining close
relations with survivors, local communities, religious
leaders and the Iraqi authorities.

The Russian delegation supported the establishment
of the Team in 2017. Its first steps were encouraging.
We call on the Team to continue its hard work on the
basis of the principles of impartiality and transparency.
We are convinced that only in that way will the Team’s
work make a worthy contribution to the efforts to bring
ISIL terrorists to justice.
Mr. Glossner (Germany): I thank the Special
Adviser and his team for their tireless efforts.
Germany fully supports the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) and commends the important
progress that has been made and outlined by the Special
Adviser today.
By unanimously adopting resolution 2379 (2017),
the Security Council affirmed the importance of
ensuring accountability in the post-conflict setting of
Iraq, but, more broadly, it also shed light on the wider
global need for accountability for criminal acts, whether
they are committed by States or non-State actors.
We also welcome the support provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to the
work of UNITAD, in accordance with resolution 2470
(2019). UNITAD and UNAMI, in our view, share some
key similar objectives: the promotion of accountability,
the protection of human rights and the strengthening of
the rule of law in Iraq.
Germany commends the Special Adviser and his
team for the comprehensive approach that they are
taking to their mandate and investigations. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its accomplices
have assaulted many different groups and individuals,

We also welcome the strong working relationship of
UNITAD with international and regional organizations
and civil society. In that regard, I would like to
especially mention the collaboration that UNITAD
has developed with the International Commission on
Missing Persons and the Commission for International
Justice and Accountability. Those organizations have
been on the ground since the very beginning and have
conducted extremely important work.
ISIL’s heinous crimes and the suffering it has
caused do not stop at the Iraqi border. We therefore
further encourage the Special Adviser to look for
additional forms of transnational cooperation in the
investigations. The victims and survivors of ISIL’s
crimes must have access to justice everywhere, which
is why Germany welcomes the exchange of information
and possible support for the prosecution of ISIL crimes
in other national jurisdictions through mutual legal
assistance. In that regard, Germany thanks the Special
Adviser for the exchanges he has had with the German
authorities on possible ways of cooperation with regard
to the Team’s ongoing investigations. Like others,
Germany actively supports the work of UNITAD.
As the Special Adviser mentioned initially, we have
dispatched experienced personnel to the Investigative
Team, and we are looking into identifying further areas
of support.
Let me also add a few words on the cooperation
between UNITAD and Iraq. We welcome the
commitment of the Iraqi Government to pursue justice
and accountability. Justice served with due process
and in accordance with international standards is
indispensable for national reconciliation and a peaceful
and stable future, as outlined by my South African
colleague. The terms of reference worked out with

19-2161211/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

the Special Adviser and the establishment of the Iraqi
Steering Committee allow for effective cooperation. It
is clear — and the Special Adviser emphasized this point
at the beginning — that independence and impartiality
are essential for the Team’s credibility going forward.
Cooperation with UNITAD holds significant
potential to strengthen the rule of law within the Iraqi
judicial system. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points. First, we welcome the steps taken towards
agreements between the Investigative Team and the
Iraqi national authorities in order to facilitate the
transmission of relevant evidentiary material to the
Team. Secondly, we also deem it important that Iraq
incorporate provisions on international crimes in its
national criminal law. Thirdly, evidence gathered
by the Investigative Team must be used only in
prosecutions that comply with international legal
standards, which disqualifies the use of such evidence
if capital punishment cannot be excluded. In that
regard, Germany takes note of the relevant report of the
Secretary-General (A/73/253) that outlines the policy
prohibiting international accountability mechanisms
from sharing evidence for use in the context of criminal
proceedings in which the death penalty could be
imposed or carried out.
Finally, we call on the Iraqi Government to
strengthen the rule of law in judicial proceedings
against possible ISIL perpetrators. Such proceedings
must allow for fair and impartial procedures and
effective and timely judicial review, including access
to legal assistance.
The Security Council can count on Germany’s
support for UNITAD and for the fight against impunity.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Adviser Karim Khan for his briefing.
The Security Council recently visited Iraq and
witnessed the proper responses by the Government
and the people of Iraq to the internal and external
challenges they face, their victory over terrorism,
the gradual restoration of security and stability and
the steady progress in rebuilding the economy. China
commends these efforts.
The international community should continue
its strong support for the Iraqi Government in
maintaining security and stability, achieving inclusion
and reconciliation, promoting economic development,
improving people’s living standards and accelerating
12/18

15/07/2019

the reconstruction process. At the same time, we should
not lose sight of the fact that the fight against terrorism
is far from over, with the lingering threat of remnant
terrorist forces, or that it is still necessary to deal with
large numbers of foreign terrorist fighters and their
families remaining in Iraq. Support from all parties is
urgently needed.
China appreciates the tireless efforts and the
tremendous sacrifices made by the people and the
Government of Iraq in the fight against terrorism
and supports Iraq in bringing terrorists to justice in
accordance with the relevant domestic law. China has
taken note of the second report (see S/2019/407) of
the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD). We welcome the work of
the Investigative Team in developing an investigative
strategy, setting up core working groups, conducting
field investigations and collecting and analysing
relevant evidence. We support the Investigative Team
in setting priorities for its work in the light of the
actual situation on the ground and acknowledge the
efforts and progress made by the Team. It is our hope
that the Team will continue its close communication
with the Iraqi Government and the relevant parties and
cooperate with the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and other stakeholders to play an active role in
holding terrorists accountable and curbing the return
and spread of terrorist forces and their activities.
China commends the Investigative Team’s good
cooperation with the Iraqi Government and believes
that the support of the Iraqi Government and the trust
of the people are of great significance in the Team’s
fulfilling its mandate and effectively responding to
challenges. The Team should continue to abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, earnestly implement its mandate in strict
accordance with Security Council resolutions and its
terms of reference and, while actively and effectively
carrying out its work, fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty
and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on its
territory. We welcome the appointment by the Iraqi
Government of Ms. Al-Khafaji to join the Investigative
Team and look forward to the Team’s early completion
of the recruitment of other Iraqi nationals to help
strengthen the capacity of the Iraqi Government to hold
terrorist organizations accountable.
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind.
Its impact transcends national borders. As such, it is
hard for any country to deal with it alone. Faced with
this challenge, the international community should be
committed to applying a unified standard and adopting
a zero-tolerance and non-discriminatory approach to
resolutely fighting terrorism. As a victim of terrorism
and an important member of the international counterterrorism front, China stands ready to continue to work
with the international community for new progress in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
delegations in thanking Mr. Khan for his report (see
S/2019/407) and in expressing our deep appreciation for
his work and that of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD)
We have said it many times in this Chamber but
let me also reiterate that there is no peace without
justice and that the key element to providing justice
is accountability. As Mr. Khan rightly pointed out,
accountability must be based on solid evidence, which
is why we greatly welcome the contribution of the
Special Adviser and his Team to accountability efforts
by collecting, preserving and storing evidence of
acts that could amount to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide committed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq. I cannot agree
more with Mr. Khan that ISIL must be held accountable
for those atrocity crimes. We also welcome in particular
the advances in operationalizing the Team’s mandate,
including the development of the investigative strategy,
and the activities undertaken by UNITAD in line with
the investigative priorities, which include the excavation
of 12 mass grave sites.
The establishment of trust and safeguarding
cooperation with the Government of Iraq and the
authorities of a number of other States, as well as
Iraqi regional and local authorities and representatives
of different parts of society, including survivors, is
equally commendable. We are greatly pleased to hear
from Mr. Khan himself in the Chamber today about
the exemplary cooperation UNITAD and he personally
enjoy with Iraqi Government authorities. That kind
of cooperation demonstrates the will, and even the
commitment, of the Iraqi Government to provide justice
and accountability. It is also a kind of sine qua non of
reconciliation within Iraqi society. We look forward to

S/PV. 8573

the development of such cooperation further increasing
the Team’s operational capabilities and progress in its
substantive work in line with its mandate. We call on all
stakeholders to support UNITAD and provide it with
any assistance it may need.
The efforts to ensure geographic diversity and
gender, ethnic and religious balance in appointing
the Iraqi members of the Investigative Team deserve
recognition. The Team’s composition should reflect the
diversity of the Iraqi population, and thereby increase
the its capabilities in collecting evidence in various
communities affected by Da’esh. In that context, like
many other delegations, we welcome Special Adviser’s
appointment of Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji as Chief
of National Engagement and Support. We encourage
efforts to integrate Iraqi members into the Team. We
also encourage States Members of the United Nations
to consider offering expert personnel support.
Delivering meaningful justice to the victims of
the crimes of Da’esh/ISIL and their relatives requires
independent, credible investigations and fair trials. It
entails evidential and material collection and analysis
in accordance with the highest international standards.
In that context, the considerable progress achieved
by UNITAD with regard to the establishment of
frameworks for the collection and storage of forensic
material and documentary, digital and testimonial
evidence, as well as for protecting witnesses, should be
noted. I thank Mr. Khan for his updates. Great progress
has been made in that regard.
We commend the victim-centred approach adopted
by UNITAD, as highlighted by Mr. Khan, including
the steps taken to ensure that victims of sexual and
gender-based crimes in particular are provided with
adequate support.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Poland fully
supports UNITAD, its impartiality and independence.
While welcoming the cooperation to date by different
stakeholders with the Special Adviser and the
Investigative Team, we call for further development in
that regard. Allow me also to once again acknowledge
the crucial contribution of the Special Adviser and the
Investigative Team to promoting accountability and
reconciliation in Iraq. We encourage them to continue
to effectively carry out their mission.
Last but not least, I concur with the words of
Mr. Khan that collecting the evidence will not mean the
end of UNITAD’s mission. The end of its mission will

19-2161213/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

be accomplished once justice has been provided for the
victims of the atrocities committed by ISIL and Da’esh.
Mrs. Charrier (France) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan for
his informative briefing. In just a few months, he has
set up a high-quality team of Iraqi and international
experts that also includes an equal place for women.
In that context, we welcome Ms. Salama Hasson
Al-Khafaji, who is sitting beside him today, and the
Iraqi Ambassador. That is a sign that the international
community and Iraq, in response to Iraq’s request to
the Security Council, are working hand in hand to fight
impunity for crimes committed by Da’esh.
France would like to thank Kuwait for having
organized, as part of its presidency, an exchange with
Mr. Khan during the Council’s visit to Iraq. That
enabled us to affirm on the ground our full support
for the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) two
years after the adoption of resolution 2379 (2017) and
to assess the challenges. Their work focuses today on
the crimes committed by Da’esh in Sinjar, Mosul and
Tikrit. That is a first step. Justice must be rendered for
all victims of the most serious crimes committed by
Da’esh throughout Iraqi territory. It is essential that
regional leaders and commanders be brought to justice.
We welcome the initial operational progress made
by the Team in the collection of digital documents and
testimonies, as well as the excavation of mass graves
in Kojo, in Sinjar, in March and April. The Team’s
meeting with the council of tribal leaders of Anbar in
June will contribute to deepening its close cooperation
with Iraqi society and its authorities. It is a step in the
right direction. We also encourage the Team to continue
its work independently. In that encouraging context,
France would like to convey three messages.
The first message is to UNITAD. It is important
that the Team continue to work with all actors: the
Iraqi authorities, local actors, victims groups and
non-governmental organizations, representatives of all
components of the Iraqi population, as well as Member
States. The United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), has a
key role to play in supporting the Iraqi authorities in
reforming governance and strengthening the judicial
system and the rule of law. I would like to commend
the cooperation between UNAMI and UNITAD,
14/18

15/07/2019

whose mandates in the fight against impunity are
complementary. We encourage them to continue along
those lines.
With regard to UNITAD sharing evidence with
national judicial authorities in proceedings, France
recalls that resolution 2379 (2017) and the Team’s terms
of reference provide that evidence sharing should be
carried out in accordance with United Nations best
practices and international standards. In that regard, we
recall that France is opposed to the death penalty in all
places and under all circumstances.
My second message is addressed to all those who
may have relevant information for them to provide
it to UNITAD. In particular, we encourage States to
commit to cooperating with UNITAD in an operational
manner and, if necessary, to conclude cooperation
agreements. France intends to fully cooperate with the
Special Adviser and his teams. We welcome the fact
that contacts have already been established between the
relevant French authorities.
My third message is to the Iraqi authorities. Since
the territorial victory over Da’esh, Iraq has fully
recognized the need to prosecute those responsible
for the most serious crimes committed on its territory.
We welcome the determination of the Iraqi authorities
to integrate the fight against impunity for all crimes,
regardless of the victims and the affiliation of the
perpetrators, into efforts to stabilize, rebuild and
reconcile all components of Iraqi society, which is key
to preventing any resurgence of Da’esh. We welcome
in particular the support of the Iraqi authorities and
the establishment of a Steering Committee appointed
by the Government to determine how the cooperation
should be carried out. It is important that Iraq continue
its close dialogue with UNAMI on strengthening the
rule of law. Finally, I would like to reiterate that France
will continue its efforts to combat impunity and support
the strengthening of the rule of law in Iraq. France is
providing multifaceted assistance for strengthening the
capacities of Iraqi institutions. We formalized that in
May with the signing of a joint Franco-Iraqi road map.
France supported resolution 2379 (2017) in 2017
because we stand side by side with Iraqis in the fight
against Da’esh in all its aspects — security, political and
judicial. UNITAD is now in place, which is an essential
first step. However, there are still many challenges, as
noted in the second UNITAD report (see S/2019/407).
The evidence is numerous, but scattered. It needs to
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8573

be used in proceedings, first and foremost in Iraq, that
respect fundamental guarantees. The Council must
support the Iraqi authorities’ efforts to address those
challenges. It is therefore important that UNITAD’s
work be developed and sustained. That is how the
objectives of justice and reconciliation established in
resolution 2379 (2017) can be achieved.

and gender-based violence. It is therefore important to
ensure that the investigation processes ensure protection
and confidentiality for both survivors and witnesses.
For that reason, we consider the witness protection
strategy established by the witness protection team, in
the context of gathering evidence from testimonies, to
be an excellent measure.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Khan for his
briefing and for the hard work he has been doing as
Special Adviser.

We also urge the Iraqi authorities and the
Investigative Team to pay attention to persons with
family ties to members of the Islamic State, including
women and children, and to prevent them from being
prosecuted for crimes perpetrated by their relatives.
Likewise, their protection and physical integrity and
respect for their rights must be ensured, particularly in
the case of minors, who under no circumstances should
be treated as adults, including when they have allegedly
been part of or collaborators with the terrorist group.
They should be treated as victims, not perpetrators.

First, we would like to welcome the fact that, in
its initial development, preparation and investigation
phase, the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has worked
constructively and in joint coordination with the Iraqi
authorities, local communities, the various agencies
of the United Nations system and States where the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has expanded its
operational capacities and activities. We hope that
that cooperation will continue and be strengthened
as the Team reaches its operational phase. Similarly,
we welcome the implementation plan established by
the Special Adviser, which outlines the three initial
specific areas for investigation.
We would also like to highlight the readiness and
cooperation shown by the Iraqi authorities with the
Investigative Team in implementing the provisions set
out in resolution 2379 (2017) in order to hold members of
the Islamic State accountable for the crimes committed,
including war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, to which the populations of Iraq and other
States were subjected. It is therefore imperative that the
Investigative Team function effectively so that those
unspeakable crimes do not go unpunished.
In that regard, we are pleased to note that the Team
undertook the first set of excavations of mass graves
in the village of Kojo in March and April in order to
exhume the remains of victims of the Islamic State.
We applaud the fact that that process is being carried
out with due regard for the customs and respect for the
religious rites of the people.
We are also pleased that special attention is being
paid to survivors of crimes of sexual and gender-based
violence. In that regard, we would like to emphasize
that the investigations should focus on survivors,
prioritizing their rights and needs as victims of sexual

On another front, the Investigative Team must
maintain its independence and impartiality, working in
collaboration with the United Nations mechanisms and
the Iraqi authorities and respecting their sovereignty
and jurisdiction, in accordance with the mandate of
resolution 2379 (2017), the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.
Finally, the dividends of justice will be determined
to a large extent by the regional and international
financial, legal and capacity-building support that Iraq
receives to strengthen its institutions, in particular
the judicial system. We therefore encourage the
international community to work together to that end.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to join previous
speakers in commending and thanking Mr. Karim
Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), for the comprehensive
and enlightening report (see S/2019/407) submitted
pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). We also welcome
the appointment of Ms. Al-Khafaji.
The delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
highlights the importance of resolution 2379 (2017) in
terms of judicial accountability for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is essential that those
responsible for the atrocity and mass crimes committed
by Da’esh during the period between June 2014 and
December 2017, in which it occupied, controlled and

19-2161215/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

operated with impunity in large areas of Iraq, committing
all kinds of crimes involving serious violations of
international human rights law, international criminal
law and international humanitarian law, all of which
constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, be held accountable.
The shocking and horrifying discovery of more
than 200 mass graves containing the remains of
thousands of men, women and children deserves no
less. We therefore welcome the establishment of the
Investigative Team and its efforts to implement the
original strategies for the complete fulfilment of its
mandate as well as the strategies that continue to be
implemented, specifically the field visits to the major
crime scenes in Iraq and the ongoing contact with the
national authorities, groups of survivors and civilian
and religious leaders in the country.
With regard to the gathering and analysis of
evidence, we also welcome the standard operating
procedures for the collection, handling, preservation
and storage of evidence and information management
tools, such as chain of custody forms, which are being
tested to ensure their probative value before a broad
range of national courts. It is important that the victims
feel that justice is being rendered so as to prevent a
sense of impunity.
We note the important contribution made by
Member States of expert personnel. In that regard, we
thank the Governments of Germany, Saudi Arabia,
Sweden and Turkey because we believe that a much
more effective team is thereby being formed with the
required number of staff.
Furthermore, we commend the Iraqi authorities as
well as the United Nations for continuing to enhance
their operational cooperation with the Investigative
Team. We hope that the activities of the Investigative
Team are conducted in an impartial and transparent
manner in full compliance with international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations.
In conclusion, our delegation wishes Mr. Khan and
his entire team much courage, success and determination
in the challenging and complex task entrusted to them
by the United Nations. At the same time, we assure him
of the support of the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea in his duties.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Karim
16/18

15/07/2019

Khan, Special Adviser, for his written report (see
S/2019/407) and for his very enlightening briefing to
us this morning.
In a context that remains difficult in terms of
security given the significant threat that Da’esh
continues to pose, the stability of Iraq is our priority
now more than ever. In order to rebuild a resilient
society on solid foundations, Belgium is convinced that
it is essential to fight against impunity for the atrocity
crimes committed there.
Da’esh is one of the main perpetrators of the
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law that took place in Iraq. In that context,
Belgium co-sponsored resolution 2379 (2017), which
established the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (see
S/PV.8052). On that occasion, the Council played its
part in ensuring that the necessary measures were
taken to combat impunity and promote respect for
international law — two objectives that contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security
Belgium commends the work done by Mr. Khan
since he assumed his functions almost a year ago. We
welcome the positive cooperation with local authorities,
which was highlighted during the Council’s recent field
mission to Iraq, as well as the contacts maintained
with all components of Iraqi society so as to garner
collective support for the Investigative Team. The work
carried out with regard to its operationalization, the
initial activities involved in the collection and analysis
of evidence and the discussions on the support it could
provide within the framework of national processes are
very encouraging.
We also noted with interest the consultations held
with the Iraqi authorities on ways to incorporate war
crimes, crimes against humanity and the crime of
genocide into domestic law, as well as on the possible
establishment of specialized bodies to prosecute their
perpetrators. That is in line with the efforts by Belgium
and other European countries to explore the viability
of the various possible avenues of international
cooperation to try foreign terrorist fighters.
My country expresses its full confidence in the
ability of Mr. Khan and his team to carry out their
mandate rigorously. I would like to highlight two issues
that are of particular importance to us.
19-21612

15/07/2019

Threats to international peace and security

First, with regard to sharing evidence, as an
independent and impartial United Nations mechanism,
the Investigative Team must ensure that it complies with
United Nations policies and good practices, as well as
international law. The aim is to follow the established
practice of the international tribunals and mechanisms
established by the United Nations, whether in the area
of procedural guarantees, the protection of victims and
witnesses or the non-application of the death penalty.
Secondly, in the context of capacity-building in
connection with applying international standards and
best practices in the area of justice, it is necessary that
all perpetrators of crimes, regardless of their affiliation,
be able to answer for their actions before Iraqi courts
and tribunals. To that end, in accordance with resolution
2379 (2017), Belgium will explore how it might share
its expertise and provide the Iraqi Government with the
necessary assistance.
It is in the light of those various objectives that
Belgium will continue to monitor the work of the
Investigative Team particularly closely during our term
on the Security Council. This mechanism represents an
immense hope for the many victims, and it is our duty
not to let them down.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We are grateful for the presentation of the second
report (see S/2019/407) by the Special Adviser and
Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
Mr. Karim Khan, following our meeting in Baghdad
in June organized under the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Security Council.
As one of the countries that co-sponsored resolution
2379 (2017), we reiterate our conviction that the work of
the Investigative Team is part of a plan, requested by the
Government of Iraq, not only to ensure accountability
for terrorist acts committed by Da’esh, but also to
contribute to reconciliation in the country. In that
regard, we reaffirm our support for the Investigative
Team to continue to operationalize its mandate in order
to carry out its work in an impartial, independent and
credible manner in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and relevant norms of international law,
including international human rights law, international

S/PV. 8573

humanitarian law and the policies and best practices of
the Organization.
We welcome the relationship of respect and
cooperation between the Investigative Team and the
Government of Iraq, as well as with the most diverse
sectors of Iraqi society, including survivors and local
communities, in order that their activities complement
the investigations conducted by the national authorities
of Iraq. We also highlight the special support provided
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq.
We recognize the importance of prioritizing
forensic analyses and exhumations, and we note with
interest the excavation carried out in March and April.
With regard to gathering evidence, which has only just
begun, although it is of particular importance to the Iraqi
authorities, we recognize the future potential of using
such evidence for the benefit of other States requesting
it, in line with the mandate of the Investigation Team.
Lastly, we stress the need to ensure that the
Investigative Team has the necessary resources at its
disposal to carry out its work.
In conclusion, despite the progress made in
combating the Islamic State both in Syria and Iraq, the
threat remains present and its influence has permeated
other spaces and taken on new traits. We therefore
reiterate our support for the Investigative Team, whose
success will foster the fight against impunity and the
deterrence of new crimes, while strengthening access
to justice and the rule of law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to I congratulate the Republic
of Peru on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also thank and express
our appreciation to the State of Kuwait for its able
leadership of the Council last month. As well, we thank
all Council members for their successful visit to Iraq at
the end of last month.
I thank Mr. Karim Khan, Special Adviser and Head
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, for his valuable briefing. I
commend him for his personal commitment to carrying
out his functions with diligence and determination,

19-2161217/18

S/PV.8573

Threats to international peace and security

including his intensive efforts in line with resolution
2379 (2017), the relevant terms of reference and the
highest international standards. I also commend the
high level of coordination between the Government of
Iraq and the Investigative Team in the appointment of
Deputy Head Al-Khafaji, who will provide legal and
judicial advice on Iraqi laws and legislation.
We look forward to completing the appointment
of Iraqi experts to strengthen the work of the Team
under domestic laws and legislation to guarantee
accountability and justice. The Government of Iraq
is committed to facilitating the work of the Team
by calling on all competent Government bodies to
cooperate with it and support its mandate to collect and
store evidence, while fully respecting Iraq’s sovereignty
and jurisdiction over crimes committed on its territory.
We emphasize that the work of the Investigative
Team must fully respect the sovereignty of Iraq and
its jurisdiction over its territory and people. Evidence
must be used in independent and fair legal criminal
proceedings conducted by Iraqi national courts, in line
with applicable international law. Iraqi authorities are
the main party in receipt of such evidence. Any other
use of such evidence must be in coordination with the
Iraqi Government and on a case-by-case basis.
In addition, the Iraqi Government seeks to
strengthen coordination with the Iraqi Kurdistan
Regional Government on the use of forensic evidence
collected from the scenes of crimes committed by
the Da’esh terrorist organization. We stress the need
to implement the mandate of the Investigative Team
related to the strengthening of Iraqi capacity. That is one
of the goals of the Iraqi Government — to consolidate
specialized national capacity in that regard. We also call
for efforts to be redoubled in order to provide technical
and substantive assistance to Iraq.

18/18

15/07/2019

The implementation of the Team’s mandate
requires strong partnerships with survivors and local
communities. We commend the Team’s engagement
with a large number of survivors of violent acts, such as
the survivors of the violence perpetrated by the Da’esh
terrorist organization/Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), as well as the witnesses of such violence
from all segments of Iraqi society, in areas overrun,
occupied and controlled by that terrorist organization.
We welcome the field visits conducted by Mr. Khan to
those areas, as well as his meetings with religious and
tribal leaders and Government officials.
Juveniles’ Law No. 11 was enacted in 1962, based
on the best and most modern practices in the care,
protection and treatment of minors. The law was
updated and adapted to respond to Iraq’s societal needs
in the current circumstances, in order to build a modern
society and remove any gaps and inconsistencies in
the law. Iraq has also established juvenile courts in
all parts of the country. The law is flexible and allows
those courts to take the necessary decisions in line with
the needs of juvenile delinquents, including alternative
decisions based on their situation.
In in conclusion, we stress the importance of full
coordination and cooperation between the Government
of Iraq and the Investigative Team, full respect for
the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Iraq and the use of
evidence to complement the investigations conducted
by the competent Iraqi authorities into crimes
committed by the ISIL/Da’esh terrorist organization.
Such evidence must be used as part of independent
and fair legal criminal proceedings conducted by
competent Iraqi courts. We urge the international
community to fully support the Investigative Team and
promote accountability for the crimes against humanity
committed by ISIL/Da’esh terrorists.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

19-21612
