General Assembly-Twtmty-second Sesnot1

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
llffll

2263 (XXII)

Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
(A/6880) .............................. · · ·. · .. · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
World social situation (A/695'1:) ............................... .

2293 (XXII)
2294 (XXII) Continuation of the Office of the United Nations High CommiHioner
for Refugees (A/6936) ....................................... .
2295 (XXII) Elimination of all forms of religious intolerance (A/6934) ..... .
2331 (XXII) Measures to be taken against nazism and racial intolerance (A/6992)
2332 (XXII) Measures for the speedy implementation of international instruments
against racial discrimination (A/6992) ........................ .
2333 (XXII) Creation of the post of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (A/700fJ) ..................................... .
2334 (XXII) Capital punishment (A/7007) ................................... .
2335 (XXII) United Nations Children's Fund (A/7003) ............ .
2336 (XXII) Freedom of information (A/6997) ............................... .
2337 (XXII) Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the Optional Protoool to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (A/7005) ........................... .
2338 (XXII) Question of the -punishment of war criminals and of persoos· who
have committed crimes against humanity (A/69Pn and A/L.543/
Rev.l) ............................................. .
2339 (XXII) International Year for Human Rights (A/7008) ..... .

DIii• t1I

ado'"°"

Pep

53
49

7 November 1967
11 December 1967

35
37

so

11 December 1967

54
55 (c)

11 December 1967
18 December 1967

38
38
39

55 (d)

18 December 1967

39

61
62
12
59

18 December 1967
18 December 1967
18 December 1967
18 December 1967

40
40
40
40

57

18 December 1967

41

60
58

18 December 1967
18 December 1967

41
42

51
52

SS

18 December 1967
18 December 1967
18 December 1967

43
43
43

56

18 December 1967

43

Otlaer decbiona
Housing, b!lllding and planning
Town twinning as a means of international co-operation ....................... .
Elimination of all forms of racial discrimination .............................. .
Question of the violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
policies of racial discrimination and segregation and of apartheid, in all countrie!, ~th particular reference to colonial and other dependent countries and
terr1tor1es . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2263 (XXII). Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women

Taking into account the resolutions, declarations,
conventions and recommendations of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies designed to eliminate all forms of discrimination and to promote equal
rights for men and women,
Concerned that, despite the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenants on Human Rights and
other instruments of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and despite the progress made in the
matter of equality of rights, there continues to exist
considerable discrimination against women,
Considering that discrimination against women is
incompatible with human dignity and with the welfare
o_f the family and of society, prevents their particiF.t10n, on equal terms with men, in the political, social,

The General Assembly,
Considering that the peoples of the United Nations
have, in the Charter, reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human • rights, in the dignity and worth of
the human person and in the equal rights of men and
women,
Considering that the Universal Declaration on Human Rights asserts the principle of non-discrimination
and proclaims that all human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth therein,
without distinction of any kind, including any distinction as to sex,
35

36

General AHembly-Twenty-Ae~ond Se11.ion

economic and cultural life of their countries and is an
obstacle to the full development of the potentialities
of women in the service of their countries and of
humanity,
Bearing in mind the great contribution made by
women to social, political, economic and cultural life
and the part they play in the family and particularly in
the rearing of children,
Convinced that the full and complete development
of a country, the welfare of the world and the cause
of peace require the maximum participation of women
as well as men in all fields,
Considering that it is necessary to ensure the universal recognition in law and in fact of the principle
of equality of men and women,
Solemnly proclaims this Declaration :

Article 1
Discrimination against women, denying or limiting
as it does their equality of rights with men, is fundamentally unjust and constitutes an offence against
human dignity.
Article 2
All appropriate measures shall be taken to abolish
existing laws, customs, regulations and practices which
are discriminatory against women, and to establish
adequate legal protection for equal rights of men and
women, in particular:
(a) The principle of equality of rights shall be
embodied in the constitution or otherwise guaranteed
by law;
(b) The international instruments of the United
Nations and the specialized agencies relating to the
elimination of discrimination against women shall be
ratified or acceded to and fully implemented as soon
as practicable.
Article 3
All appropriate measures shall be taken to educate
public opinion and to direct national aspirations towards the eradication of prejudice and the abolition
of customary and all other practices which are based
on the idea of the inferiority of women.
Article 4
All appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure
to women on equal terms with men, without any
discrimination :
(a) The right to vote in all elections and be eligible
for election to all publicly elected bodies ;
( b) The right to vote in all public referenda ;
( c) The right to hold public office and to exercise
all public functions.
Such rights shall be guaranteed by legislation.
Article 5
Women shall have the same rights as men to acquire,
change or retain their nationality. Marriage to an alien
shall not automatically affect the nationality of the
wife either by rendering her stateless or by forcing
upon her the nationality of her husband.
Article 6
1. Without prejudice to the safeguarding of the
unity and the harmony of the family, which remains the

basic unit of any society, all appropriate measures,
particularly legislative measures, shall be taken to
ensure to women, married or unmarried, equal rights
with men in the field of civil law, and in particular:
(a) The right to acquire, administer, enjoy, dispose
of and inherit property, including property acquired
during marriage ;
( b) The right to equality in legal capacity and the
exercise thereof;
( c) The same rights as men with regard to the law
on the movement of persons.
2. All appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure
the principle of equality of status of the husband and
wife, and in particular :
(a) Women shall have the same right as men to
free choice of a spouse and to enter into marriage
only with their free and full consent ;
( b) Women shall have equal rights with men during
marriage and at its dissolution. In all cases the interest
of the children shall be paramount ;
( c) Parents shall have equal rights and duties in
matters relating to their children. In all cases the
interest of the children shall be paramount.
3. Child marriage and the betrothal of young girls
before puberty shall be prohibited, and effective action,
including legislation, shall be taken to specify a minimum age for marriage and to make the registration of
marriages in an official registry compulsory.

Article 7
All provisions of penal codes which constitute discrimination against women shall be repealed.
Article 8
All appropriate measures, inch ,ding legislation, shall
be taken to combat all forms of traffic in women and
exploitation of prostitution of women.
Article 9
All appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure to
girls and women, married or unmarried, equal rights
with men in education at all levels, and in particular :
(a) Equal conditions of access to, and study in,
educational institutions of all types, including universities and vocational, technical and professional schools;
( b) The same choice of curricula, the same examinations, teaching staff with qualifications of the same
standard, and school premises and equipment of the
same quality, whether the institutions are co-educational
or not;
( c) Equal opportunities to benefit from scholarships
and other study grants;
( d) Equal opportunities for access to programmes
of continuing education, including adult literacy programmes;
( e) Access to educational information to help in
ensuring the health and well-being of families.
Article 10
1. All appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure

to w~men, married or unmarried, equal rights with
men m the field of economic and social life, and in
particular :

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) The right, without discrimination on grounds
of marital status or any other grounds, to receive
vocational training, to work, to free choice of profession and employment, and to professional and vocational advancement ;
( b) The right to equal remuneration with men and
to equality of treatment in respect of work of equal
value;
(c) The right to leave with pay, retirement privileges and provision for security in respect of unemployment, sickness, old age or other incapacity to work ;
( d) The right to receive family allowances on equal
terms with men.
2. In order to prevent discrimination against women
on account of marriag~ or maternity and to ensure their
effective right to work, measures shall be taken to
prevent their dismissal in the event of marriage or
maternity and to provide paid maternity leave, with the
guarantee of returning to former employment, and to
provide the necessary social services, including childcare facilities.
3. Measures taken to protect women in certain types
of work, for reasons inherent in their physical nature,
shall not be regarded as discriminatory.
Article 11
1. The principle of equality of rights of men and
women demands implementation in all States in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.
2. Governments, non-governmental organizations
and individuals are urged, therefore, to do all in their
power to promote the implementation of the principles
contained in this Declaration.
1597th plenary meeting,
7 November 1967.

2293 (XXII). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963, 2035 (XX) of 7 December 1965 and 2215
(XXI) of 19 December 1966,
Emphasizing the responsibilities assumed by Member
States under the Charter ,of the United Nations for
international co-operation in the solution of international social and economic problems,
Noting with deep concern that, despite the adoption
of its resolutions 1522 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and
1711 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and despite efforts
in many countries of the world, the social situation
remains unsatisfactory owing to factors which include
inadequate contribution, which up to now remain
below the recommended target,
Noting also the need for continuing improyement
in the co-ordination of technical assistance in the social
field and the importance of concentrating such assistance
systematically on the priority needs of the developing
countries through a fully co-ordinated programme of
assistance to each country,
Convinced that the implementation of the main
objectives and principles of the social programme of
the United Nations set forth in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1139 (XLI) of 29 July 1966, on

17

the basis of clearly defined concepts of social development, is of the utmost importance to the solution of
the basic social problems,
Recognizing the interdependence of the economic
and social aspects of development and the fact that,
while national efforts are ·being intensified, a significant
expansion of international assistance for development
is required for the improvement of the world social
situation,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
1227 (XLII) of 6 June 1967, which invited the Commission for Social Development to make recommendations on ways of strengthening the operational
programmes of the United Nations system in the social
field, in order to enable these programmes to play their
full role in promoting social development in the immediate years ahead and during the forthcoming decade,
Convinced also that the consideration every three
years of the reports on the world social situation
reflecting the over-all social situation and trends in
different regions of the world and in countries with
differing economic and social systems, as well as the
elaboration of the declaration on social development
as decided by General Assembly resolution 2215
(XXI), will substantially influence the comprehensive
approach to the problems of social development and
facilitate the continuing process of improvement of the
United Nations programmes in the social field,
1. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council,
the Commission for Social Development and the
Secretary-General to continue the implementation of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1139 (XLI),
taking into account the urgency of determining clearly
the concepts and targets of social development and
also the necessity for the concentration of efforts on
priorities and on the use of the most effective methods
contained in that resolution ;
2. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Committee for Development Planning to
take fully into account the role of social development
in accelerating the attainment of the goals of development of nations, particularly in the context of the
preparations for the decade following the current United
Nations Development Decade;
3. Appeals to all Member States, and in particular
the economically advanced States, to respond to the
Secretary-General's appeal for a significant expanc;ion
of international assistance for development, which will
contribute to the improvement of the world social sihtation, in order to maximize the success of the decade
following the current United Nations Development
Decade;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to exert all
appropriate efforts in order that the needs of developing
countries for United Nations assistance in social development, as reflected in requests by Governments, are
met as effectively as possible;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
next report on the world social situation to the General
Assembly at its twenty-third session, together with a
separate report consisting of conclusions and suggestions directed towards the realization of substantial
progress in the implementation of the prov.rammes in
the social field, taking into account the comments of
the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social Council thereon;
6. Notes with appreciation the progress achieved
hy the Commission for Social Development in the
