S/PV.9016

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9016

th meeting
Wednesday, 13 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Mr. Kariuki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Parga Cintra
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Accountability as prevention
Ending cycles of sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 5 April 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2022/293)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31682 (E)
*2231682*

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Accountability as prevention
Ending cycles of sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 5 April 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/293)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Morocco, Nepal, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Sierra Leone, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
Ukraine and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Nadia
Murad, Nobel Peace Prize laureate and United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime Goodwill Ambassador;
Ms. Mariana Karkoutly, co-founder of Huquqyat; and
Ms. Hilina Berhanu, civil society briefer.

13/04/2022

It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/272, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, and document S/2022/293, which contains
the text of a letter dated 5 April 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I would like to begin my remarks today
with a question that should be on the mind of every
member of the Council: What do the 10 resolutions on
women and peace and security — five of which are
squarely on preventing and addressing conflict-related
sexual violence — mean right now for a woman in
Ukraine, Afghanistan, Myanmar or Tigray?
Every new wave of warfare brings with it a
rising tide of human tragedy, including new waves
of war’s oldest, most silenced and least condemned
crime, and yet the promise expressed by the Council
in its resolutions is prevention. They represent a
commitment to bringing all tools to bear to break the
seemingly endless cycles of sexual violence, impunity
and revenge in order to save succeeding generations
from that scourge. They articulate the elements of
an accountability regime to influence the conduct of
perpetrators and potential perpetrators.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, and
Mr. Michal Miarka, Head of the NATO Liaison Office
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

In that respect, I would like to sincerely appreciate
the leadership of the United Kingdom in convening
this debate on accountability as prevention. I thank
Lord Ahmad and the United Kingdom’s Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict initiative for shining and
sustaining a spotlight on that atrocity during dark and
difficult times. I warmly welcome the civil society
briefers from Syria and Ethiopia, as well as Iraqi
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ms. Nadia Murad. The
lived experience of survivors and directly affected
communities must guide our global search for solutions.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in that regard.

We meet at a time of great global turbulence,
marked my multiple cascading crises. When the
pandemic emptied this Chamber over two years ago, the
Secretary-General called for a global ceasefire in order
to defeat the common enemy of disease. The pandemic

2/36

22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

was meant to usher in a paradigm shift — to silence the
guns and amplify the voices of women, caregivers and
peacebuilders; to deepen investment in public welfare,
rather than the instruments of warfare. Instead, we
have seen increased militarization, including an
epidemic of coups that have turned back the clock on
women’s rights.
New crises have multiplied even as entrenched wars
march on, exacerbating the challenge of shrinking — in
some cases, closing — of public space, manifest in
rising reprisals against women human-rights defenders,
activists and journalists, who risk their lives to bring
these issues to the attention of the world. Reprisals
have been used against front-line actors working to
end sexual violence and deliver life-saving services;
and sexual violence itself has been used as a tool of
reprisals and intimidation, coupled with misogynistic
hate speech, including online. That affects the wider
political climate, when those who should be praised for
their courage are, instead, persecuted.
In virtual meetings over many months on many
screens, we endeavoured to ensure that survivors
on war-time rape would not be forgotten in the long
shadow cast by the coronavirus disease. Today, as the
world watches, transfixed by the horrors unfolding in
Ukraine, with its wider ripple effects on global stability,
other crises continue to escalate behind the scenes. The
bandwidth of our global attention economy is limited.
As the Secretary-General has rightly stated, the world
is too small for so many hotspots. We must reassure all
populations at risk that they are not forgotten and that
international law is not an empty promise.
In my public statements on Ukraine, I have urged
all parties to the conflict to ensure the protection of
women and girls from sexual violence, trafficking
and exploitation, including those displaced internally
and across borders, following the fastest population
flight this century. I have expressed grave concern
about the mounting allegation of sexual violence
and called for swift and rigorous investigations in
order to ensure accountability as a central aspect of
deterrence, prevention and non-repetition. The failure
to acknowledge and investigate past atrocities is the
surest sign that violations will continue unabated.
All the warning signs are flashing red and yet,
essential civilian infrastructure has been reduced to
rubble and ruin. Gender-based violence and reproductive
health services are least available just when they are

S/PV.9016

needed most. We do not need hard data for a scaled-up
humanitarian response. We do not need hard data for
all parties to ensure zero-tolerance for sexual violence.
The harrowing personal testimonies and pictures seen
around the world, including of rape at gunpoint and
rape in front of family members, are a call to action.
The report before us today (S/2022/272) exposes
painful human stories — all of which cry out for justice
and redress.
In northern Ethiopia, a young woman was taken
to an Eritrean Defence Forces camp where 27 soldiers
raped her, as a result of which she contracted HIV. An
elderly visually impaired woman was shot by soldiers
after being detained for three days while her daughter
was raped by members of the Ethiopian National
Defence Forces in an adjacent room. An adolescent boy
was raped in Himora. He later committed suicide.
There is also the case of a woman and two girls,
whose discarded bodies were found days after their
kidnapping and rape by armed elements in the Central
African Republic, where sexual violence has doubled
over the past year, particularly against displaced
populations, who are at risk of being forgotten victims
of a forgotten war.
Likewise, the plight of more than 900,000 Rohingya
refugees in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, has become a
crisis within a crisis following the military takeover of
Myanmar by the Tatmadaw. This year’s report includes
the tragic case of two women subjected to gang rape by
Tatmadaw soldiers in Chin state, resulting in unwanted
pregnancies in both cases.
There is also the case of a woman allegedly raped
at gunpoint by an officer of the Puntland Police Force
in Somalia — a context where abduction, rape and
forced marriage are rampant, while legislative reform
to address those crimes has been stalled since 2018.
In Colombia, cases of sexual violence committed
against women ex-combatants and members of their
families were also documented.
In Afghanistan, professional women, including in
the security sector, have been targeted for their work
to address sexual violence, with a female police officer
who was eight-months pregnant brutally tortured and
killed in Ghor province.

22-316823/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

Thousands of civilians abducted by Da’esh in Iraq
and Syria between 2014 and 2017 remain in captivity,
including victims of forced marriage and sexual slavery.
In Yemen, harmful social norms, exacerbated by
seven years of armed conflict, can result in a victim
being killed for reporting rape, which persists in
detention facilities and displacement settings.
In each of those contexts, we see the emboldening
effects of impunity. Indeed, the gap between
commitments and compliance, resolutions and reality,
is evident on every page of the annual report. Over the
past year, sexual violence continued to be committed
as a tactic of war, torture, terrorism and political
repression. The report covers 18 country situations
and documents 3,293 United Nations-verified cases
of conflict-related sexual violence committed in 2021,
representing a significant increase of some 800 cases,
compared with 2020. Once again, the highest number
of incidents was recorded in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with 1,016 cases. The vast majority of
incidents — 97 per cent — targeted women and girls.
There were also 83 cases recorded against men and
boys, with the majority occurring in detention settings,
and 12 verified cases targeting lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer and intersex individuals.
The report demonstrates how intersecting forms of
inequality, based on ethnic identity, political affiliation,
age, disability, sexual orientation and gender identity,
income and migratory status increase the risks faced
by diverse individuals, in a context of historical power
imbalances, which are structural and systemic. While
the report conveys the severity of verified incidents, no
report can capture the full scale and prevalence of this
chronically underreported, historically hidden crime.
Indeed, survivors continue to be silenced by trauma,
pain and despair, as well as by stigma, insecurity and
the paucity of service provision. There is a relationship
between the individual silence and the official silence:
survivors cannot be expected to denounce what the
State itself denies. When perpetrators walk free, the
survivors walk in fear, carrying the burden of ostracism
and shame.
The central insight of this year’s report is the need
to foster a protective environment that inhibits sexual
violence in the first instance and enables safe reporting
and response. Those are not isolated incidents. They
do not occur in a vacuum. Today, we know more
than ever before about the security dynamics that
4/36

13/04/2022

cause such crimes to occur and reoccur, namely, mass
population, displacement, the collapse of the rule of
law, decimated infrastructure and institutions, rising
violent extremism and hostilities waged in proximity to
civilian population centres.
It is also starkly evident across the world that
lawlessness and impunity are tantamount to license to
rape. We are aware of the visible drivers, such as arms
proliferation, and the invisible drivers, such as genderbased discrimination. We know the context in which
sexual violence is concentrated, namely, in displacement
and detention at checkpoints, on military bases and
in rural areas where women undertake livelihood
activities. And we know that socioeconomically
marginalized women in areas beyond the reach of law
institutions are at the great greatest risk.
Prosecution is also a form of prevention and can help
convert the centuries-old culture of impunity for such
crimes into a culture of deterrence. Whereas impunity
normalizes violence, justice reinforces global norms. It
is time to move from visibility to accountability and
to ensure that today’s documentation translates into
tomorrow’s prosecutions. The prohibition on sexual
violence is clear and categorical, yet norms have no
power unless they are known. Every member of the
Council can lead the way in reflecting that prohibition
in their military manuals, international humanitarian
law dissemination and training, codes of conduct and
military disciplinary measures at all levels of the chain
of command.
We have said for several years in the Chamber
that sexual violence is preventable, not inevitable. It is
time now to make accountability inevitable. Survivors
must be seen by their societies as the holders of rights
that will be respected and enforced, and societies must
realize that the only shame of rape is in committing,
commanding or condoning it.
In 2021, four encouraging developments took place
in terms of transitional justice.
First, in Guatemala, five former members of the
paramilitary group, the Civil Self-Defence Patrol, were
convicted and sentenced for crimes of sexual violence
committed against indigenous Maya Achi women in
the 1980s.
Secondly, in Iraq, the Council of Representatives
adopted the Yezidi Survivors Law, which provides
support to victims of Da’esh atrocities.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

Thirdly, the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights issued a ruling that found the State responsible
for violations of the rights of Colombian journalist
Mrs. Jineth Bedoya Lima following her two-decade
quest for justice for abduction and sexual abuse.
Yesterday, I was pleased to announce Mrs. Bedoya’s
appointment as one of my mandate’s Global Champions
for the Fight Against Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Fourthly, under the auspices of universal
jurisdiction, a former official of the Syrian General
Intelligence Directorate, Anwar R., was convicted by
the Higher Regional Court in Koblenz, Germany, for
crimes against humanity, including sexual violence,
committed in 2011 and 2012.
Each year, we report three or four landmark
judgments against the backdrop of thousands of United
Nations-verified cases that meet the definition of
international crime. Accordingly, I regret to note that
the few emblematic cases of justice delivered are still
the exception that proves the rule of justice denied.
In June 2021, my Office launched model legislative
provisions and guidance on the investigation and
prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence,
which aims to ensure that the national legislation
comprehensively criminalizes all forms of sexual
violence and protects all individuals at risk. The guidance
supports the implementation of resolution 2467 (2019),
which calls on Member States to strengthen legislation
and enhance the investigation and prosecution of sexual
violence in order to deliver justice that is accessible,
empowering and ultimately transformative, in line with
a survivor-centred approach.
Yet accountability processes, while critical, they
are no substitute for compliance with international
norms in the first instance. This year’s report lists
49 parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of sexual violence in situations
on the agenda of the Council, with more than 70 per
cent of persistent perpetrators having appeared on the
list for five or more years, without taking remedial or
corrective action.
It is critical to cohere the practice of listing suspected
perpetrators and the practice of imposing targeted
and graduated measures by sanctions committees to
improve compliance. Leveraging the credible threat
of sanctions can change the calculation of parties to
conflict that operate on the assumption that rape is
cost-free, or even profitable, in the political economy

S/PV.9016

of war, in which women and girls are trafficked, traded
and sold. Eight sanctions regimes now include sexual
violence as part of their designation criteria. In 2021,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya listed the de facto manager
of the notorious Al Nasr detention centre for abuses,
including sexual violence.
In terms of the way forward, the report recommends
targeted action to reinforce structural prevention
through political and diplomatic engagements to address
sexual violence in ceasefire and peace agreements; the
use of early-warning indicators of sexual violence to
inform monitoring, threat analysis and early response;
curtailing the flow of small arms and light weapons;
gender-responsive justice and security sector reform,
including vetting, training, codes of conduct, zerotolerance policies and effective prosecution; amplifying
the voices of survivors and affected communities; and
supporting women’s human rights defenders, as well as
victims and witnesses.
Justice, peace and security are inextricably
linked. Collaboration between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission can advance genderresponsive accountability and reconciliation processes
that address crimes of sexual violence as part of the
consolidation of peace. We must deliver justice, not just
law, in communities, as well as courtrooms, and ensure
that reparations reach survivors to help them rebuild
shattered lives and livelihoods.
It is critical that Member States reinforce the
architecture established by the Council through
resolution 1888 (2009), including the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which
works to strengthen institutional safeguards against
impunity, the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against
Trafficking in Persons, United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict and women’s protection
advisers, whose timely deployment to the field is vital
to timely reporting and response. We must marshal
a level of resolve and resources equal to the scale of
the challenge, including by replenishing the ConflictRelated Sexual Violence Prevention Multi-Partner
Trust Fund that supports our work.
Our special report on women and girls who become
pregnant as a result of sexual violence in conflict and
children born of sexual violence in conflict (S/2022/77),
circulated in January, also sets out a platform of
legal, policy and operational recommendations,

22-316825/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

including reforming discriminatory nationality laws
and practices. I look forward to the special report being
debated by the Council later this year.
The Charter of the United Nations was born out of
war to chart the path to peace. No amount of protection
or assistance is a substitute for peace. As a wise woman
once said, we can no more win a war than an earthquake.
Wars are indeed unwinnable and yet their social and
economic aftershocks affect us all.
Throughout history, human progress has been
interrupted by plagues, wars and authoritarian rule.
Issues we thought had been consigned to the ash heap
of history remain in our daily headlines. We cannot
choose the times we live; in we can choose only how we
respond. We must not rest until every survivor, every
civilian, can sleep under the cover of justice.
There is no place in the modern world for gender
apartheid, for strong men in place of strong institutions
or for medieval wars of looting, pillage and rape.
Women’s rights are not Western rights. They are human
rights, and they are universal in times of war and peace.
Prevention is the best form of protection, including
the prevention of conflict itself. We must rise to the
challenge of our times. Inaction is not an option.
The President: I thank Ms. Patten for her very
extensive and detailed briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Murad.
Ms. Murad: I, too, thank Ambassador Woodward
and the United Kingdom for organizing this important
debate as one of their signature events and for inviting
me to brief the Council today.
We are gathered at a moment of global instability — a
moment shaped by a pandemic, a war and a climate
crisis. In times like these, issues that affect women and
girls, such as conflict-related sexual violence, tend to
be pushed aside, as if they were somehow secondary to
the real issues. The truth is that these are precisely the
moments when protecting, supporting and investing in
women and girls should be urgent priorities.
For every setback our societies face, women and
girls are forced to take 10 steps backward. That is
particularly true in times of conflict. History shows
that whenever armed conflict erupts anywhere in the
world, rape and brutality follow. We are seeing that in
Ukraine as we speak, with reports of sexual violence
that should alarm us all. Sexual violence is not a side
6/36

13/04/2022

effect of conflict. It is a tactic of war as old as time.
Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) understand the destabilizing effect of genderbased violence, and so must we.
ISIS began targeting my Yazidi community in
2014. Thousands of Yazidis were massacred. Others
fled on foot, facing thirst, starvation and blistering
temperatures. In addition to the murders, ISIS captured
more than 6,000 Yazidi women and children. Women
and girls like me, my nieces and my sisters were sold
and raped. Those of us who survived were considered
lucky. However, the nightmare continues even now,
eight years later, for more than 2,800 women and
children who are still living in captivity and enduring
sexual violence at the hands of ISIS.
We are here today to discuss accountability, not
only in the aftermath of conflict-related sexual violence
but, just as important, as a tool for preventing such
violence from occurring in the first place. In particular,
there are three aspects of accountability that I would
like to highlight: justice, support for survivors and a
commitment to gender equity in the long term.
The pursuit of justice is one of the most visible
forms of accountability. Last year, a German court
convicted an ISIS member of genocide. It was the first
time that had ever happened anywhere in the world.
That historic verdict is an important step, but as I stand
before the Council today, my question is: what next?
ISIS led a systemic campaign of sexual violence
to destroy Yazidi women and the Yazidi community.
The United Nations has condemned the group’s actions
as genocide. The United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
collected reams of evidence documenting the atrocities
that ISIS committed against women and girls. Other
terrorist groups and oppressive regimes have watched
as ISIS members openly brag about enslaving Yazidi
women and girls, while facing few, if any, consequences
on the world stage.
As survivors of sexual violence, it is not easy for us
to tell our stories, but we do it to prevent what happened
to us from happening to others. We are called brave,
but the courage we really want to see is from leaders
in a position to do something, whether they are Heads
of State, States Members of the United Nations or
corporate leaders. We need more than moral outrage.
We need action.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

To those assembled in the Chamber, I say that now
is the time to put ISIS on trial for genocide and sexual
violence, refer the case to the International Criminal
Court or establish a hybrid court by treaty to prosecute
ISIS crimes. In the meantime, other nations should follow
Germany’s example and use the principle of universal
jurisdiction to try war criminals for the atrocities they
commit, including sexual violence. Those trials must
proceed with transparency for survivors, who deserve
their day in court.
What message will it send if Member States let
the perpetrators of sexual violence continue to enjoy
immunity? If States want to establish deterrence and
assure Yazidi women and survivors everywhere that
the international community stands with us, they can
no longer delay justice. We have the evidence; all we
need is the political will.
Accountability means that those who perpetrate
violence should face consequences for their actions. But
it cannot stop there. Victims are not to blame for sexual
violence. Yet, too often, we are left to piece our lives
back together on our own, abandoned by Governments
and the international community, which failed in their
mandate to protect the basic human rights of all people.
Survivors need solidarity and tangible support to
empower them and provide a path to recovery.
Reparations and recognition are an essential
part of justice. That is why I co-founded the Global
Survivors Fund with my friend and colleague, Dr.
Denis Mukwege, to provide interim reparations to
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. After
all, to survivors, reparations are not some theoretical
idea or a topic for legal debate; they are the difference
between going hungry and having enough food to put
on the table, between sustaining lifelong injuries and
accessing reproductive health care and between being
cast out of our communities and being able to put a
roof over our heads. Through that project, we want
survivors to know that we stand with them, and that
they are not alone.
Eight years after ISIS’s genocide, survivors who
returned to Sinjar are still struggling to recover in the
face of political disputes between Baghdad and Erbil,
with militia groups vying for control of our homeland.
The Security Council should send a special envoy to end
the suffering of Yazidis in Iraq. Member States have a
moral responsibility not to abandon genocide survivors.

S/PV.9016

That brings me to my third point. Every time
that we see a new conflict, there is an outpouring of
thoughts and prayers. But, as I know from personal
experience, a few days, or even a week, in the news
cycle does nothing to address the systemic challenges
that women face. That is true from Iraq and Ethiopia to
the Democratic Republic of Congo, to Ukraine and to
conflict zones everywhere.
It is not enough to talk about accountability and
prevention in times of crisis. We need long-term
commitments to advancing global gender equity
because gender equity is key to democracy. That means
combating gender bias and stereotypes everywhere
that they occur: in homes and families, as well as our
education systems. It means recognizing that what is
true in times of conflict is true in times of peace. If
we want strong, stable communities, we must listen
to women.
To be very clear, when I say that we should listen to
women, I do not mean it in some abstract way. I mean
that policymakers should leave the halls of power and
go out into affected communities to ask women what
they need. One solution will not work for everyone.
Throughout the world, different socioeconomic
and political circumstances impact women’s rights.
Compounding factors, such as race, religion, class
and access to health care, education and employment,
require different solutions. Survivors know best what
they need to heal and recover, so why not ask them? At
Nadia’s Initiative, the organization that I founded, every
day we see that the most effective work is communityled and survivor-centred and takes a holistic approach.
The work that is being done to help survivors must be
done hand in hand with them.
It is not just the act of listening that matters. How
one listens, the way in which one communicates with
survivors and what one does with the information that
one collects — all those things matter, too. Documenting
sexual violence is crucial to accountability and
prevention. But, too often, survivors who speak out
face shame, stigma and a lack of transparency about
how their testimonies will, or will not, be used, or the
likely outcomes.
That is why I look forward to joining Lord Ahmad
tomorrow to officially announce the Murad Code,
a set of guidelines intended to change norms around
how journalists, investigators and anyone tasked with
documenting and investigating conflict-related sexual

22-316827/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

violence interacts with survivors. Those guidelines were
shaped by feedback from survivors around the globe
and aim to promote greater respect, understanding,
transparency and healing.
In conclusion, accountability can be a crucial
component of prevention, but only if it includes
meaningful justice, the services and support that
survivors need and the ultimate goal of advancing
global gender equity. Each person in this Chamber has
the power to make that a reality, but only if they choose
to act.
Everywhere I go, I meet survivors of sexual
violence who bravely tell their stories in the face of
stigma, shame and even physical danger. If women who
have suffered such immense loss and incredible pain
can find the strength to not only rebuild their lives, but
help their families, communities and entire countries,
surely the rest of the world can find the strength to take
meaningful steps to end sexual violence in conflict.
As survivors, we look to those, the leaders, in this
Chamber to act with the same courage that we have
shown. Survivors do not want pity; we want justice.
The President: I thank Ms. Murad for her briefing,
her deep insights and her continuing courage and
strength regarding this important issue.
I now give the floor to Ms. Karkoutly.
Ms. Karkoutly: My name is Mariana Karkoutly.
I am a co-founder of Huquqyat, a membership-based
organization of women lawyers and legal practitioners,
advocating for accountability in Syria. I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to deliver this
briefing today.
Let me start by saying that what drove me to study
law was not love of the law, but the experience of
injustice. While studying law under a dictatorship did
not teach me much, witnessing women in Syria fighting
for their rights did.
Accountability, the theme of this open debate, is
a difficult word to say in the Syrian context. We have
experienced all sorts of atrocities for more than a
decade, with more than 350,000 people killed, tens of
thousands arbitrarily detained or disappeared, nearly
13 million displaced and another 14 million in need of
humanitarian assistance. Parties to the conflict have
violated international human rights and humanitarian
law, used chemical weapons and committed acts that
amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
8/36

13/04/2022

Government forces and armed groups continue to
murder, torture and use sexual and gender-based
violence against civilians as a matter of policy.
Yet despite discussing Syria for more than a decade,
the Security Council has failed to take actions to hold
perpetrators accountable. The Syrian Government has
systematically violated not only international law, but
many of the Council’s own resolutions. Meanwhile,
members of the Council have blocked urgent action on
Syria, shielded the Syrian regime from accountability,
and vetoed resolutions on humanitarian assistance
and investigating the use of chemical weapons against
civilians 16 times.
My statement today will focus on three issues:
the use of sexual violence against women; entrenched
gender discrimination in Syria, and next steps for the
international community to ensure accountability.
As documented by the Commission of Inquiry
on Syria, sexual and gender-based violence has been
used against civilians during ground operations, at
checkpoints and in detention, across the country since
2011, primarily by Government forces and associated
militia, but also by other armed groups. It has been
called a devastating and pervasive feature of the Syrian
conflict and part of a widespread and systematic
attack against civilians, amounting to crimes against
humanity. This violence continues as we speak.
I have worked as an independent investigator with
the support of the Centre for Justice and Accountability
since 2020 on case-building against members of
the Al-Assad regime responsible for crimes against
civilians. To date, we have documented 54 testimonies,
including those of survivors of sexual violence. These
are just some of the hundreds that have been documented
out of tens of thousands of survivors.
Over the last decade, at least 150,000 people in
Syria are estimated to have been arbitrarily arrested,
detained or disappeared; at least 9,700 women still are
missing or being detained. These women — lawyers,
journalists, activists and others — have been detained
for opposing the regime, or often, to punish or threaten
male relatives who have opposed the regime. In places
of detention, sexual violence is used to humiliate them,
punish them for rebelling and force confessions. Women
in detention have been subject to all kinds of sexual
violence, including rape, torture, sexual harassment,
electric shocks directed at genital areas, intimate
searches, forced abortions and forced nudity.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

Survivors of rape and sexual violence in detention,
estimated to number in the thousands, have largely
been unable to report these crimes for fear of
marginalization or further retaliation. Discrimination
and violence against women and girls who have been
detained, or who have faced sexual violence, have
resulted in abandonment, divorce, so-called honour
killings and suicide.
The Syrian regime has taken advantage of this: it
knew that by targeting women in this way, they were
in fact targeting their communities as a whole. This
is why arresting and detaining women, leaving their
families with no information about their fate, has been
a key tool used to suppress Syrian dissent since 2011.
The systematic occurrence of these crimes across the
country provides reasonable grounds to assert that the
regime has weaponized gender-based violence as a
matter of State policy.
The Syrian regime’s actions have been possible
because of a corrupt legal system and entrenched
discrimination against women and girls in Syria, which
affects their access to housing and land, property
rights, custody of their children, and their protection.
For instance, laws in Syria do not criminalize sexual or
gender-based violence against women or marital rape.
Syrian women cannot pass their nationality to their
children, and even where laws have changed, social
practices have not. Furthermore, sexual and genderbased violence against women does not end inside
Syria, but continues in the camps, settlements and
cities throughout the region, where millions of Syrian
refugees face discrimination, poverty and lack of access
to health care and education, all while experiencing
pressure to return to a country that is not yet safe.
Syrians are desperate for justice after more than a
decade of war. Domestic accountability is impossible
as long as the Al-Assad regime remains in power. The
universal jurisdiction cases currently being pursued
against suspects for crimes committed in Syria, while
positive, have also had limits, including how fear of
retaliation for reporting to local authorities, as well as
the trauma and stigmatization of survivors of sexual
violence, affects the ability and willingness of victims
to come forward.
Syrians can no longer wait for justice. We encourage
all States Members of the United Nations to continue to
pursue accountability under universal jurisdiction. But
we are also looking to the Security Council for help,

S/PV.9016

in the form of referring the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
Despite 14 years of the Security Council’s
condemnation of the use of sexual violence in conflict,
impunity prevails, not only in Syria but in many
other conflicts on the Council’s agenda. This is often
not because sexual violence has been inadequately
criminalized, or because perpetrators are unknown,
but owing to a lack of political courage. The Security
Council must call on the Syrian Government to
respect international law, end attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, and ensure an immediate
and permanent nationwide ceasefire; immediately
end torture, inhumane treatment and sexual violence,
including in places of arrest and detention; release all
arbitrarily detained persons and allow unconditional
access to all places of detention by international
humanitarian organizations; and release the names,
status and locations of all detainees, and a timetable for
their release.
I urge the Security Council, States Members
of the United Nations and the Organization itself
to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court; adopt a resolution on the situation
of detainees and missing persons that underlines the
Syrian Government’s obligations under international
law and reflects the priorities outlined by associations
representing victims, survivors and their families,
such as the Truth and Justice Charter, including
support for the creation of a mechanism to clarify the
fate of missing persons and to support their families;
investigate and prosecute all perpetrators of sexual
violence, and ensure that women’s rights are at their
core of all accountability efforts; ensure women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in all ongoing and
future political, peace or reconciliation processes;
prioritize a survivor-centred, rights-based approach
to prevention and mitigation of gender-based violence;
ensure that the Special Envoy for Syria prioritizes
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including prohibitions against arbitrary detention,
enforced disappearances, torture and gender-based
violence, in political discussions, and that he convenes
Syrian civil society on how to address these issues and
regularly briefs the Security Council on these efforts;
renew the cross-border mechanism for at least 12 months
and reauthorize access via all original crossing points,
as cross-border access is an indispensable lifeline for
millions of people in Syria, the majority of whom are

22-316829/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

13/04/2022

women and children; and pressure arms-exporting
countries to stop arms proliferation and prevent the use
of weapons against all civilians.

consistency across victims’ accounts shows that those
crimes were committed intentionally with a degree of
organization and planning.

When people in Syria watch conflicts rage in
Ukraine and other parts of the world today, we are
reminded of our own suffering and the abject failure of
this body to stop the violence.

Secondly, sexual violence is ethnically motivated. A
Tigrayan woman was fleeing the conflict zone with her
children. Along the way she encountered the Amhara
militia, who separated her from her family, gang-raped
her and inserted a hot metal rod into her uterus. They
declared, “A Tigrayan should never give birth”. Similar
incidents of rape with claims of “cleansing Tigrayan
blood” and mutilating women’s bodies to prevent the
birth of more generations of Tigrayans have been
extensively covered by various human rights reports.

I join my voice with those of the millions of girls
and women from Syria who are not here with me today
and call on the Council to take action. There can be no
peace without justice.
The President: I thank Ms. Karkoutly for her very
powerful briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Berhanu.
Ms. Berhanu: Thank you for allowing me to bring
the stories of Ethiopian women to the Chamber of the
Security Council.
I speak to you today as an Ethiopian woman,
one who has heard those testimonies and seen those
injuries first-hand in Tigray; one who carries the guilt
of survival and silence. Today I hope to do justice to the
experiences of the millions of Ethiopian women who
have suffered in this war.
In this briefing, I will focus on six points in relation
to conflict-related sexual violence in Ethiopia since the
war began in Tigray in November 2020 and expanded
to the neighbouring regions of Amhara and Afar.
These points are drawn directly from human rights
investigations and reports that have been made public,
as well as my own visits to the region.
First, rape has been perpetrated systematically
and used as a tactic of war. It is framed as a means of
reprisal and leveraged as a bonding tool for members of
allied military forces.
When the war first started, Blen, a 21-year-old
waitress from Badme, along with around 30 other
Tigrayan women, was held against her will and subjected
to sexual slavery, starvation and gang rape by a group
of Eritrean and Ethiopian soldiers who took turns with
her. I documented many other stories like Blen’s during
multiple visits to the region of Tigray before June 2021.
Sexual violence was used to terrorize communities and
as a bonding tool among the allied Eritrean Defence
Forces, the Ethiopian National Defence Force and the
Amhara regional militia and special forces through the
shared experience of exploiting women’s bodies. The
10/36

Thirdly, sexual violence is used to humiliate
survivors and their communities. Sexual violence has
often been perpetrated in front of family members. An
Amhara woman was beaten and raped in the presence of
her husband and child by two Tigrayan force members.
She and her child witnessed her husband being killed as
he tried to stop the assault.
Men and boys have also been sexually assaulted.
The Ethiopian Human Rights Commission found that
in the town of Samre, in Tigray, 600 men and boys
were stripped and forcibly paraded, some completely
naked, while Eritrean female soldiers mocked them and
took pictures.
Fourthly, women with disabilities and other
vulnerable communities have been at particular risk
during this conflict. Many women with disabilities were
specifically targeted in the region of Tigray as they were
presumed to have been fighters in the previous war.
Girls, elderly women and women belonging to minority
and indigenous communities also face higher risks.
The lack of access to the region for independent human
rights monitoring has made it difficult to document
the impact of the conflict in minority communities,
especially those living in disputed areas on the Eritrean
border, such as the Irob and Kunama in Tigray.
Fifthly, the conflict in northern Ethiopia, and
the effective siege of the Tigray region in particular,
has undermined women’s rights, including access to
reproductive health care and psychosocial support,
exacerbating the impacts of sexual violence.
In May 2021, I visited a shelter supported by
Mekelle University in Tigray, where many lactating
mothers and their infants had taken refuge. Those
women — some of whom had survived sexual assault
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

while pregnant — could not access timely sexual and
reproductive care owing to the widespread destruction
of medical facilities and limited deliveries of aid due to
the Government blockade of the region.
The conflict in northern Ethiopia has increased
women’s vulnerability irrespective of their ethnicity.
I carry with me the story of Kadija, a nine-monthspregnant woman from Afar, who fled the shelling of
Aba’ala town by the Tigrayan Defence Forces with
her five children and elderly mother. She gave birth
under a tree after having walked for nine days, two
of which while in labour. In a country with one of the
highest maternal mortality rates globally and a lack of
infrastructure specifically in pastoralist communities
and areas, the conflict puts the lives of many Ethiopian
women in immediate and grave danger.
Lack of access to psychosocial support services
also means that the mental health of survivors hangs
in the balance. Many have already died by suicide. The
story of a 50-year-old Amhara woman from ShewaRobit in central Ethiopia, who was gang-raped by
Tigrayan fighters in the presence of her son, who was in
the next room, and later died by suicide highlights just
how tragic the situation is. Initial reports also indicate
disproportionate rates of suicide among internally
displaced persons across various parts of Tigray. Amid
a total Internet and telecom blackout, I fear that the
extent of the trauma experienced by the community
remains unknown.
Sixthly, while cases of sexual violence from
Tigray, Afar and Amhara have attracted international
attention, women from other communities across
Ethiopia, specifically the Oromo, Gumuz, Konso,
Kimant and Somali, specifically Ogaden, continue to
experience conflict-related sexual violence, including
by State forces, without any attention from the
international community.
The central theme of today’s open debate is
accountability for sexual violence. Resolution 2467
(2019) recalls the critical role of national investigations.
The Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights were able to conduct a joint
investigation that was limited in scope and analysis.
But unfortunately, and more broadly, we have witnessed
deliberate delays in investigation, the withholding of
information, failings on the part of the justice system,
the destruction of evidence, including statistical

S/PV.9016

records, and the harassment and detention of journalists
by the Ethiopian State and allied parties to the conflict.
As we have seen in other contexts and in the
spilling of that war into the broader northern region,
lack of accountability and justice for past crimes
continues to fuel a sense of grievance that drives a
vicious cycle of retaliatory attacks. Based on the trends
and stories that I have highlighted, I would like to offer
the following recommendations to the members of the
Security Council.
First, members should use their platform to demand
that efforts to document, investigate and prevent sexual
violence in conflict are survivor-centred and conducted
in a dignified, safe and confidential manner. As part
of the pursuit of justice for survivors, the Security
Council should also champion the work of the recently
established International Commission of Human Rights
Experts on Ethiopia, including by urging all parties to
the conflict to fully cooperate and provide unimpeded
access to the Commission.
Secondly, the Council should demand that all
parties ensure full and safe humanitarian access to
Tigray and other areas of conflict and ensure that
humanitarian aid prioritizes the needs of survivors.
That includes comprehensive sexual and reproductive
health care and addressing stigma. Service providers
must also continue to adhere to core humanitarian
standards, including the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee Guidelines on gender-based violence and
mental health and psychosocial support.
Finally, I call on the three African countries that
are members of the Security Council, which can be
counted as some of the strongest voices for women,
peace and security in this Chamber. I urge them to work
here and in the African Union (AU), through its Peace
and Security Council, which has the mandate to request
a proactive intervention from the AU Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security, and to take a harder look
at the prevailing view that supporting investigations
of conflict-related sexual violence in Ethiopia could
somehow derail the proposed reform agenda of the
current Government.
This war has been so devastating to witness — first,
because of the sheer scale of human suffering and,
secondly, because many Ethiopians have defended that
violence in the name of patriotism. But my patriotism,
my political loyalty and my allegiance lie exclusively
and firmly with Ethiopian women, and I thank the

22-3168211/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

13/04/2022

Council for having invited one of them to speak to
it today.

that strengthens the pursuit of justice. That is a pivotal
and crucial first step towards accountability.

The President: I thank Ms. Berhanu, again, for a
very powerful testimony and statement.

However, as we heard from Ms. Murad in her
powerful testimony, it is far from the reality for many
survivors around the world. Frankly, we must ask the
question of ourselves: why? Why have we failed to
protect? Why have we failed in our collective duty to put
survivors first? Despite numerous forms of guidance
for those collecting information and evidence from
survivors and witnesses, mistakes continue to be made.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
May I begin by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Pramila Patten. The strength of the relationship between
the United Kingdom and her Office is something that
we hold very dear, and we welcome the continued
coordination and strength of the work that we are doing
on this important agenda.
I thank our brave activists, Mariana Karkoutly and
Hilina Berhanu, for their stark insights and for their
practical recommendations on the responsibilities and
the importance of action from us, the Security Council,
and, of course, Nadia Murad, as her determination,
her courage and her example have at their heart a real
willpower to build a world for survivors. Simply put, it
is an inspiration for me and I know I speak for every
member of the Security Council. Her testimony today
is, once again, reflective of the central objective that
we all share.
Yet, as we have heard again today in the powerful
testimonies and Special Representative Patten’s
briefing, disturbing reports of rape and sexual violence
in Ukraine continue to emerge. We are reminded yet
again that when conflict erupts, sexual violence soon
follows. As we have heard, in northern Ethiopia, in
Syria and in Ukraine, we are witnessing the devastating
effects on communities, families and, in particular, on
women and girls. It is important that we come together
and stand up for those courageous survivors — not just
to provide hope but to provide action and, ultimately,
justice.
It is clear that impunity continues to be the norm for
perpetrators; whereas it should be the exception — we
must strive for that. Frankly, the fact that we are here
and that this is happening in the year 2022 — and
let us reflect on that — is not just unacceptable; it is
utterly shocking.
Therefore, we must strive to do more collectively to
end the violence and, as we heard in each of the powerful
statements by our briefers, to ultimately deliver justice
and accountability for survivors. We need to ensure that
survivors can safely record their experiences in a way
12/36

Those mistakes — albeit made without any bad
intentions — can allow the wheels of justice to slow
down and, indeed, to destroy lives. Too many survivors
are not told about what their options are or given the
time and space to make their own choices about how
their testimonies are best used. Too many survivors
continue to face unnecessary re-interviewing — 27
times, as one courageous survivor told me; I ask my
colleagues to reflect on that. Too many interviews are
being overheard or interrupted, thereby diluting the
impact of those testimonies, so that they do not meet
the threshold and that is too often put forward as the
reason why prosecutions cannot take place.
The consequences can be devastating and souldestroying, ending all hope. Simply put, that is
unacceptable. Survivors are being re-traumatized time
and time again. Work to deliver justice and accountability
is being undermined. That is why it is vital that we end
those harmful practices and put survivors’ rights at the
very heart of evidence-gathering.
I am therefore greatly humbled to join Nadia’s
Initiative and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations in releasing the Murad Code today. First,
I turn to Ms. Murad and thank her. She and I have
known one another for many years. She inspires me
and her courage is a powerful example to us all, as we
have heard again today. The Murad Code, to which she
has so kindly lent her name, is a code of conduct for the
collection of information and evidence from survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence.
Importantly, as we have heard in all of today’s
contributions, including from Special Representative
Patten, it has been shaped by survivors. Survivors must
be at the heart of the solutions we see. It has also brought
together Governments, international organizations and
civil society, because it is our collective responsibility
to place survivors’ needs at the very heart of our work.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

Therefore, I urge everyone involved in
documenting and investigating conflict-related sexual
violence to follow the Murad Code. In fact, go further:
in my mind, it should become the gold standard for
any non-governmental organization, Government,
Government agency, human rights institution or civil
society group working in the field. Putting survivors
first and at the centre of investigations should not be
an option; it should be done by everyone, everywhere.
But our collective efforts cannot stop there.
This year, we are exploring all options to strengthen
international action, including an international
convention, as proposed by our Foreign Secretary, Liz
Truss. Today, I am also pleased to announce that from
28 to 30 November, we will also host an international
conference on the issue of preventing sexual violence
in conflict, marking 10 years since we launched
that initiative.
We will also, importantly, continue to bring faith
and belief leaders together in support of survivors
through the Declaration of Humanity. It cannot be
right that groups such as Da’esh use the veil of religion
erroneously and perversely to somehow justify their
abhorrent crimes and actions. Faith leaders continue to
stand up and clearly state that those actions are not in
the name of their religion or any faith or belief across
the world.
We will also make further progress to enhance the
rights and well-being of children born of sexual violence
and rape. I was honoured to announce the call to action
last November, but let us put that into perspective. A
child born of such a crime should be given compassion;
instead, they are stigmatized and rejected. That has to
change at all levels.
We will also respond robustly to reports of sexual
violence in conflict, wherever and whenever they
occur. We have just heard from Ms. Berhanu about
the distressing situation in Ethiopia. The nature and
scale of the reports of sexual violence that have come
out of Tigray, Amhara and Afar are deeply disturbing.
Yet many communities, as we heard in her testimony,
remain cut off from communications and are therefore
unable to tell their stories and seek the hope and support
they need.
That is why it was important for the United
Kingdom — and I thank our Ambassador and her
team in that regard — to invite the first Ethiopian civil
society representative to brief the Security Council

S/PV.9016

today on the situation in northern Ethiopia. It was also
incredibly important to hear directly from Ms. Berhanu,
an Ethiopian woman who has been integral to feminist
youth movements and who has recently worked with
communities across the country that have been affected
by conflict-related related sexual violence.
The Government of the United Kingdom has
committed more than £7 million to support survivors in
northern Ethiopia and improve national accountability
systems. We will also continue to work to provide
expertise to build capacity to hold perpetrators
to account.
In that respect, the gauntlet may have been thrown,
but I welcome our colleagues from the African Union
and pay tribute to the African Union’s leadership
on conflict-related sexual violence. Thirty African
countries now have a national action plan on women and
peace and security, providing the essential framework
for addressing the issue and promoting women’s
political participation in conflict-affected contexts.
Ms. Karkoutly also referred to how essential that is.
Within the framework and the family of the United
Nations, as Special Representative Patten and I have
discussed, we have incredible mediation networks of
women. We need to ensure that that expertise and those
insights are deployed directly, not just in resolving
conflicts but in actually building sustainable peace.
Sadly, as we also heard from Ms. Karkoutly, we have
heard again how rape continues to be used to destroy
the lives of many Syrian women and girls by various
parties to the conflict. The United Kingdom continues
to provide support in that area — £4 million through its
Conflict, Stability and Security Fund have been used in
response to that crisis. We have also strengthened the
medical documentation of attacks, in accordance with
international standards, and improved support services
for survivors. I am absolutely convinced that the Murad
Code will be an important contribution to enhance that
collection of evidence. I was also pleased to see the first
conviction for conflict-related sexual violence in Syria,
delivered in Koblenz in January.
Let me assure the Council that, as we look around
the world, the United Kingdom will also continue to
support Afghan women, who face some of the highest
rates of violence in the world and are watching the
progress made in recent decades unravel in front of
their eyes. Let us also send a very clear message to
those who seek to suppress women’s rights and the

22-3168213/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

rights of education for girls. That is a message for the
Taliban to hear clearly. Islam, as a religion, bases itself
on equality for girls and rights for women. Islam is
clear, are they? Our message to them is — empower
girls, educate girls, empower women. The evidence is
in front of them. Societies prosper, nations progress.
We are also pushing to integrate services for all
survivors of gender-based violence, including sexual
violence, into Afghan health-care provision. That is
being informed directly by the people who know best,
including many Afghan women leaders who are helping
us on this important agenda.
We are also working with the International Rescue
Committee, the United Nations Population Fund and
others on programmes to protect women and girls and
provide access to gender-based violence services.
We are collectively shocked at the abhorrent
testimonies we hear in every conflict, but are now
particularly shocked at the abhorrent testimonies
emerging from Ukraine. The reports of rape and sexual
violence committed by Russian armed forces must be
properly investigated. That is why the United Kingdom
has worked with partners to refer the situation in
Ukraine to the International Criminal Court (ICC), to
establish a commission of inquiry through the Human
Rights Council and, with the support of Ukraine, to
establish an Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe mission of experts. In March, we announced
an additional £1 million in funding for the ICC to help
uncover evidence of war crimes.
Let me put it simply and starkly — sexual violence
and rape are a vile stain on humankind. Wherever it
occurs and whoever the perpetrators, it is our collective
moral duty and our absolute obligation to work together
to help survivors and to do all we can to stamp it out. As
Ms. Murad said, we must work together to provide the
routes and avenues to see justice for survivors.
To perpetrators, we must send a very clear
message — not just from the Security Council. Every
person in every society must be determined to send that
same unequivocal message in all of its clarity — they
will be found; they will face justice; and they will be
held to account.
Finally, to the survivors — to those who are here
and to the courageous survivors around the world — we
thank them for the hope they provide in the face of such
challenges and unimaginable consequences they have
faced. We thank them for their courage and conviction
14/36

13/04/2022

to carry on. Sexual violence is not just a crime against
them, it is a crime against our common and shared
humanity. We stand for them, and we will always stand
with them.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important discussion today. I
also want to thank Special Representative Patten for
her remarks. The United States is proud to support the
important work of the Special Representative’s Office.
Most of all, I would like to thank the three briefers for
sharing their powerful stories. Their courage and their
strength are an inspiration to all of us.
As we all know, sexual violence is a horrific and
deliberate tactic in conflict. It is used to terrorize, to
destabilize and to break communities and people down.
Its impact ripples out far beyond survivors, and it fuels
instability. Unfortunately, this unspeakable practice
is not new. As I heard today’s briefers, I was recalling
attending meetings in the early nineties with Somali
women who were victims of violence in Somalia and
hearing their horrific stories of rape and their plea
to all of us to support them. And here we are today,
hearing those same pleas from today’s briefers. The
same acts of violence are still being committed around
the world today. And women, like those Somali women
that I spoke to in the 1990s, are sitting here listening to
us today.
On Monday, we outlined the threats to women and
girls in Ukraine from Russia’s brutal and unprovoked
war (see S/PV.9013). We cannot forget or look away
from the way rape and sexual violence have been used
as a weapon of war in Ethiopia, Syria and other conflicts
around the world. The Council has spent a great deal of
time discussing those issues and noting them with great
concern. Well, now it is time for us to act.
As we heard today, expressions of concern are
not enough.
First, we and all Governments need to hold
perpetrators accountable. We must do more as a global
community to actually implement the international
commitments that we have all agreed to, as Ms. Patten
said to us today. Governments, instead of denying
these acts, must acknowledge them and they must
address them. They have to stop intimidating
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

victims, silencing their voices, silencing those who
raise concern and advocate for them and hold those
responsible, accountable.
We must explore ways to use the diplomatic tools
we have, both as individual Member States and as a
collective, to do everything we can to ensure that
perpetrators do not get away with these acts of conflictrelated sexual violence. That means strengthening
quality, ethical and effective documentation efforts.
We caution against any action that would duplicate
or dilute the efficacy of our existing Security Council
mandates and legal frameworks. We have the tools
we need — we just need to use them. We cannot
let ourselves get distracted from the urgency of
accountability, especially in settings where we continue
to receive reports of conflict-related sexual violence.
After all, holding perpetrators accountable is not only
the right thing to do. It deters others from enacting
this violence in future. It strengthens the rule of law. It
makes reconciliation more likely and it makes inclusive
and democratic transitions possible.
Secondly, we must defend and empower survivors
through a survivor-centred approach. That means
listening to survivors, responding to their unique needs
and providing the resources and legal support they
ask for and need. We have learned just how important
it is to create a supportive environment to avoid
re-traumatizing those who have experienced conflictrelated sexual violence and to ensure that they are
treated with dignity and respect.
When we provide survivors with the resources
they need to heal and to recover, we help them
tremendously and we help break the silence and the
stigma surrounding sexual violence in conflict, as well.
Centring our support around survivors while securing
justice for them is the clearest and most powerful
way to empower survivors to become agents of peace
and voices of change, as we see from our colleague,
Ms. Murad, across this room. I once again thank Nadia
very much for bringing her voice to us today.
Thirdly and finally, because all gender-based
violence is rooted in gender inequality, we must
advance the empowerment of women and girls in all
of their diversity. To that end, the United Nations and
all Member States should apply conflict-sensitive and
participatory gender analysis to our interventions and
work. We need to ensure that we are addressing the
underlying societal norms and power relations that,

S/PV.9016

when combined with weak or absent State institutions,
lead to gender-based violence.
We need to advance gender-sensitive early
warning and response and we must persevere in our
promotion of the meaningful participation of women in
decision-making roles, especially in conflict prevention
and resolution and peacekeeping processes. When we
integrate women and girls into atrocity prevention
efforts, we do more to prevent those atrocities. It is
that simple.
In the long term, the best defence against conflictrelated sexual violence is an equal and just society — one
in which all women and girls enjoy respect for their
human rights, we enjoy equal protection under the
law, we have timely access to justice and we have the
educational opportunities we all deserve.
As late Secretary of State Madeleine Albright
used to say, democracy is a parent to peace and
common sense tells us that true democracy is not
possible without the full participation of women. Let us
therefore make democracy possible. Let us build those
just an inclusive societies. And in the meantime, let us
hold perpetrators accountable, take a survivor-centred
approach and integrate gender equity in everything we
do. As Nadia said, survivors do not want our pity; they
want justice. All of the women who spoke today made
recommendations to us. Let us pay homage to them and
follow their lead.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten and the civil
society briefers for their very valuable statements.
Time and time again, we hear in this Chamber
how sexual violence is being used as a tactic of war,
while every year the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/272) puts into stark relief how we continue to
fall short in effectively addressing both the immediate
effects and the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence — a grave violation of international law. That
is completely abhorrent. I therefore wish to thank the
United Kingdom for focusing this year’s open debate on
accountability as prevention.
I want to thank especially Nadia Murad, Mariana
Karkoutly and Hilina Berhanu for their very powerful
interventions and for sharing their recommendations.
Their testimonies remind us how participation and
protection are inextricably linked.

22-3168215/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

We see in Syria, as Ms. Karkoutly so powerfully
testified, conflict-related sexual violence in detention
settings; a heightened risk of sexualized violence against
displaced women; and negative coping mechanisms,
such as child labour and early and forced marriages.
Those are of particular concern.
In Ethiopia, we are horrified by the numerous
reports, including Ms. Berhanu’s account, of systematic
rape and gender-based violence. We welcome the
Commission of Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia,
which was established by the Human Rights Council to
investigate allegations of human rights violations and
abuses by all parties. That is essential for accountability,
prevention and reconciliation.
In Ukraine, we are deeply shocked by the atrocities
committed against civilians in places that have been
held by Russian forces, as well as the disturbing
reports of conflict-related sexual violence. Ukrainian
women and girls are placed further at risk by targeted
Russian attacks against civilian infrastructure,
forcing displacement and family separation and
depriving victims and survivors of access to essential
health services.
In the Security Council, we are still discussing
what a comprehensive, human-rights based and
survivor-centred approach means. In order to make the
move to actual implementation, we must recognize the
root causes of conflict-related sexual violence and dare
to suggest concrete measures. In that spirit, I will put
forward three recommendations that Norway firmly
believes will promote accountability and prevention
if sufficiently scaled up and addressed jointly through
multi-stakeholder coordination.
First, we must build the capacity of law-enforcement,
security and military sector personnel in both United
Nations peace operations and national institutions.
That helps reinforce accountability structures, tackles
underlying structural inequalities and attitudes, and
ensures that policies and action plans are actually put to
use. A good example is how the specialized police team
for sexual and gender-based violence of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan is supporting South
Sudan’s National Police Service.
Secondly, we must invest in providing access to
coordinated health care and services and legal services
and information. A commendable example is the
United Nations Population Fund’s (UNFPA) one-stop
16/36

13/04/2022

centres, which are established in cooperation with local
authorities, such as the one in Mosul, Iraq.
Thirdly, placing the needs of survivors at the centre
of our efforts also means promoting and supporting their
agency. They themselves must be allowed to define and
design what they think are the necessary measures for
prevention, protection and accountability.
As Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1
Patten has highlighted, reparations are what survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence request the most
and yet still receive the least. Let me also congratulate
Ms. Murad and the United Kingdom on tomorrow’s
launch of the Murad Code, an important initiative to
place survivors right at the centre of investigations and
documentation of conflict-related sexual violence.
Financing and resources go hand in hand with
monitoring and the implementation of all three of
those recommendations. As highlighted by the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and echoed by United
Nations-Women, UNFPA and civil society, the scale of
the resources is far from equal to the scale of actions
needed on the ground. Council members and the
broader United Nations membership must join forces
to ensure that the United Nations and civil society
organizations have the necessary expertise, financing
and access in place.
Lastly, we all recognize that the elephant in the
room is the lack of political will. By sending a strong
collective signal in all Council decisions and in our
dialogue with conflict parties, we must remind them
of their obligations and influence their actions. And
we must insist on women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation and protection from violence, not merely
as an end in and of itself but as a prerequisite for peace
and stability.
I hope that the Council will send a strong signal
today, clearly condemning any and all use of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by welcoming you, Lord Tariq Ahmad,
and thanking you for presiding over this important
open debate. We are delighted that the United Kingdom
has joined the shared commitment of the presidency
of the Security Council to the women and peace and
security agenda and we welcome the growing number
of signatories.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

I would also like to thank Special Representative
Pramila Patten for her detailed briefing and the critical
work of her Office.
I would like to thank Ms. Murad for her insightful
briefing. The United Arab Emirates has always admired
Ms. Murad’s courageous work and we are proud to
support Nadia’s Initiative — her non-profit organization
that empowers the brave Yazidi women of Iraq.
I also listened carefully to the briefings by
Ms. Karkoutly and Ms. Berhanu.
Sexual and gender-based violence is a despicable
scourge and the Council must do more to prevent it in
conflict situations. When such violence is used as a tool
of war, it exacerbates conflict and sets back progress
towards inclusive, equal and stable societies. As the rate
of conflict and instability around the world increases,
so too have the disturbing reports on the situation of
women and girls in those settings.
Women and girls in Afghanistan continue to be
subjected to sexual slavery and rape. In Syria and Iraq,
the heinous acts of Da’esh continue to have an impact.
At the Ukrainian border, women and girls are targeted
by human and sex traffickers as they flee the conflict.
Today we also heard about the tragic experiences faced
by women and girls in many other conflicts.
The United Arab Emirates therefore welcomes
the focus on structural prevention, resilience-building
and accountability in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/272). As members of the international
community, the Security Council and the wider
United Nations membership have a responsibility to
prioritize prevention, ensure accountability and end
this horror. In that regard, we would like to make the
following recommendations.
First, the most effective response to sexual and
gender-based violence is to prevent it from happening
in the first place. As the Special Representative has
pointed out time and again, effective prevention
strategies require addressing root causes, most notably
structural gender inequality and harmful social norms.
That includes strengthening women’s and girls’
resilience by ensuring that they enjoy equal access
to public life, education and economic participation.
Recognizing and understanding their role as active
agents of change and dynamic members of society is
therefore the first step in prevention.

S/PV.9016

Secondly, accountability needs to be pursued by
upholding and strengthening the rule of law. There is
a transformative period following conflict and crisis
for strengthening the capacity of relevant national
institutions, such as law enforcement and the security
sector, so that they may better uphold the rule of law.
Capacity-building, if coupled with the deployment of
gender and protection expertise with a survivor-centred
approach, can be a critical tool for establishing a system
that promotes accountability.
Thirdly, the international community must hold
non-State armed groups accountable for conflictrelated sexual violence, not least because they are
increasingly central actors in conflict settings. Grave
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law require accountability.
A strong tool for the Security Council to achieve that
is to include conflict-related sexual violence as a standalone designation criterion for sanctions on terrorists,
individuals and entities, whenever they are responsible
for the commission of such acts.
In that regard, we welcome the recent decision made
by the Council to designate the Houthis as an entity,
including for perpetrating a policy of sexual violence
in conflict. Such efforts contribute to the prevention of
and response to those crimes on the ground and Council
members must remain consistent in their approach.
In conclusion, there is no justification for the fact
that conflict-related sexual violence remains a reality.
The Council, the United Nations, its Member States,
the private sector and civil society must work together
and make it a priority to eliminate these crimes once
and for all.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, we thank the
United Kingdom for convening the open debate on this
important issue. We also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten and all other
briefers for sharing their insights.
In the past three decades, the international
community has played an important role in fixing
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence,
thereby sending the strong message that sexual violence
has no place in the civilized world. The prosecution
of conflict-related sexual crimes by the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, resolutions on sexual violence and the United
Kingdom’s Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict

22-3168217/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

initiative have contributed to addressing that complex
and sensitive issue in its entirety.
Despite that progress, it is indeed distressing
that sexual violence in conflict situations continues
unabated amid a culture of impunity as a tactic of war,
torture and terror in armed conflicts, especially by
non-State actors. Again, despite the robust framework
put in place by the Security Council since 2007 with
the launching of the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the levels of compliance
by parties to conflict remain low.
The majority of the parties listed in the Secretary
General’s annual report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2022/272) are persistent perpetrators who
continue to commit or abet sexual violence in armed
situations. That must stop. The Council must focus on
identifying and bridging the implementation gaps to
prevent atrocities and facilitate the rehabilitation and
reintegration of survivors.
My delegation wishes to highlight the following
six issues for the consideration of the Council. First,
national Governments have the primary responsibility
to prosecute and deter such crimes and conflict
situations on their territories, even if they are alleged
to have been committed by non-State actors. Member
States should ensure the effective prosecution of sexual
violence as a self-standing crime.
Secondly, upon request, the United Nations must
assist national authorities in developing capabilities to
strengthen their national legal frameworks and related
structures for the speedy investigation and prosecution
of perpetrators. That should also be a priority in postconflict situations in order to address holistically the
structural and cross-cutting gender inequalities that
perpetuate sexual violence.
Thirdly, Member States must adopt a victimcentred approach to preventing and responding to
sexual violence in armed conflicts, in line with
resolution 2467 (2019), which seeks to strengthen
justice and accountability and calls for a survivorcentred approach in the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence. States must ensure
adequate focus and resources for comprehensive and
non-discriminatory assistance for the victims of sexual
violence by providing for medical, psychological, social
and legal services.
18/36

13/04/2022

A key starting point in strengthening the
accountability process is to address the endemic stigma
attached to survivors of sexual violence and the fear of
reprisals by offenders, thereby helping them to come
forward to speak to investigators and testify in court.
Fourthly, terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism continue to be the biggest global
threat to peace and security, with women suffering
disproportionately in the resulting conflicts engendered
by them. Sexual violence primarily directed against
women and girls and increasingly among men and boys
by terrorists remains a cause for concern. The nexus
between terrorism, trafficking and sexual violence in
armed conflict needs to be broken.
Fifthly, sanctions regimes and other targeted
measures by the Council need to be strengthened
in order to utilize their full potential to deter the
perpetrators of sexual violence in armed conflict.
Last but not least, Member States must provide
a conducive environment for the participation
and inclusion of women in political processes and
decision-making. India has moved ahead from women’s
development to women-led development. We have
been advocating that idea for lasting peace in our
neighbourhood, including in Afghanistan, in line with
resolution 2593 (2021), especially relating to women,
children and minorities.
In 2017, Prime Minister Narendra Modi joined the
Circle of Leadership initiative, which was formally
established by the Secretary-General at the high-level
meeting on the prevention of sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations operations. India also signed the
Secretary-General’s Voluntary Compact on Preventing
and Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.
India has the distinction of having sent the first allwomen formed police unit contingent to Liberia in 2007.
That unit mitigated incidents of crime against women,
deterred sexual and gender-based violence and helped
to rebuild safety and confidence among the Liberian
population. In that process, it also operationalized
the spirit of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, into action. Those
courageous Indian women patrolled Monrovian streets
at night, taught Liberian women self-defence skills and
conducted classes on combating sexual violence.
India welcomes the Uniformed Gender Parity
Strategy 2018–2028 to increase the number of
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

women peacekeepers. We also support increasing the
deployment of women protection advisers for effective
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence in the field.
To conclude, India reaffirms its commitment to
actively contributing to the collective endeavour of
effectively tackling sexual violence in situations of
armed conflict.
Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): It is highly regrettable
to be here today once more calling for an end to an
utterly unacceptable crime, committed mostly against
women and girls, but also against men and boys.
Sexual violence in conflict destroys the social fabric
of communities. It inflicts long-lasting psychological
trauma, having a direct bearing on the resilience of
peace and on the prospects for sustainable development.
Perpetrators, be they State or non-State actors,
terrorist or mercenaries, should now think twice
before committing such crimes. But they do not stop;
they continue because they know that, most probably,
their actions will go unpunished, even though they
are committing well-known violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
abhorrent acts prohibited in times of both war and peace.
Today’s briefings and the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/272) serve as stark
reminders that the fight to end sexual violence as a
weapon of war and as a tool of intimidation and social
control in conflict and post-conflict situations is very
far from over.
Brazil thanks the United Kingdom for organizing
today’s debate and the briefers for their comprehensive
presentations. In addition to that, we take this
opportunity to commend Special Representative Pramila
Patten for her work and her Office for the crucial role
that it plays in international efforts to combat sexual
violence in conflict. We also thank Ms. Nadia Murad,
Ms. Mariana Karkoutly and Ms. Hilina Berhanu for
their testimonials. They show us the strength of the
committed work of victims themselves and of their
organizations on the ground.
Addressing the prevailing culture of impunity for
the crime of sexual violence in conflict is paramount,
not just as a means of reparation but also of delivering
justice by making perpetrators accountable for their
crimes. As experience shows, it is also an important

S/PV.9016

tool to prevent the horrific scenarios described by the
aforementioned reports and a myriad of other accounts.
As Ms. Sima Bahous told us on Monday (see
S/PV.9013) and Ms. Pramila Patten confirmed today,
red flags are now flying all over as allegations of
sexual violence are reported in the context of the
conflict in Ukraine. Brazil reiterates its calls for urgent
independent investigations of such allegations, and
welcomes the participation of skilled and experienced
UN-Women experts to investigate sexual violence,
abuse and exploitation in the work of the commission
of inquiry of the Human Rights Council.
The Security Council should respond appropriately
to all allegations of sexual violence in situations of
conflict under its agenda. That response must recognize
the problem and strengthen, whenever appropriate,
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions so as to promote real changes on
the ground.
Recent reports on South Sudan offer a horrific
account of sexual violence being used as a weapon
of war and remind us of the grave consequences of
widespread impunity for sexual violence in conflict.
The recently approved resolution 2625 (2022), on South
Sudan, which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), expresses serious
concern about those ongoing reports and underlines the
urgency of timely investigations, not only to support
accountability but also to provide assistance and
protection to survivors. It enables UNMISS to curb
sexual violence within its core directive for the protection
of civilians. In effect, UNMISS may use a variety of
means and areas of deployment to deter, prevent and
respond to sexual and gender-based violence, including
by facilitating access to organizations that provide
services and support to survivors.
However, having such provisions in Council
resolutions is not enough. The Security Council must
urgently address the funding shortfalls that prevent it
from delivering a satisfactory response. That includes
having the resources, for instance, to continue to deploy
women’s protection advisers to bring about behavioural
change through engagement with the parties to
a conflict.
It is also essential to guarantee that predeployment
training of United Nations troops and personnel
includes capacity-building to recognize and respond to
sexual violence in conflict, including on early warning

22-3168219/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

and risk mitigation. Troops should be trained to help
foster an enabling environment for surviving victims to
seek support and for perpetrators to be prosecuted for
their crimes.
Peace agreements and post-conflict arrangements
hardly ever deal with the situation of those who have been
subjected to violence during conflict and its aftermath.
With the support of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Security Council should continue to advocate for the
inclusion of references in peace agreements given the
imperative to — ideally, at least — eradicate all forms
of sexual violence, especially against all women and
girls, and of provisions related to accountability for
gender-based violence.
Promoting the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in decision-making processes
and peace talks also means tackling the root causes of
sexual violence in conflict, including structural gender
inequality and harmful social norms that lead to the
stigmatization and discrimination of survivors.

13/04/2022

peaceful means, such as negotiation, good offices and
mediation. In line with their mandates, United Nations
political and peacekeeping missions should also play
their due roles in the early warning of conflict and the
protection of vulnerable groups.
Secondly, we must combat terrorism so as to
eliminate violence against women by terrorists and
extremist forces. In recent years, the activities of
terrorist groups, kidnapping and human trafficking, as
well as sexual violence and exploitation, have become
increasingly rampant. Many alleged perpetrators of
sexual violence named in the Secretary-General’s report
are terrorist groups listed by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.
The international community should closely integrate
the elimination of sexual violence in conflicts with the
fight against terrorism by adhering to unified standards
and jointly combating all terrorist and extremist forces
so as to end violence against women and girls.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/272), sexual violence continues to be used as a
tactic of war and terrorism, causing profound suffering
to vulnerable groups, such as women and girls. China
strongly condemns all sexual violence against women
and girls, and we call on the international community
to take comprehensive measures to tackle the
problem. In that connection. I would like to make the
following remarks.

Thirdly, the international community should
amplify “she” power and actively support women’s
development and empowerment. Sexual violence
in conflict is closely related to such root causes and
deep-seated imbalances as gender inequality and
underdevelopment. The international community should
tackle the issue of conflict-related sexual violence in
an integrated manner within the overall framework
of women’s empowerment and development, striving
to eliminate gender discrimination and differential
treatment, removing the development gap faced by
women and promoting synergy between woman’s
endeavours and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It is essential to continue to amplify
women’s active participation and transformative power
in the field of peace and security and actively support
women’s effective participation in peace processes,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

First, we should build a solid foundation for
peace by stepping up conflict prevention and political
settlement. As the most vulnerable groups in conflict
and turmoil, women and girls are the main victims of
sexual violence. The best way to ensure their most basic
protection is through the prevention and resolution of
conflicts so as to eliminate the breeding ground for
sexual violence. The Security Council should make
good use of the toolkit provided for under the Charter
of the United Nations, step up its efforts for the political
settlement of hotspot issues and make greater use of

Fourthly, the international community should
uphold the leadership of countries concerned and
support their efforts in pursuing accountability. The
countries concerned have the primary responsibility for
preventing and combating sexual violence in conflicts
and protecting the women and children of their countries.
Based on respecting the judicial sovereignty and the
leadership of the countries concerned, the international
community should provide targeted assistance in the
rule of law, security and humanitarian fields, assist
the countries concerned in providing timely protection

Any and every step towards the implementation
of women and peace and security resolutions is
very welcome.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome, Sir, your presiding over today’s meeting.
I thank Special Representative Patten and the civil
society representatives for their briefings.

20/36

22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

and support for victims of sexual violence in conflicts
and step up the capacity-building of judicial organs
so as to bring perpetrators to justice and bring justice
to victims.
Ms. Nadia Murad is a survivor of sexual violence
perpetrated by the Islamic State terrorist group. Her
tragic experience is heartbreaking, while her tenacity
and courage are awe-inspiring. For over seven years,
she has been advocating for Yazidi survivors like
her. All she asked for could be summarized in two
words — accountability and justice.
In East Asia, there exists a group of victims of
sexual violence in conflict who have been living with
nightmarish memories but have not been able to get
justice even until their death. This group consists of
individuals who were forcibly drafted by the Japanese
Army during the Second World War to serve as “comfort
women”. During that period, hundreds of thousands of
women and girls from China, the Korean peninsula,
South-East Asia and other countries and regions were
forcibly conscripted by the Japanese military as comfort
women and became prisoners in hell. They experienced
horrific sexual violence, both mentally and physically.
However, to our indignation, for decades,
some forces in Japan have stubbornly adhered to
misconceptions and kept attempting to deny and
whitewash its history of aggression. As recently as last
month, some of the textbooks approved by the Japanese
Government once again blurred historical facts through
word games, attempting to downplay and evade the
historical guilt stemming from the forced recruitment
of comfort women. We solemnly urge Japan to face up
to and reflect on its history of aggression, handle such
issues leftover from that history as the forced drafting
of comfort women in a responsible manner, bring
justice to the victims and survivors and be accountable
to the people of the invaded countries, so as not to
further undermine the trust of its Asian neighbours and
the international community.

S/PV.9016

voices to our discussion. They testify to how much we
need to hear from civil society in the Security Council.
We all know where we have come from on this issue.
For a very long time, conflict-related sexual-violence
crimes have not been recognized as crimes against
humanity or war crimes, and as such were only rarely
prosecuted, if at all. Thankfully, in the course of the
last three decades, this has changed, but certainly not
enough, as atrocities and conflict- related violence based
on sexual orientation continues to persist in many parts
of the world. Sexual violence continues to be used as a
weapon of war and terror to punish civilians, terrorize
communities and break up families for the sheer sick
choice of perpetrators.
Women are raped, men are tortured, girls are
exploited and sold, children are born to raped mothers
and end up being excluded by their communities. This
is what has happened and is still happening in many
theatres of war, from Tigray to Syria, from Myanmar
and Afghanistan to Yemen, but not only these countries;
the list is much longer.
There is unfortunately a new situation where, as the
days go by, we see new gruesome pictures emanating
from the darkness of the war in Ukraine, and we hear
new chilling testimonies of women and girls raped
by the Russian aggressors. Only two days ago, the
Executive Director of UN-Women, speaking on the
situation of Ukraine, said in this Chamber, “We are
increasingly hearing of rape and sexual violence” (see
S/PV.9013). It was a stark warning of what is to come.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Mr. President, thank you
for organizing today’s open debate on this crucial
issue. The number of speakers by itself speaks of the
paramount importance that the States Members of the
United Nations accord to this issue.

In a remarkably well-documented investigation,
an excellent example of the kind, The New York Times
tells a part of a story of Bucha, this landscape of horror.
The evidence uncovered shows that Russian soldiers
not only recklessly and sadistically killed people in
revenge for their defeat, but there is more: a woman
was held as a sex slave in a cellar before being executed
in cold blood. Ukraine’s Ombudsperson speaks about
horrific cases of sexual violence involving a group of
women and girls who had been kept in a basement of
a house for 25 days, and nine of them are unwillingly
pregnant now. By committing such despicable crimes
and systematically denying them, as we have heard
perpetrators do, they are killing twice.

We were moved by Ms. Murad’s powerful
message. We thank her, as well as Ms. Karkoutly and
Ms. Berhanu. Again, we thank you, Mr. President, and
the United Kingdom team, for bringing these important

This is the only so-called noble aspect of this
war: we know that lies are the backbone of every
dictatorship, and Russia has made it its flagship
communication tactic. These crimes must not be left

22-3168221/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

unanswered. Perpetrators are being identified, and they
must be prosecuted and convicted.
All parties to conflict, whether they are State
or non-State actors, are bound by international law.
While in the past sexual violence has often been seen
as a by-product of war, it is now recognized as a war
crime and a core security challenge. It is outlawed
by many international legal frameworks and Security
Council resolutions. I therefore wish to echo Special
Representative Patten’s questions: why is it still so
widespread in conflicts from Ukraine to Myanmar,
from Afghanistan to South Sudan? Why do some
State actors still condone sexual violence as a means
of warfare?
The unacceptable and deplorable reality is that
despite collective efforts, conflict-related sexual
violence goes largely unpunished. We have the law, but
there is a lack of proper application of it. We express
outrage, but we end up with little action, and this is
what must end.
Coming from a region that, in the not-so-distant
past, has been the setting for major conflicts and human
suffering, we have witnessed how sexual violence
was used as a tactic of war against civilians. Sexual
violence was a despicable weapon of war, an instrument
to humiliate that was widely used in the conflict in
Kosovo in 1998 to 1999. This horrible crime has left a
profound imprint on survivors and society alike.
While the conflict-related sexual crimes committed
in Kosovo have regrettably never been included in the
reports of the Secretary-General on sexual violence
and their annexes, we commend UN-Women for its
work in assisting and training the Kosovo authorities to
investigate, prosecute and adjudicate cases of conflictrelated sexual violence and address their legacy by
integrating a survivor-centred human rights-based
approach, because the voices of more than 20,000
women and girls abused during the conflict in Kosovo
must be heard, just as all voices of all survivors of
sexual violence anywhere in the world must be heard.
In this respect, we commend Special Representative
Patten for the publication of the anthology entitled In
Their Own Words: Voices of Survivors of ConflictRelated Sexual Violence and Service-Providers, which
contains 150 powerful and heartbreaking stories
of survivors and service-providers. Reading their
words, one understands the destructive force and the
dehumanizing nature of that horrendous crime. It harms
22/36

13/04/2022

not just a single individual or a single family or even a
single group but negatively affects entire families and
communities, erodes social and political stability, and
undermines economic progress, as you, Lord Ahmad,
rightly put it.
If we want to finally end this universal scourge,
we must be able to do more and better, and that is by
taking action.
First, we must prioritize prevention, and we can
contribute by including the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence when we in the Council
design and renew the mandates of peace operations.
The deployment of women’s protection advisers has
proved to be very effective in ensuring more timely,
accurate and reliable information regarding conflictrelated sexual violence in the field.
Secondly, as everyone agrees, we must improve and
strengthen accountability; ensuring accountability by
putting an end to impunity for violations and abuses
must be our priority. We strongly support the work
of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conf lict as well as the
Model Legislative Provisions and Guidance launched
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Albania welcomes the steps taken by some
countries under universal jurisdiction in their national
courts and encourage a more coordinated approach
among States towards that end. We will be very pleased
to follow the Murad code on the collection of evidence,
because only evidence can lead to accountability, and
accountability helps wounds heal. We in the Council
should incorporate sexual violence as a stand-alone
designation criterion for targeted sanctions when we
cannot do better than that.
The message should be a clear one: no one who
has promoted, used or plans to use sexual violence as a
tactic of war will escape justice.
Thirdly and finally, we must ensure the effective
and secure participation of civil society, as was the
case today, in particular women’s organizations, in
our efforts to address conflict-related sexual violence
at all stages, including reparation and rehabilitation.
We must protect women activists, including women
human rights defenders, journalists and peacebuilders
and those working directly on conflict-related sexual
violence, from any form of reprisal.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

In conclusion, spending time to only condemn such
crimes is not an option. We must take concrete action
through the entire chain of steps: prevent violence,
protect individuals, punish perpetrators and provide
redress to victims and survivors. The legal framework
has value only if it is implemented. Otherwise, it is just
printed paper.
We must use the recent accounts of victims of sexual
violence in Ukraine, and anywhere else in the world,
as a most urgent wake-up call: no perpetrator should
go unpunished — not in Ukraine, not in Yemen, not in
Afghanistan, not in Syria, not in Kosovo, not anywhere.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened today’s debate and in particular
for bringing to the table such strong voices from civil
society. The work that Nadia, Mariana and Hilina do to
protect and advocate for survivors of sexual violence is
invaluable. I thank them for them courage, courage that
we here need to take heed of, as Nadia stated.
I also want to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Patten for her work and that of her team. Her tireless
work in documenting those heinous crimes is critical.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/272) is
brutally clear. Conflict-related sexual violence is
rampant, it is going unpunished, and it is destroying
lives and communities. It continues to be wielded as
an appalling and illegal weapon of war, torture and
terrorism. And with widespread impunity the norm,
perpetrators are acting without fear of consequence.
We are deeply concerned that sexual violence is
increasingly being used to silence women, especially
women human rights defenders and those who speak
out politically. The horrific reports from Afghanistan
and Myanmar are grave testament to that.
The constraining of civil-society space, coupled
with misogynistic threats and violence, is not only
unacceptable but outright dangerous. Anywhere
women cannot participate freely in public life, not
only are they deprived of their rights but society is also
prevented from reaching its full potential and achieving
sustainable peace.
We agree with the Secretary-General that adequate
attention is not being paid to prevention. Time and
again we have failed to prevent the escalation of
sexual violence and to protect survivors. The shocking
examples documented from Ethiopia by the joint

S/PV.9016

United Nations-Ethiopian Human Rights Commission
report clearly tell us this. And, as we have just heard
from Hilina, these are just a sample of the widespread
and systemic use of sexual violence that has defined
the conflict in Ethiopia. All parties to that conflict are
accused of egregious acts of sexual violence.
We are deeply concerned that this time next year
we will be discussing similar testimonies arising from
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, where we have seen
enough credible reports to believe that widespread
sexual violence is already occurring.
The road map to prevention is clear. There exists a
robust framework, including resolutions of the Council,
that outlaws conflict-related sexual violence and that
can hold perpetrators to account; that prevents future
violations; and, importantly, that ensures justice for
survivors. The real gap is in implementation. As the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General put it
this morning, what do the resolutions of the Council
mean to victims and survivors of conflict-related
sexual violence?
Parties to conflict must have at the forefront of their
minds the fact that sexual and gender-based violence
can amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Perpetrators must be held accountable. Domestic,
regional and international courts all play an essential
role in so doing.
For instance, the Bemba and Ongwen convictions
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) demonstrated
that sexual violence will no longer be treated as a
collateral crime. However, as the Secretary-General
has highlighted, too few situations, including where
widespread conflict-related sexual violence has been
reported, have been referred to the ICC by the Council.
In Syria, the International Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
have played an instrumental role in bridging the
accountability gap left by Council inaction. The
gathering and preservation of evidence is fundamental
for ensuring accountability and has enabled convictions
for sexual violence crimes at the domestic level. We
saw this recently in the watershed Koblenz proceedings
in Germany, as others have referenced.

22-3168223/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

We also need to ensure that we embed the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence in the
operational provisions of all mandates agreed by the
Council. As recommended by the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security, we should
integrate women’s protection advisers into the budgets
of United Nations peace operations, particularly during
transition processes.
The use of targeted sanctions on grounds of conflictrelated sexual violence is another important — but
underutilized — tool at the Council’s disposal. Alongside
our pursuit of justice, we need to prioritize a survivorcentred approach for all, including men and boys as
well as members of the LGBTQI+ community. Access
to gender- and age-sensitive services, including sexual
and reproductive health services and psychosocial
support, is essential.
Many factors exacerbate conflict-related sexual
violence. However, the fundamental root cause is
inequality. Conflict-related sexual violence is the most
horrific abuse of power. It is a shameful scourge that
will be ended only when we do the right thing and
embrace gender equality.
The Council has made countless commitments to
addressing conflict-related sexual violence; now let us
implement them.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank all our briefers for their very moving
presentations. I reiterate our full support for the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten.
I also commend the outstanding commitment of Nadia
Murad and, through her, reiterate our gratitude to all
those working on the ground to combat the scourge of
sexual violence.
Given the situation in Ukraine, which continues
to deteriorate, we were appalled to learn of allegations
of rape and sexual violence. The increasingly growing
number of testimonies are terrifying and must be
investigated impartially and independently without
delay. Those crimes must not go unpunished.
France condemns in the strongest terms the use of
sexual violence as a method or means of war, torture or
terror, wherever that may occur. I refer here in particular
to the cases of sexual violence observed in Ethiopia,
Syria and Yemen, as well as in the Democratic Republic
24/36

13/04/2022

of the Congo. We condemn any sexist, misogynistic or
homophobic discourse that exacerbates that violence.
To prevent sexual violence and bring those
responsible to justice, France’s action is based on
three axes.
First, France is committed to supporting and
accompanying victims and survivors. We commend the
work of Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege in that regard.
France is proud to contribute €6.2 million to the Global
Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
and to be a member of its Board of Directors.
We support the implementation of pilot projects
on the ground, in particular in Iraq, the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. In Nigeria, we
have a pilot project that will support the return to
school or training of girls abducted by Boko Haram.
Those various initiatives rely on local partners to
provide access to medical, physical, psychological and
financial reparations.
Despite some commendable progress, we condemn
the culture of impunity that persists. We also denounce
the reprisals suffered by human rights defenders who
are engaged on the issue. We know that while the
normative framework is robust, its implementation is
essential but remains insufficient. Forty-nine parties
are still listed in the annex to the Secretary-General’s
report (see S/2022/272, annex) and most of them have
been for many years.
French courts are taking action. With Sweden,
for example, France has formed a team to investigate
crimes committed against the Yazidi population in
Syria and Iraq. We also reiterate our support for the
indispensable role played by the International Criminal
Court. In parallel with the fight against impunity,
the Security Council must also use all the tools at its
disposal, in particular sanctions, which represent a
deterrent measure that has not been sufficiently applied
to date.
Finally, we must also continue our advocacy and
strengthen our commitments. One such example is the
launch of the Compact on Women, Peace and Security
and Humanitarian Action at the Generation Equality
Forum. At the national level, we have also adopted a
third action plan on the women and peace and security
agenda. At the European level, it is the objective of
a conference that will be held in May on the role of
women in mediation processes.
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

We call on all States to renew and strengthen their
commitments in that area. Together with the United
Nations, we must also raise awareness of the obligations
of the parties as well as the rights of the victims. That is
the goal of our political and financial support for civil
society, whose advocacy work is absolutely essential.
Rest assured that the fight against sexual violence
will remain at the heart of France’s priorities within the
Council. France will ensure the implementation of the
resolutions on women and peace and security, as well as
the provision of adequate and necessary resources for
teams on the ground.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the United Kingdom for convening
this timely and necessary debate. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Pramila Patten; Nobel Prize laureate Ms. Nadia
Murad; and Ms. Mariana Karkoutly and Ms. Hilina
Berhanu for their briefings. Their testimonies compel
us to reflect but above all to commit to taking action.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/272)
provides an account of the complex scenarios that are
frankly devastating, in many cases, in which sexual
violence in conflict continues to occur and goes
unpunished. Sexual abuse and rape are often used as
a weapon of war but pass under the radar. Perpetrators
are often repeat offenders and enjoy total impunity,
while their victims remain marginalized, besieged by
absurd questioning and cumbersome procedures in
criminal justice systems that are not designed to serve
or understand them, which as we have heard is the case
in Syria and Yemen.
Mexico unequivocally condemns all such war
crimes and crimes against humanity and joins other in
saying that enough is enough. At the United Nations, we
need to be more effective and show greater collective
commitment against those unacceptable crimes.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, armed
groups continue to use sexual violence as a tactic to
control natural resources. In Ethiopia, virtually all
parties to the conflict have engaged in acts of brutality,
including gang rape and the intentional transmission of
HIV. In Afghanistan, Myanmar and the Sudan, sexual
violence has been perpetrated against political activists
demonstrating peacefully.
Despite the normative framework, impunity
remains the norm and survivors’ access to justice is

S/PV.9016

the exception. It is true that the underlying causes of
sexual violence in conflict cannot be understood in
isolation from other factors, such as gender inequality
or discrimination, but explaining those issues is not
enough to resolve them.
The Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and
Security, which Mexico co-chairs with Ireland, held a
meeting at the end of last year on sexual violence in
conflict, with the participation of women protection
advisers deployed in different missions. One of
the outcomes of that meeting was a set of specific
recommendations of a practical nature that we believe
can be very useful. We will soon hold another meeting in
order to provide the necessary continuity to our action.
We must seek out approaches to help us find
more pragmatic and focused alternatives and simpler
procedures. We must give credit to the word of the
victims and consider specialized courts with properly
trained personnel. We must therefore ensure that justice
is expedited and not in a piecemeal way.
Mexico supports the recommendations presented by
the Secretary-General in his report and has formulated
the following responses, which clearly are in keeping
with what we have heard this morning from the briefers.
First, accountability mechanisms must be
strengthened with justice systems that have police
and experts trained to investigate crimes from a
gender perspective.
Second, survivors of sexual violence must be
guaranteed access to justice with effective complaint
mechanisms, measures for the restitution of functional
damages and comprehensive reparation processes.
Third, all cases that national authorities are
unable or unwilling to prosecute must be brought
before international bodies, including, of course, the
International Criminal Court.
Fourth, we must adopt targeted, comprehensive
measures for survivors that are designed by survivors
and respond to their priorities and needs, including
access to sexual and reproductive health services, as
well as mental health support.
Fifth, we must respond to the needs of men and
boys and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex persons who are victims of sexual violence
in conflict.

22-3168225/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

Sixth, we must recognize women civil society
leaders, peacebuilders and human rights defenders
as strategic allies in preventing and responding to
sexual violence, ensuring their participation with
appropriate protection.
Seventh, we must appoint more women
protection advisers in peace operations and in the
offices of United Nations Resident Coordinators and
Humanitarian Coordinators.
In conclusion, the prevention of sexual violence
begins with ensuring the full and substantive
participation of women in the public and political life
of their communities. Without that, it is difficult to
ensure just, inclusive societies and sustainable peace
processes, without which it will be difficult to put an
end to the cycle of sexual violence in conflict that we
discuss time and again in the Council.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, Ms. Patten, for preparing the
2021 report (S/2022/272). We also wish to thank the
guest briefers.
We are convinced that work to prevent and eradicate
violence must be systematic and comprehensive, taking
into account the identified causes and origins of this
scourge. Focused efforts to combat manifestations of
sexual violence must yield long-lasting and sustainable
results. In situations of armed conflict, women and
children remain the most vulnerable civilians.
We believe that the prevention and combating
of sexual violence in all stages of armed conflict
and post-conflict situations is first and foremost the
responsibility of national Governments. Measures
adopted by United Nations entities and civil society
should merely supplement the efforts of States.
We are troubled by information provided in the
Secretary-General’s report about mounting violence
against women and girls in conflict areas in Africa,
Colombia and Syria. Thousands of people in the Al-Hol
and Rukban camps in Syria, which are controlled by
the United States occupying authorities, are subjected
to violence, exploitation and mistreatment. They
are cast aside, are marginalized and are destitute.
Prostitution, theft, the sexual exploitation of minors,
human trafficking and unequal marriages are rife in
the camps.
26/36

13/04/2022

Today, we yet again heard unsubstantiated, baseless
accusations against Russian military personnel carrying
out their duties as part of the special military operation
in Ukraine. We emphatically reject those insulting
and baseless insinuations. We see them as part of the
unprincipled information war unleashed against the
Russian Federation by Ukraine and its Western patrons.
The actions of Russian field units — in combat and
outside of it — are subject to strict, unchanging rules
for all personnel, regardless of rank or position.
One of the objectives of the smear campaign against
Russian military personnel is to cover up real cases of
sexual violence by Ukrainian radicals, who have been
practicing it against the residents of Donbas since 2014.
For years, the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other international institutions
have been publishing numerous reports of egregious
instances of beatings, electric shock being applied to
the genital area, threats of rape and forcible nudity
against men and women accused of collaborating with
the authorities in Donetsk and Luhansk. The detainees
were denied medical assistance and received death
threats and threats of a sexual nature against themselves
and their families.
It is therefore not surprising that we have noted a
sharp upsurge in cases of sexual violence in territories
controlled by the Ukrainian Government. We are
convinced that such crimes must be emphatically
condemned and deserve severe punishment, in contrast
to the silence they are often met with in the West.
Today, the actions of the Ukrainian Nazi battalions
and so-called territorial defence units are carbon
copies of the tactics used by the terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant — including the
use of civilians as human shields and the placement
of weapons in residential buildings, schools, hospitals
and other civilian infrastructure. At the same time,
the bacchanal of murder and humiliation of Ukrainian
citizens suspected of being disloyal to the regime
is skyrocketing.
Here are just a few examples.
On 7 March, in the vicinity of the Kommunar coal
mine in the Donetsk region, Donetsk People’s Republic
soldiers who arrived to demine the area discovered a
grave containing the bodies of four women. Forensic
examination showed that they had been tortured and
raped before their deaths. One of the victims was
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

pregnant. The Aidar Nazi Battalion was based in
the area.
On 28 March, Azov Battalion Nazis entered school
number 18 in Mariupol and tortured a girl to death.
Her mutilated body with severed arms and a swastika
branded into her stomach shocked everyone who saw it.
We mentioned that tragedy during the 11 April meeting
in this Chamber.
On 21 March, nationalists abused Roma women
who had fled to western Ukraine by stripping them,
dousing them with green dye and tying them to lamp
posts, after accusing them of looting.
On 3 April, in the centre of Pavlograd,
Dnipropetrovsk oblast, representatives of the Territorial
Defence Forces stripped and tied a local woman to a
pole. Police officers who observed the incident did
not intervene.
Yesterday, however, concerned Ukrainian citizens
posted a video online in which police officers publicly
beat a woman tied to a pole with a rod, having first
humiliated her by stripping her naked.
These are facts that are publicly available and
accessible to all — not unsubstantiated allegations.
This heinous practice of forced public nudity, violence
and punishment is characteristic of medieval Europe
and has now, unfortunately, become commonplace
in Ukraine.
The conflict in Ukraine has intensified the industry
of exploiting Ukrainian refugees in European countries.
According to available information, the specialized
agencies of the European Union have assessed the
vulnerability of Ukrainian refugees to trafficking as
being very high, given the fact that in recent years
Ukraine has ranked as one of the top five countries in
terms of the number of victims of human trafficking
and sexual exploitation in Europe. It would be naive
to believe that the situation had suddenly changed
overnight
We urge our colleagues not to ignore those
disturbing trends or the evidence of sexual crimes
committed by the Ukrainian military that I mentioned.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of the United Kingdom for convening
this open debate, which provides the Security Council
with the opportunity to sustain its engagement on an
issue of great importance to the global community.

S/PV.9016

I also wish to express our appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila
Patten and the other briefers for drawing our attention
to specific conflict situations in which sexual violence
continues to be a concern and the need for action to
follow up the commitments made.
Ghana welcomes the emphasis placed in this open
debate on accountability as a preventative mechanism
against conflict-related sexual violence, as it rightly
directs our collective thinking to an essential truth.
When an individual sexually violates another, longlasting, indelible and life-changing wounds are
inflicted on the victim, which can be purged only if
the perpetrator is held accountable and brought to
justice. Without accountability, which is necessary to
deter future violence, there is no closure for victims
and society is worse off in its efforts to rid itself of the
culture of impunity associated with sexual violence.
Through the annual reports of the SecretaryGeneral, we are repeatedly reminded that conflictrelated sexual violence comprises actions such as rape,
sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
forced abortion, enforced sterilization, forced marriage
and many other forms of sexual violence of comparable
gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls or boys
that is directly or indirectly linked to a conflict.
The lengthy list of acts of sexual violence not only
paints a horrific picture of the sheer atrociousness of
the acts perpetrated in the contexts of conflict but also
points to the multifaceted, diverse and extensive nature
of acts of sexual violence in conflict.
It is therefore important that we elevate the
discussion above the common perception that limits
the appreciation of the notion of sexual violence to rape
in order to create a broader awareness of the breadth
and extent of the menace of sexual violence if we are
to succeed in ensuring the operationalization of global
norms, including the resolutions of the Council, such as
resolution 2467 (2019), as well as other United Nations
and international norms concerning the subject.
Whenever sexual violence has been used as a
reprisal tool or weapon of war, the path to accountability
has often been fraught with enormous challenges. In
many cases, survivors are unable to access the help
required, owing to systemic or institutional obstacles,
the fear of reprisals and stigmatization, and societal
norms and cultural perceptions, among other things. In
the worst scenarios, help is completely unavailable.

22-3168227/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

In almost all the conflict situations with which the
Council is seized, there are reports of sexual violence
in varying degrees. The Council and the global
community therefore have a continuing responsibility
to ensure that the existing resolutions that champion
prevention, accountability and justice are translated
into actions that can be felt on the ground.
In making specific recommendations for today’s
debate, Ghana would like to focus on the following
three points.
First, we reaffirm our support for the Council
in ensuring that conflict-related sexual violence
is treated as a basis for targeted sanctions against
culpable actors and that sanctions committees have the
requisite expertise on conflict-related sexual violence.
Periodic briefings to the committees by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict would be useful in sustaining their
focus and reviewing progress on the implementation of
such sanctions, as well as the existing challenges.
Member States are also encouraged to actively
ensure the development and implementation of
domestic legislation that enables the investigation
and prosecution of prosecutors of sexual violence in
conflict settings in order to redress the wrongs done to
their victims.
Secondly, while Ghana commends the commitment
demonstrated by the Council to deploy women’s
protection advisers as part of peacekeeping and special
political missions to monitor, analyse and report
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence in the
field, we believe that the timely provision of adequate
human and financial resources for that purpose will
ensure that the Council receives even more frequent,
reliable and accurate information from the ground
in order to take required action on conflict-related
sexual violence.
Thirdly, in order to empower survivors, the
United Nations and organizations within Member
States, including civil society groups, should show
determination in their recruitment of survivors to
be part of decision-making processes and advocacy
mechanisms on sexual violence in order to meaningfully
impact policy, legal processes and implementation.
In that regard, we welcome the announcement by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of
her appointment of a Global Champion for the Fight
28/36

13/04/2022

Against Sexual Violence in Conflict. That form of
empowerment helps survivors to re-establish a sense of
control and agency, as well as to recognize their own
strengths and capabilities in resolving the challenge.
In conclusion, it is important to recall that the effects
of conflicts on populations are innumerable. Whenever
conflicts occur, innocent civilians are often exposed
to unspeakable physical, mental, environmental and
economic harm, with very little hope for recovery.
When sexual violence is introduced into that already
toxic cocktail, victims experience agony that most of us
could never imagine.
For that reason, inaction and indifference should be
considered a real enemy within the Council. As we strive
to fulfil our mandate to maintain international peace
and security, we owe it to victims, potential victims and
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence all over
the world to ensure that our actions ultimately lead to
freedom from sexual oppression and accountability for
acts of sexual violence.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative of convening
this important debate on accountability as a means of
preventing and addressing cycles of sexual violence
in conflict.
I thank all the briefers, in particular Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila
Patten and Ms. Nadia Murad, for their very
informative briefings.
In a global context characterized by a multitude
of unprecedented security, humanitarian, economic,
political and health crises, today’s subject calls on us to
consider the fate of civilian populations, in particular
women and children, who pay the greatest price in
conflict and post-conflict situations of instability.
The adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), supported
by a robust number of normative tools, further
strengthened the impact of resolution 1325 (2000),
especially with regard to the need to end sexual
violence in armed conflict. Those resolutions were a
turning point in the understanding of sexual violence
as a security issue in its own right. It is clear that the
great number of conflicts and multifaceted crises are
exacerbating that horrible phenomenon, which counts
women as its primary victims.
In that regard, the latest report on the issue
(S/2022/272) specifically highlights the case of women
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

peacemakers and human rights defenders, who in
precarious and conflict situations are often subjected to
sexual abuse, harassment and every form of intimidation
to exclude them from public life. That appalling fact
requires the international community, in particular the
members of the Security Council, to join their efforts
to end once and for all the cycles of conflict-related
sexual violence.
Under the leadership of President Ali Bongo
Ondimba, my country has resolved to place the wellbeing of women and young people at the centre of its
development policy. We acknowledge the immense
potential of women with respect to the establishment
of security, stability and lasting peace. Consequently,
Gabon remains steadfast in its call for accountability
for the perpetrators of sexual violence and remains
firmly committed to the inclusion and participation of
women and building their resilience.
Indeed, the sustained commitment and effective
participation of women in conflict prevention and
conflict resolution processes, as well as in post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding processes, will allow us not
only to achieve lasting peace but also to ensure that
decisions on transitional justice processes are fairer and
better adapted to the harm suffered by victims and in
line with their expectations, while taking into account
important contextual factors.
We remain convinced of the need to make greater
efforts to facilitate survivors’ access to justice and
accountability mechanisms in order to provide a
holistic response to conflict-related sexual violence. It
is also vital to facilitate access to redress, which is a key
component in restoring the dignity of those concerned,
while advocating a holistic preventive approach that
is tailored to situations on the ground. That should be
done by using existing means and mechanisms, such
as building States’ institutional capacity, implementing
security sector reform and raising awareness
among populations.
My country calls for continued efforts to assist
populations and ensure the comprehensive and inclusive
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its related
resolutions, including resolutions 1820 (2008) and
2467 (2019). We also call for the strengthening of the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, in particular
in coordinating efforts on the women and peace and
security agenda. That serves not only to seek appropriate

S/PV.9016

lasting solutions to conflicts and their adverse effects
but also to ensure a broader consideration of the gender
dimensions in United Nations peace mission mandates,
in particular in conflict or post-conflict situations.
In the same vein, we note with interest the efforts
of the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict network, which integrates the work of 21
United Nations entities in order to prevent conflictrelated sexual violence, respond to the needs of
survivors and combat impunity.
It is time for the Council to issue a unanimous
call to ensure that the victims of sexual violence have
access to international justice. It would restore hope,
dignity and their fundamental rights. Denying justice
to victims is a factor that hinders their recovery.
We firmly believe that in order to better prevent
and combat conflict-related sexual violence, we must
ground our work in a survivor-centred approach
and focus on protecting survivors and building their
resilience. By healing the invisible wounds caused by
wars and armed conflict and providing victims with
the mental health support and psychosocial support
they need, we can move with determination towards
our shared goal of a peaceful world for current and
future generations.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): It is particularly fitting that
Lord Ahmad presided over this debate earlier, given
his role as his Prime Minister’s Special Representative
on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict. We thank
his delegation for bringing this important debate to the
Security Council.
I also thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Pramila Patten and the other briefers for their
insights. I thank Ms. Nadia Murad for her extraordinary
bravery and determination and service to the Yazidi
people, women and all humankind through her work.
Kenya strongly condemns gender-based violence
and its manifestation in all contexts and as it takes
place in the brutality and inhumanity of the conflicts in
Syria, Ukraine, Ethiopia and other wars. War itself is
the crime that opens the door to the kinds of war crimes
we are discussing today. War, even when it purports the
opposite and particularly when it is prolonged, almost
inevitably leads to the breakdown of law, order and
moral conscience.
We must redouble our efforts to prevent and stop
war. We must be rid of the illusions of limited or

22-3168229/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

precision-guided war, which in the past 20 years have
shown their serious limits. We must turn our knowledge
and experience of mediation to innovation and boldness
of vision in order to stop the current wars.
I thank Hilina Berhanu for her words and
recommendations to the three African members of
the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya
(A3) — and to the African Union. We hear and feel the
pain of the Ethiopian people, especially the suffering
of the people of Tigray. We urge full cooperation and
openness to mediation that enables full humanitarian
access, a ceasefire and eventually peace with justice.
In the past year, the A3 has sought to stand with the
people of Ethiopia, as brother has taken arms against
brother, and we will continue to do so. We have spoken
up with strong recommendations. We have embraced
the democratic aspirations of the country. We have
urged humanitarian access and pushed for the Council’s
support for African Union and regional mediation. The
A3, in the Chamber, once urged for a ceasefire, while
observing that there is no lasting victory in crushing
one’s countrymen and countrywomen. I know that is
still the position of the A3. As their neighbours and
brothers and sisters, we urge the people of Ethiopia to
embrace one another to get beyond the intense suffering
and pain that they cause each other and reach for the
peace that we all pray and hope for them to achieve.
We are here in search of implementing commitments
and existing frameworks. As a country, Kenya has
enacted strong laws and policies to combat sexual and
gender-based violence. We will champion the efforts in
the Chamber and outside it to continue to do so.
Our focus for today is on sexual violence perpetrated
by terrorist groups. The Secretary-General’s report
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2022/272)
underscores once again how sexual violence continues
to be a tactic of war and terrorism. We are concerned
that there is too little effort to ensure accountability for
sexual violence perpetrated by terrorists.
The Security Council should undertake strong
efforts to list those responsible, including their chain
of command. It should also call forth cases of sexual
violence to be prosecuted in the context of terrorism.
That should include the recommendation by Ms. Mariana
Karkoutly on sexual violence in prisons. In that regard,
we urge that the Security Council take steps to list and
sanction administrators of prisons and their chains of
30/36

13/04/2022

command if their facilities are party to systemic and
systematic sexual violence against prisoners.
I will propose three areas of action that I
hope will offer further opportunities for practical
implementation. First, with regard to Member States’
responsibility, States must escalate prosecution for
gender-based violence and enhance efforts in preventing
and responding to conflict-related sexual violence.
All efforts must be taken to address stigmatization,
discriminatory laws and other cultural barriers that
stand in the way of reporting and accountability.
Such efforts should be reinforced by a genderresponsive and inclusive national security sector and
the reforms needed to achieve it. Accountability and
prevention demand the localized identification of gaps
and that communal infrastructure be operationalized
for social awareness and sensitization programmes, as
well as the provision of access to justice mechanisms
and medical and psychological care for the victims of
sexual and gender-based violence.
Secondly, on the role of the Security Council, we
note that the current report underlines that the series of
Council resolutions on conflict-related sexual violence
has helped to raise the cost of what has long been
perceived as the cheapest and oldest weapon of war. We
believe that the bar should be even higher. There is an
urgent need to move from commitments to compliance
and from resolutions to results. Beyond listings and
the incorporation of sexual and gender-based violence
as a separate listing criterion in the relevant sanctions
regimes, the Security Council should take specific
steps and deterrent measures to also increase the costs
of acts of conflict-related sexual violence.
The stronger integration of, and investment in
the women and peace and security, counter-terrorism
and countering violent extremism agendas will also
contribute to increasing the cost of such atrocities. For
example, the implementation of resolution 2242 (2015),
which recognizes that acts of sexual and gender-based
violence are part of the strategic objectives and ideology
of certain terrorist groups, including Al-Qaida, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram, should be linked to other resolutions that
touch on countering terrorism, including resolutions
2354 (2017), 2178 (2014) and 2331 (2016).
Thirdly, on cross-border cooperation, the
intersecting elements of rising militarization, coups
d’état and conflicts with a transnational character call
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9016

for enhanced coordinated action, especially where
such contexts lead to increased refugee and internally
displaced person situations, with the potential
aggravation of conflict-related sexual violence and
human trafficking.

No one can claim the right to use the body of any human
being as a board wargame or as a theatre to show its
supremacy over a/competitor. A woman’s body is not
a board wargame, and the multilateral system must be
absolutely unequivocal in that regard.

We call for more effective cross-border coordination
among border security personnel, early warning
mechanisms, national and regional women protection
advisers and humanitarian actors to minimize
prevention and reporting gaps, in line with resolution
2467 (2019), which speaks to cross-border dynamics.

For my part, as Vice-President of Colombia, I
wanted to take up this agenda item, following the
leadership of President Iván Duque Márquez, who
was here yesterday (see S/PV.9015), to ensure that our
country serves as an example regarding everything
related prevention and attention to women to achieve
genuine gender equality. It was also said quite clearly
that frequently the root cause of sexual violence in
conflict against women is precisely gender inequality.

Given the importance of cross-border and regional
coordination, Kenya supports strategies for advancing
the implementation of the mandate and the integration
of women and peace and security positions into the
United Nations annual budgets of peace operations,
particularly during transition processes, in line with
resolution 2594 (2021).
In that regard, Kenya looks forward to Special
Representative Patten’s launch of her report in June.
We also look forward to the international adoption of
the Murad Code.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
Ms. Ramírez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to especially thank Special Representative
Patten for her comprehensive and compelling briefing
on the report of the Secretary-General Conflictrelated sexual violence before us (S/2022/272). I
also particularly welcome the briefing by Ms. Nadia
Murad, for whom we all truly have great admiration
for her leadership, her work and her capacity to bring
people together//convening power. I also warmly thank
Ms. Mariana Karkoutly for her briefing, as well as the
other briefing and statements delivered.
I would like to say that one need not be a victim of
sexual violence in conflict to feel a moral obligation
to speak out against such an atrocious crime and one
that should be served by//benefit from the strongest
institutional capacities, of both States and the
multilateral system, in order to sufficiently ensure
prevention, as well as punishment and that there is no
chance of impunity.
That applies equally to terrorist groups, drug
traffickers and criminals, under any circumstances,
as well as inter-State conflicts. That message must be
convincing on the part of the international community.

The root cause of poverty in many countries is also
gender inequality. What we must therefore achieve
together is to ensure equal conditions for women
and give them full access to a life in which they can
harness their abilities and contribute to their countries’
economic development.
In Colombia, we therefore give the highest
importance to women’s economic empowerment as
part of our gender policy, which I have been leading
since becoming Vice-President because women who
are independent economically are much less vulnerable
to any kind of violence.
We also know that this is a time when what the
entire world is experiencing due to the pandemic and
now the economic effects of Russia’s war against
Ukraine shows us that progress made in overcoming
poverty across the world will be undone. Such a setback
in terms of poverty means that women need to play a
much greater, not a lesser, role in the economy. If
50 per cent of the population, namely, women across
the world, enter the labour market as entrepreneurs,
become businesswomen and own companies, with
the support of States, the entire world would benefit
from that human capital, which productively generates
wealth and contributes to the creation of jobs.
I say that because the cause of women should be
championed not by women alone, but by all humankind
and every nation at this particularly difficult time
facing us all.
We are therefore truly very pleased to welcome
Ms. Pramila Patten briefing us on the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report. I believe
that we need to be creative at this time. I also welcome

22-3168231/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

the additional recommendations very clearly made by
the representative of Mexico. In our case in particular,
we think that the best way to prevent violence against
women, as well as sexual and conflict-related violence
against women, is precisely by giving them greater
economic independence and by enabling their active
participation. They must be heard, like the appeal by
Nadia Murad and all the other women who took the
floor today. We must support women with much more
effective measures within the multilateral system.
In Colombia, we are fully convinced that where the
national justice system does not function, international
justice must intervene to deal with sexual violence in
conflict, as well as outside conflict situations, since we
often fall into discussing whether or not it is a situation
of armed conflict. What does it matter? What is clear is
that there cannot be sexual violence, abusing women’s
bodies. We see that there are internal conflicts. Some
of them are of a religious nature; others are on ethnic
grounds. There are inter-State conflicts and those
related to drug trafficking. In reality, they all share the
common factor of conflict-related sexual violence.
We therefore clearly support the idea that
international justice be applied where the national
justice system does not function and where there is not
the political will for it to do so.
We also believe that all the aforementioned should
be supplemented with other recommendations. We are
convinced that all the different entities of the United
Nations multilateral system — the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations
Development Fund, UN-Women — must work together
towards the same ends, namely, to prevent sexual
violence in conflicts, violence against women in general,
and, above all, impunity in these cases of violence. That
is why we believe that, beyond international justice, it
is also important that the Security Council recommend,
for example, that multilateral banks not to grant
resources to regimes that perpetrate violence against
their citizens, in particular women.
Colombia has proposed that UN-Women create,
inter alia, an index of women’s economic autonomy.
It is necessary for us to take stock in each country
of their concrete actions in this area. Based on
recommendations set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, Colombia has sought to implement the Final
Peace Agreement signed with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia, as President Iván Duque
32/36

13/04/2022

Márquez clearly explained to the Council yesterday (see
S/PV.9015), through 51 defined trackable indicators, of
which 60 per cent have already been fully implemented
and their purposes achieved. Significant resources
have been dedicated to productive projects for women
in some 37 per cent of the cases in which the victims
were women. Women have also been the beneficiaries
of formal adjudication of hectares of land on which they
can undertake their productive projects.
In the case of Colombia, which has suffered so much
from drug trafficking, as have other countries — obviously
there is no fixed reference — 33,827 people are
registered as victims of the crime of sexual violence,
out of which 30,546, or 90 per cent, are women, which
reaffirms that unfortunately it is most frequently the
woman who bears the brunt of this crime. A large part
of the reparations is through economic measures, but
there is also ample psychological support for women.
In terms of justice, which is a crucial element, I
would like to mention that, in Colombia, the Office of
the Attorney General has created a body of prosecutors
specialized in sexual violence who have the specific
training to work on issues of gender violence and to
process all the evidence without re-victimizing the
woman or, rather, the person — as we also know that
unfortunately men can also be victimized — who has
suffered this violence.
Among other measures taken in Colombia,
President Iván Duque Márquez convened for the first
time a National Security Council consultation between
the Commander of the Army, with the Director of the
National Police, the Attorney General and the Public
Defender to analyse the issue of security and the risk
of sexual violence against women. Based on that
experience, we developed a mechanism that 70 per cent
of the municipalities in Colombia are using, whereby
representatives of the security forces and prosecutors
are working together on related cases and complaints
with a view to ensuring that there is no impunity for
sexual violence against women.
The
Secretary-General’s
recommendations
have therefore been embraced in Colombia, and, as
I said before, my country, on its own initiative, have
achieved many of their underlying objectives. But it
is very important for us that these recommendations
be reinforced by the Security Council with its own
recommendation that credits not be granted to those
countries that fail to adopt robust agendas aimed at
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

guaranteeing gender equity and ending violence against
women, especially violence in conflict.
The participation of women in public security and
law enforcement is very important. We are committed
to promoting greater participation of women both as
high-ranking officers and as uniformed soldiers. It was
very painful to hear from the briefings this morning
that women soldiers themselves are sometimes the
protagonists of this type of violence, for it is humiliating
that unvalidated men should perpetrate any type of
sexual violence against others during a conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General refers to
18 countries. I am afraid that there are many more
countries that are not included in the report, as we
constantly see cases in which sexual violence is used
by one group to dominate another or to diminish the
capacity for action or undermine the will of certain
sectors of the population as a way to force them to
go in a certain direction. This work is therefore very
important. We are very grateful for it. Colombia offers
its full cooperation in all efforts to address these issues.
We have been developing our own initiatives with a
view to, inter alia, bring justice to remote rural areas,
so that it is justice that goes to women where they live
and that it does not wait for the day when women can
leave their homes to seek justice.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership
in this area, and emphasize Colombia’s commitment
to working tirelessly on these issues, not only in the
context of implementing the Final Peace Agreement
in relation to the conflict in my country, but because
voices on this issue should never be silenced.
The President: I thank Her Excellency Ms. Ramírez
for her statement.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Jordan.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on the United Kingdom’s
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April, and thank you for convening this timely meeting
to discuss conflict-related sexual violence.
I would like to thank the briefers for their invaluable
service to the cause of combating conflict-related sexual
violence and their contribution to the debate today.

S/PV.9016

The coronavirus disease has exacerbated violence
against women and girls, especially in conflict
situations. Conflict-related sexual violence is a tactic
often used to target civilians, inflicting long-term
trauma and humiliation, fracturing families, destroying
the social fabric, triggering displacement and fuelling
armed actors’ activities. Throughout the years, the
role of peacekeeping missions has evolved and been
modernized to adapt to new emerging challenges, such
as conflict-related sexual violence.
A coordinated and comprehensive approach across
civilian, military and police components, from the
strategic to operational levels, is critical to peacekeeping
missions to effectively prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence in the performance of their
mandates. Training, mainstreaming policies against
conflict-related sexual violence, enhancing, monitoring
and reporting mechanisms and advocacy and raising
awareness are crucial elements in any successful
strategy to combat conflict-related sexual violence.
As a host country to 2 million refugees, Jordan
has seen its already-scarce resources strained.
Nonetheless through its response plan, we have carried
out numerous outreach activities with the objective of
raising awareness, particularly among young people, to
change social norms and promote gender equality with
a particular focus on preventing child marriage and
ending sexual and gender-based violence. In addition,
Jordan’s Youth Peace and Security 2250 National
Coalition has collaborated with the United Nations
Population Fund to organize an online interactive
session to mobilize young people and representatives
of youth organizations and networks on conflictrelated sexual violence and to discuss the impact of
sexual violence on the lives of young people and their
communities, as well as effective tools to combat the
phenomenon.
Gender-responsive security sector reforms remain
crucial for the fulfilment of our mission to eliminate
conflict-related sexual violence. As part of Jordan’s
national action plan, we have managed to integrate
gender-responsive training into the security sector.
We must ensure that existing United Nations,
international and national mechanisms to combat
sexual violence are supported and provided with the
resources needed to support survivors and prevent
future tragedies.

22-3168233/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

Perpetrators of violence, whether State or non-State
actors, must also be held responsible for their acts.
States should harmonize their legislation to criminalize
conflict-related sexual violence under their national
laws and remove any procedural impediments to the
prosecution of the crimes, including forms of immunity
such as immunity ratione materiae. Conflict-related
sexual violence must not be seen as an inevitable byproduct of the process. The effective implementation of
criminal accountability and international responsibility
is an important deterrent from the commission of the
crimes.
The well-being of survivors should be our focus
in efforts to reducing and preventing sexual violence.
Ensuring equal access to medical care and psychological
support for all sexual violence survivors during conflict
and in post-conflict situations is an integral part of the
process.
Now is the moment to enhance our joint efforts to
eliminate sexual violence in conflict. We have a second
chance to reset the rhythm in our endeavours to end
conflicts around the world and build back better for our
future generations, where every individual around the
world would be able to realize their full potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I begin by thanking the United
Kingdom for organizing this open debate and today’s
briefers for enriching the discussion with their personal
experiences and insights.
Malta aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union; the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security; and the LGBTI
Core Group, and would like to make some additional
remarks in its national capacity.
Sexual violence and rape are terrifying weapons
of war, aimed at humiliating and stigmatizing helpless
civilians. As members of the international community,
we must strive to prevent these crimes, redouble our
efforts to hold perpetrators accountable and ensure that
we support survivors. We must reject the notion that
sexual violence and rape are unfortunate but inevitable
consequences of war. They are not. They are war
crimes. They are a breach of international law and must
be treated as such.
In Ukraine, reports of rape continue to increase.
Several women and girls have recounted the sexual
34/36

13/04/2022

violence and abuse that they have suffered at the hands
of Russian soldiers. I commend the courage of the many
women who are sharing their chilling accounts of rape
and other forms of sexual violence. What we are hearing
by word of mouth, especially from survivors, is horrific.
We cannot be silent in the face of such atrocities, nor can
we forget what has happened and continues to happen
in other parts of the world — in Syria, Yemen, South
Sudan, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Afghanistan, Iraq, Ethiopia, Myanmar, Libya and other
places. Malta is concerned that children, particularly
girls, are vulnerable to sexual violence at or on their
way to school. We call on all parties to conflict to end
and prevent sexual violence against children.
Conflict-related sexual violence is equally
traumatizing yet different in nuance for women, girls,
men, boys and people with diverse sexual orientation,
gender identity or expression and sex characteristics.
Justice and accountability must be crucial parts of our
response, and more awareness is needed to promote
accountability. Survivors must be kept at the centre
of our efforts. They must have access to resources
to counter the multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination they face, while a more gendered
psychological and medical support should be ensured.
Special Representative Patten has once again pointed
to the fear and stigma that survivors face. Malta fully
supports the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and commends the important
work of her Office.
It is equally important for women and girls in all
their diversity to enjoy full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership at all levels of
decision-making, as outlined in resolution 1325 (2000).
Providing all survivors with access to a holistic model
of care, covering medical, psychological, legal and
socioeconomic needs, is a concrete way to empower
women towards demanding their rights and creating
change, both within their countries and globally.
There can be no impunity for those who violate
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
The International Criminal Court can contribute to
the fight against conflict-related sexual violence by
developing and consolidating a gender-responsive
legal framework and jurisprudence. The capacity of
Governments, judiciary, police, military and civil
society should be further built to gather evidence
and strengthen prosecutions. Training for military
and police personnel, peacekeepers, grass-roots
22-31682

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

organizations and human rights defenders on sexual
violence issues remains essential.
In conclusion, by adopting a holistic approach,
we need to save and protect, but we also hope that
victims, given all the support for their recovery, will be
transformed into empowered survivors and agents of
change within their communities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I speak on behalf of 64 States
members of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security.
Our group is profoundly concerned by the persistent
and widespread use of sexual violence with impunity
by State and non-State actors in a great many conflicts
around the world. The list of such conflicts is long and
has been cited by several speakers and in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/272). I think it important that
we bear them all in mind.
I appreciate the comments made by my colleague
from Malta with respect to the situation in Ukraine.
We need to understand that the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has spoken of possible
war crimes, breaches of international humanitarian law
and serious violations of international human rights
law. We strongly support the Secretary-General’s call
for an immediate, independent investigation of the
conduct of all those involved in the conflict.
We call on all parties in all conflict situations
to immediately cease all forms of sexual violence,
consistent with international law and resolutions of the
Security Council. Those responsible for such heinous
acts must be held to account by national justice or,
where that is not possible, international justice.
Regrettably, for many victims and survivors, access
to justice, remedies and reparation is non-existent or
painfully slow. United Nations Member States must
fight impunity by strengthening the rule of law. Our
group strongly encourages the Security Council to
incorporate and apply sexual violence as a designation
criterion in United Nations sanction regimes.
We must redouble our efforts to dismantle
all structural and institutional barriers that hinder
survivors from safely reporting sexual violence and
from accessing essential services, including sexual and
reproductive health-care services, victim advocacy,

S/PV.9016

mental health and psychosocial support, and legal
services. We also reiterate the importance of ensuring
universal access to sexual and reproductive health and
reproductive rights, as has been agreed in accordance
with the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development and the
Beijing Platform for Action. We call on all parties
to ensure a safe and enabling environment for civil
society, including women peacebuilders and women
human rights defenders, to carry out their important
work, free of intimidation, violence or reprisals.
Member States must invest in tackling the root
causes of conflict-related sexual violence. Prevention
starts, we believe, with a commitment, first and
foremost, to gender equality, the empowerment of
women and girls in diverse situations and conditions,
the protection and promotion of human rights, and
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership at all levels of decision-making. We
encourage the Council to ensure that country mandates
emphasize the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence and strengthen early warning systems through
the deployment of women’s protection advisors.
Finally, it is critical that survivors remain at the
heart of all our efforts. We must recognize that survivors
have different needs and may face multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination. We must ensure
that their rights are protected, that they are treated with
dignity, that they are able to obtain access to justice, and
that they can safely, fully and meaningfully participate
in decision-making at all levels.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to also say a few brief words on Canada’s
behalf.
We are convinced that we must continue to support
the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Where the Court lacks jurisdiction, we will continue to
explore alternative ways of ensuring accountability for
these crimes.
The experiences of all survivors, including the
LGBTI community, remind us of the need to do one,
simple thing — listen. Our work is to support them in
rebuilding their lives, restoring their dignity and to
find justice.

22-3168235/36

S/PV.9016

Women and peace and security

(spoke in English)
I had the opportunity to serve as the Prime Minister’s
Special Envoy to Myanmar and to Bangladesh. I came
to the camp in Cox’s Bazar three or four weeks after the
forcible deportation of nearly a million people, most of
them women and girls. I had the opportunity to speak to
a great many women who had been the victims of sexual
violence. Sexual violence is not about sex; it is about
power, violence and the abuse of patriarchal power.
The stories that I heard have been repeated and,
fortunately, victims have been able to tell them to a great

36/36

13/04/2022

many people who have gathered evidence, are gathering
evidence and are presenting that evidence. Tragically,
this experience is going to have to be repeated in
country after country after country. We have to take
every possible step to stop this terrible abuse.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of members of the Council, to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 p.m.

22-31682
