UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/17
24 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4015th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 June 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo" the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls the Statements of its President of
31 August 1998 (S/PRST/1998/26) and 11 December 1998 (S/PRST/1998/36). It
reaffirms its resolution 1234 (1999) of 9 April 1999 (S/RES/1234/1999) on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and calls on all
parties to comply with this resolution. It expresses its continued concern
at the continuing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to preserving the
national unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all other States
in the region. It further reaffirms its support for the regional mediation
process facilitated by the President of the Republic of Zambia on behalf of
the Southern African Development Community in cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and with support from the United
Nations to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
"The Security Council takes note of the constructive efforts being
made to promote a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the context of the
above-mentioned regional mediation process, including the meeting and
agreement signed at Sirte on 18 April 1999. It calls on all parties to
demonstrate commitment to the peace process and to participate with a
constructive and flexible spirit in the forthcoming summit in Lusaka
scheduled for 26 June 1999. In this context, the Council calls on the
parties immediately to sign a ceasefire agreement which includes the
appropriate modalities and mechanisms for its implementation.
"The Security Council reaffirms its readiness to consider the active
involvement of the United Nations, in coordination with the OAU, including
through concrete sustainable and effective measures, to assist in the
implementation of an effective ceasefire agreement and in an agreed process
for political settlement of the conflict.
99-18611 (E)

240699

/...

S/PRST/1999/17
English
Page 2

"The Security Council emphasizes the need for a peaceful settlement of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to permit the
economic reconstruction of the country, so as to enhance development and
foster national reconciliation.
"The Security Council stresses the need for a continuing process of
genuine national reconciliation and democratization in all States of the
Great Lakes region. It reaffirms the importance of holding, at the
appropriate time, an international conference on security, stability and
development for the Great Lakes region and encourages the international
community to help facilitate such a conference.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation and full support for
the continuing efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
