UNITED

NATIONS

OF
TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 20 APRIL 1973

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 17 10) . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . .

f@;

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . *. . . * . . . . . . . I

1

S/PV.1710

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND TENTH MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 20 April 1973, at 12.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR

(Peru).

Republic) and Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia} took the places
reservedfor them at the sideof the Councilchamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireiand, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): 1wish
to inform membersof the Council that I have received a
letter from the representativeof Jordan requestingpermission to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’sconsideration of the item on its agenda.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l710)

4. In accordance with the establishedpractice, and with
the consent of the Council, I shallinvite the representative
of Jordan to take the place reservedfor him at the sideof
the Council chamber, on the understandingthat he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when he wishes
to speak.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)

At the invitation of the President,Mr. A. Sharaf{Jordan)
took the place reservedfor him at the sideof the Council
chantber.

The meeting was called to order at 1.lOp.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):Before
the Council continues its consideration of the item on its
agendaI should like to draw the attention of membersto
the revised draft resolution submitted by the delegations
of France and the United Kingdom, which has been
distributed in document S/l091 G/Rev.l, May I also draw
members’attention to an amendmentto the draft resolution co-sponsored by the delegationsof Guinea, India,
Indonesia and Yugoslavia, which has been distributed as
document S/10917. We have before us also a draft
resolution sponsoredby Egypt, which hasbeen distributed
in document S/10918.

?he agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/10913)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council [1705th
meeting], and with its consent, I shall invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel and Egypt to take places at
the Council table.

6. Since the Council has those proposals before it, I
believe-and I hope-that we shall be able to conclude our
deliberations shortly. In this connexion, I should like to
inform Council members that I have received a request
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt that we
considerand vote first on the draft resolution in document
S/l09 18, since the Foreign Minister has to travel this
afternoon.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. H. El-Zayyat
(B&vpt) took placesat the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):Again
in accordance with the previous decisionstaken by the
Council [I 705th, 1706th and 1708th meetings], I invite
the representatives of Saudi Arabia, Algeria, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Tunisia to take the placesreservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited to be seatedat the
Council table when they wish to make additional state-

7. May I remind membersthat Rule 32 of the provisional
rulesof procedure readsin part asfollows:
“Principal motions and draft resolutions shall have
precedencein the order of their submission.”
Nevertheless,because of the specific request addressed
to
the Council, and if membershave no objection, I would put
this draft resolution to the vote first, after it lm been
introduced and discussed.

ments.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. H. Kelani (Qrian Arab
1

-.-

15. In this examination, the Council should be assisted by
a comprehensive report, prepared by the Secretary-General,
on the efforts undertaken by the United Nations pertaining
to the situation in the Middle East since June 1967. If you
would allow me, Mr. President, perhaps I could ask our
distinguished Secretary-General, through you, to give us an
idea how long the elaboration of such a report would take.
To this end Egypt has submitted a proposal in document
S/i0918 and it hopes that some member of the Council will
agree to ask for the consideration of that proposal.

_ 8. There being no objections, priority will be given to the
draft resolution in document S/l 0918.
9. I call on the representative of Egy,pt.
10. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President, I feel I owe
the Council and you an expression of gratitude for your
having allowed me to be present at this debate, for your
having had the patience and tolerance to hear me several
times, and now for this further courtesy of your having
raised no objection to my request for priority to be given to
my explanation of the draft resolution which I have
submitted to the Council. I hope that a Council member
will grant me the added courtesy of asking that this draft
resolution be considered by the Council, because 1 know
this is an essential procedure.

16. I am conscious that we are taxing the Council’s
patience and putting an undue burden on its members in
having them meet on this sad Friday. Since I came here we
have sat through a Moslem holiday, a Christian holiday and
a Jewish holiday. I have heard many‘insinuations and I wish
to end with these words. The people of Palestine, indeed
the people of the Arab world, fought imperialism when it
was practised by the Ottomans, and the Ottomans were
Moslems. It fought imperialism and colonization when it
was practised by France and England in the Middle East,
and the French are Catholic and the English are mainly
Protestant. It is fighting Zionism’s aggression and occupation, and the Zionists say they are Jewish.

11. The debate taking place on Lebanon’s complaint
underlines a wider, deeper situation: the situation of
violence, aggression, terrorism, destruction and forced
military occupation as practised by the Israeli authorities in
our area, all in contempt of the principles of the Charter,
United Nations resolutions and the authority of this
Council. I said the other day in anger what I repeat now in
deep sorrow: The situation in the Middle East defies any
solution because of the assistance and support lent by a
super-Power, a permanent member of this Council, the
United States of America, to Israel, underwriting its occupation by military and financial assistapce which facilitates
and indeed encourages that occupation.

17. It was not because we were fighting Islam that we
fought the Ottomans. It was not because we are against
Christianity that we did not like British and French
colonialism. It is not because we are against Judaism, a
religion which we consider to be’the parent of our own,
that we are fighting Zionism. I thought I should say these
few words to repeat again that we are not going to be
intimidated by any allegations of having any religious bias
in our continuous struggle for independence and for the
welfare of our people and freedom of our nations.

12. A fearful new development now appears in the
extension of that support beyond the physical to the moral,
beyond the area to the United Nations, beyond using
Phantoms against us to using the veto against us. This is, as1
said, a situation which I see in sorrow rather than in anger,
although angry we are.

18. Mr. President, I thank you very much and, since I do
not have any intention of taking the floor again, may I be
allowed to thank, personally and sincerely all the friends
who have been kind enough to mention my presence in this
hall, and to say to them that we are going to tell Egypt that
at least 14 members of this Council have heard, understood,
sympathized with and supported our struggle in the past, as
they do in the present and will in the future.

13. The Declaration
on friendly
relations [General
Assenzbly resolution 2625 (XXV), annex] has been invoked. That DecIaration, the Council understands, affirms
the inviolability of international boundaries, the prohibition of military occupation, the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, and the non-recognition of
such acquisitions, as well as the prohibition of armed
reprisals. Furthermore, the Declaration fully supports the
right of all peoples-and certainly the peoples of Palestine
are not an exception;
they are human-to
selfdetermination. It further declares:

19. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I just wanted to
answer the question put to me by the Foreign Minister of
Egypt. I think it should be possible to prepare a report in
three to four weeks. In this connexion the Council will
recall that the Secretary-General issued a comprehensive
report on 4 January 1971 in document S/10070, covering
the activities of the Special Representative to the Middle
East from 1967 to the end of 1970. Since that time there
have been other reports concerning the activities of the
Special Representative. These reports will, of course, be
taken into account in the preparation of the report which
has now been requested.

“Every State has the duty to refrain from any forcible
action which deprives peoples referred to above”-that is,
struggling peoples “in the elaboration and freedom and
independence. In their actions against, and resistance to,
such forcible action in pursuit of the exercise of their
right to self-determination, such peoples are entitled to
seek and to receive support in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter.”
14. We trust that the Security Council, having heard all
the statements around this table, will respond favourably to
our request to reconvene in the near future in order to
review and examine in depth, and perhaps to decide for the
last time on the situation in the Middle East.

20. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on my list of speakers is that of the representative of Jordan, whom I now invite to take a place at
the Council table and to make a statement.
2

21. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, thank you for
giving me the opportunity to make a statement before the
Council. May I take a moment to extend to you, and to your
country my delegation’s highest esteem and warmest
feelings. May I also extend to the new Under-SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Shevchenko, a brilliant and experienced diplomat dedicated to peace and justice, a personal salute and
best wishes.

upon its violent emergence, while the elements of justice
and morality in the Palestinian case were clear, After June
1967, the Council did hardly anything to roll back the
Israeli occupation of an area three times as big as Israel
itself and belonging to three States Members of the United
Nations.
27. The Israeli occupation has now lasted six years. The
Arab countries involved have sought every avenue for a
peaceful and realistic political settlement. The Security
Council knows of these efforts and Member States commend the Arab States seeking these peaceful avenues for
their positive attitude and their moderation. But Israel blocks
every way to peace and its realistic conditions. The
Security Council knows that, but does little to influence
this Israeli policy. In the meantime, the occupying Power
engages feverishly in consolidating its occupation and
absorbing the areas under occupation. Settlements’ are
established all over the occupied Arab territories with a
view to transforming physically the Arab character of these
areas. Large-scale expropriation of land and property in
various parts of the occupied territories is taking place
continuously, sometimes coupled with the forcible removal
of the owners. Arab Jerusalem, the heart and centre of the
Arab territories, is annexed and mutilated physically,
demographically and culturally, while its unique and
universal religious character is suppressed by blind religious
chauvinism. The economy of the occupied areas is integrated into the economy of Israel for the purpose of
exploitation and absorption.

22. My delegation takes the floor in connexion with the
statement just made by the Foreign Minister of Egypt.
Jordan is a country directly involved in the so-called
question of the Middle East. Over one third of its
population has been under occupation since June 1967. It
is a country torn by ,occupation, bleeding every day in
economic, human and emotional terms. It has a direct and
urgent interest in a serious review by the Council of the
present situation in the Middle East and in early action by
the Council to roll back Israeli occupation, liberate the
people in the bondage of occupation, restore the rights of
the people who are at present in massive exile, and establish
a just and lasting peace in the area.
23. With Egypt and all the other Arab people, we have
watched for six years the various peace efforts of the
United Nations and peace-loving countries bounce in failure
against the rock of Israeli intransigence. We therefore
support and urge an early initiative by the Security Council
to pump life into the dormant international will and direct
it against the Middle Eastern stalemate, the result of Israel’s
obstinate obstructionism,

28. Somehow this process of continuing aggression must
be halted. The Security Council has the primary rcsponsibility for this. The case is again in its trust and it cannot
ignore the roots of the continuing violence in the area and
the role and responsibility of the party which started this
ugly chain. The Council must confront the real issues and
push forward successfully the just solution for the problem
of the Middle East.

24, This occasion is a very fitting one to ask the Council
to look at the broader issue from which the Lebanese
complaint stems. Lebanon came to the Council asking for
protection for its sovereignty and its territorial integrity
against clear and distinct violations. Lebanon’s request of
the Council was just and right. Lebanon’s deep and serious
concerns about its independence, territorial integrity and
even national existence are fully justified and understandable. A brother country, very close to Lebanon, roughly the
same size-the country err whose behalf I speak-is partly
occupied, with hundreds of thousands of its population in
the captivity of Israel. Two other Arab countries are, like
Jordan, under Israel’s partial occupation.

29. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I should just
like to support the proposal of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt that the Secretary-General should be asked
to submit a comprehensive report on what has happened
since 1967 and that the Security Council should meet to
consider it thereafter.

25. Twenty-five years ago a whole people, the Palestinian
people, was uprooted and expelled from its homeland. So
the feqrs and concerns of Lebanon are justified. Its request
for United Nations protection and assistance in coping with
its massive and complex problem is natural. This occasion,
as I said, is a fitting one for requesting the Security Council
to focus again in depth and in seriousness on the probiem
which manifests itself in the concerns and pains of
Lebanon, in the agony of the occupation in Jordan, Egypt
and the Syrian Arab Republic and in the restlessness and
the near desperation of the Palestinian exiles.

30. As I said in my statement before the Council only a
few days ago [I 708th meeting],
my delegation would be
glad to see the Council call upon the Secretary-General and
his special representative, Ambassador Jarring, to renew
their efforts to promote agreement on the basis of
resolution 242 (1967), and we stand ready to help them in
any way we can.
31. I hope this initiative will in some way open the path to
further negotiations and lead on towards the settlement
that we all desire and need so desperately.

26. These issues cannot be isolated from one another. The
conflicts and violence in the area are symptoms of a greater
conflict several decades old about which the Council has
done either very little or nothing. Before June 1967, the
Security Council left ufisettled the visible and explosive
question of the Palestinian Arabs made refugees by Israei

32. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): Mr. President, I am sorry 1
had to speak before the expressions of welcome extended
to His Excellency Foreign Minister El-Zayyat and to
Mr. Shevchenko, but perhaps you will allow me this
3

opportunity
them.

to address a few words of welcome to both of

what should be done to make possible and ensure their
final implementation.” [I 706th meeting, para. 1431

33. To Foreign Minister El-Zayyat I would say at this
stage that I should not like to add to the compliments
addressed to him by his many friends -in the Council
because it would be like bringing water to the river
Nile-the
river Nile that sealed the fate of our two
countries. To shower even well-merited compliments on a
brother would only tax my modesty. I shall therefore limit
myself to expressing to him my sincere welcome during his
presence and contribution to our deliberations. To associate
myself with your cause, Mr. Foreign Minister-which
is
mine-would only be saying the obvious, for already I have
participated in your meeting with both the Arab and the
African Groups, whose unanimous support of our joint
cause was remarkably demonstrated a few days ago.

38. Having heard the arguments and the concrete proposal
just made by the Foreign Minister of Egypt, I can only
express my full support for his proposal to have a meeting
of the Security Council to consider the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General on the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations since June 1967 to find a peaceful
solution of the problems of the Middle East.
39. It is with some hope that my delegation looks forward
to the Council’s forthcoming consideration of the Middle
East crisis and the situation as a whole. We hope that the
Council will be able to respond positively and unanimously
to the formal proposal of the Foreign Minister of Egypt in
that respect. We find it quite significant that a large
majority of the members of the Council, including my
delegation, indicated during our debate that they considered such action by the Council to be both timely and
necessary. That indicates to us that the Security Council, in
expressing, I am sure, the feelings of a large part of the
international community, is resolved to consider, in a fresh,
non-routine and comprehensive way, a situation which is
far from routine and which is becoming more and more
dangerous and intolerable.

34. In the same spirit I should like to express my sincere
welcome to Mr. Shevchenko, whose recent assumption of
his new post of Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Security Council Affairs has already been the subject of
compliments in the Council. I only wish to assure him at
this stage that my delegation will be delighted to co-operate
with him and to benefit from his experience in the Council.
35. I would not wish to pursue the argument of the
dangerous situation in the Middle East and the stalemate it
has presented for six years in the Security Council and the
United Nations. That has been very well covered by
Mt. El-Zayyat. I have asked to speak only to announce that,
on the basis of rule 38 of the provisional rules of procedure,
my delegation takes great pleasure in moving formally that
the Council approve by a unanimous vote the draft
resolution in document S/10918, of 19 April 1973,
presented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat.

40. Mr. SEN (India): From what I said in my statement on
the agenda item before us (1709th meeting/, it should be
clear to the members of the Council that we shall have great
pleasure in supporting the proposal made by the Foreign
Minister of Egypt. Indeed, if the representative of the
Sudan had not invoked rule 38 of the provisional rules of
procedure, I, on my part, would have been quite prepared
to co-sponsor that Egyptian proposal. However, since rule
38 has been invoked, and under that rule we can go straight
to a vote, there is no need for such a step.

36. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): My delegation
is far from certain about the usefulness of the review
proposed by the Foreign Minister of Egypt. In the present
emotional circumstances we are concerned lest new discus.
sion produce contention and lest contention,produce new
difficulties for those who must seek to construct the
framework of a lasting peace in the Middle East. However,
we recognize the great importance of the issue and will raise
no formal objections to the draft resolution.

41. We shall have three to four weeks before we receive
the report of the Secretary-General. Taking a more pessimistic view, let us say it will be ready at the end of the
fourth week. We should earnestly hope that, during the
intervening period, the situation in the Middle East will
take a turn for the better-whether
through the efforts of
the United Nations, the efforts of any other body, or those
of any other person or of any other State-and we should
very much hope that when we come to consider that report
we shall have a better atmosphere altogether.

37. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): In my statement at the
1706th meeting, I explained the views of my delegation
concerning the Lebanese complaint and the situation in the
Middle East in general. In connexion with the role of the
Security Council in considering the situation in the Middle
East and assessing its role in the search for a peaceful
settlement, I said in my statement:

42. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): In my statement before
the Council on 18 April, I said:
“It is the view of my delegation that the complaint by
Lebanon cannot be treated outside its basic Middle East
context, because that would amount to the Council’s
trying to treat only the visible symptoms of a malignant
cancer without recognizing the basic causes of the
disease. . . . We could yet turn this dark hour in the
Middle East to a positive use. My delegation has listened
attentively to previous speakers and we sense a determination on the part of many here to try yet again to go to
the root cause of the Middle East situation. The
machinery is already there in the form of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). In the view of my

“We think it is high time for this organ of the United
Nations, entrusted with the main responsibility for
international peace and security, to review the whole
Middle Eastern situation, which is continuously aggravated by the non-compliance with resolution 242 (1967),
as well as other resolutions, to examine the reasons for
the non-implementation of those resolutions and to see
4

delegation, the Council could help advance the cause of
peace in the Middle East only by reactivating the whole
machinery already set up by the Council. In order to
ensure active involvement for peace, the Council must call
upon the big Powers to ensure that the special representative of the Secretary-General is given a chance to
bring the parties together in order to achieve peace in the
Middle East,” /Ibid-, paras. 10 and I3.j

course, his memorandum
annex I].

of 8 February 1971 [S/20403,

49. Yet, for almost six years, Israel has been systematically
sabotaging the implementation of United Nations resolutions and has been refusing to comply with resolution 242
(1967), which provides for a political settlement in the
Middle East and the establishment of a lasting peace in that
area. Israel is continuing its aggressive actions against
neighbouring Arab States.

43. Because of our basic stand on this issue, my delegation
cannot fail to support the draft resolution so eloquently
introduced by the Foreign Minister of Egypt and contained
in document S/10918. That draft resolution requests
exactly what my delegation advocated in our previous
statement. Our support of it is based on our belief that, in
order to bring peace to that troubled part of the world, it is
necessary for this Council and for the international community to continue all efforts to remove the causes of
conflict and friction in the Middle East.

50. In view of all this, the Soviet delegation believes that
the time is long overdue for the Council to consider the
Middle East situation as a whole, in all its aspects, and to
outline ways and means of ensuring the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967).
51. Of course, the report to be drawn up by the
Secretary-General concerning the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations to settle the Middle East situation, as
provided for in the draft resolution before the Council, will
be of considerable assistance to the Security Council in
discussing this problem. It is also quite obvious that it is
essential for Ambassador Gunnar Jarring to be present and
to take part in the Council’s work. His participation would
be useful and would make a positive contribution to the
Council’s work.

44. But it is necessary to caution the Council, lest our
efforts be stalemated as they have been in the past, that our
efforts will remain ineffective, as they have been for the last
25 years, unless the big Powers, and particularly the nations
of the Middle East, generate the political and moral will to
work together for peace and to work for a new order in the
Middle East based on the imperatives of peaceful COexistence.

52. The Soviet delegation supports the draft resolution,
basing its position on the concern which the Soviet Union
shares with the vast majority of countries, both Members
and non-members of the United Nations, over the dangerous situation in the Middle East.

45. We hope that our debates, folloviing the submission of
the report by the Secretary-General, will be more fruitful
and more meaningful and that the political will necessary to
bring peace to the Middle East will be evidenced by all
participating in the debate. We support the draft resolution
submitted by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and
will do everything within our power to make our contribution during that debate.

53. The cessation of the war in Viet Nam and the current
improved international climate point the way towards
further efforts by States and peoples to deal with the
urgent task of eliminating the flashpoint of war in the
Middle East. A settlement and the restoration of peace in
the area can be achieved only on the basis of justice, respect
for the legitimate rights of peoples which have fallen
victims to aggression, liberation of the occupied territories,
renunciation of attempts to encroach on the lands of
others, and renunciation of the annexation of territory,

46. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): The Soviet delegation would
like to speak in support of the draft resolution introduced
by Egypt and supported by the United Kingdom, the
Sudan, Yugoslavia, India and Kenya. The draft resolution
reflects the urgent need for the Security Council to discuss
all aspects of the situatidn in the Middle East.

54. The Soviet Union’s position on the Middle East
question is well known. The Soviet Union supports the
legitimate demands of the Arab countries for the implementation of United Nations resolutions relating to a
peaceful political settlement of the Middle East conflict on
the basis of the full implementation of resolution 242
(1967). It supports the mission of Ambassador Jarring, who
has been given the task of promoting such a settlement. The
Soviet Union also favours the renewal of consultations
between the permanent members of the Council with a
view to providing assistance and support to Ambassador
Jarring in carrying out his task.

47. As is well known, the Security Couucil and the
General Assembly have, since the very first days of Israel’s
aggression, made considerable efforts to achieve a political
solution to the Middle East crisis, to eliminate the
consequences of Israeli aggression against the Arab countries and to ensure a just and lasting peace in that important
area, To that end, a number of resolutions have been
adopted within the United Nations. The basic resolution
was, and still is, Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967.
48. In pursuance of that resolution, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative, Ambassador Gunnar
Jarring, took a number of important practical steps to
promote the achievement of a peaceful settlement in
accordance with the provisions and principles of resolution 242 (1967). The most important of those steps was, of

55. Recently, in a joint Soviet-French communique dated
I3 January 1973, it was especially stressed that the Soviet
Union and France
‘Lance again state that the Security CounciI resolution
adopted on 22 November 1967 should be put into effect.
5

62. In pursuance of the lasting peace in the MiddIe East
we all desire, we consider the proposal of Egypt contains
constructive elements, and we therefore announce that we
shall be pleased to vote in favour of it.

They support the idea that, in accordance with that
resolution, the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr, Jarring, to whom the Security Council has
given the task of promoting such a settlement, should
continue his mission with a view to the establishment of a
just and lasting peace, providing for the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from all the ‘occupied territories, the
recognition by all interested countries of the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of every
State in the area and respect for the rights and interests of
alI peoples in the area, including the Arab people of
Palestine.”

63. The study and review of the situation in the Middle
East will, we trust, provide us with new, just and equitable
formulas for the parties to the conflict.
64. May I avail myself of this opportunity to wish the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt a good journey on his
return to his country and at the same time to tell him that
his visit to the Council was most timely, useful and
desirable.

56. No one can deny the special responsibility of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace and
security. It is precisely for that reason that the Council
should do its duty and discharge its obligation under the
United Nations Charter and examine ways and means of
implementing resolution 242 (1967), which has long been
the universally recognized basis for a settlement of the
Middle East situation. The permanknt members of the
Security Council, above all, have a duty to provide
assistance and co-operation to Ambassador Jarring in
carrying out his great, important, responsible and noble
task. We note with satisfaction that this point of view is
shared by the delegations of the United Kingdom, and
France as has become obvious during discussion of this
question in the Security Council. It is now the turn of the
other two permanent members of the Security Council.

65. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
regard to the draft resolution sponsored by Egypt
[S/10918], in accordance with the formal request of the
representative of the Sudan and other representatives made
under the last provision of rule 38 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Council, could I ask the Council
whether it agrees to approve it without a vote? If I hear no
objection I shall take it that it is so decided.
The draft resolution was adopted. 1
66. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
on the representative of Egypt.

from Spanish/: I call

67. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you and the members of the Council and to ask your
permission to leave the Council chamber now. I am going
back fortified by your moral support. Having come here
again with fear and hope, I hope that in the end fear will
have no place. I am not fearful for Egypt. I am really
fearful for the great structure of international order built
by the efforts and the will of all the peoples of the world
more than 25 years ago.

57. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation from
French): It goei without saying that the delegation of
France supports the proposal of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt, which is completely in line with the
statements I made two days ago /1709th meeting] at this
very table regarding the quest for a peaceful solution of the
conflict which regrettably exists in the Middle East.
58. On several occasions we have lent our support to
Ambassador Jarring’s mission and I am pleased to confirm
once again our confidence in his efforts, under the
authority of the Secretary-General, to find a peaceful
settlement of the Middle East conflict.

68. With your permission, Mr. President, I shall now leave
the Council chamber.
69. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
Mr. Foreign Minister, as President, I should like to say how
pleased we have all been to have you participate in our
debate and of course to wish you a good journey.

59. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese) :
The Chinese delegation supports the draft resolution
submitted by the representative of Egypt and is prepared to
vote in favour of it.

70. I shall now call on the representative of France ~110
will introduce
the draft resolution
in document
S/l 09 16/Rev. 1.

60. We hope that the Security Council will make a
comprehensive examination of the Middle East situation as
requested by the Egyptian representative in accordance
with the Charter principles, draw a clear distinction
between aggression and the victim of aggression, clearly
identifying the responsibility for aggression, and take the
necessary measures.

71. Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretatiorz j?um
French): I should like to present in a few words to the
Council the draft resolution submitted by the United
Kingdom and France /S/10916/Rev.l/.
This text, which
was the subject of long negotiations, seems to us to meet
the essential points of the concern which emerged in the
Council following upon the complaint by Lebanon.

61. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
My delegation wishes to announce that it will support the
draft resolution submitted by Egypt /S/10918], which was
so eloquently presented by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Egypt, Mr. El-Zayyat.

72. I would add that the British and French delegations
have no objection to having the amendment in doFument
S/10917, submitted by Guinea, India, Indonesia and
1 Seeresolution 331 (1973).
6

Yugoslavia,
incorporated
in
draft
resolution
S/l091 6/Rev. 1, in which it would appear as a new
paragraph 4.

to be carried out by those terrorists and how many
innocent lives, in various parts of the world, were saved by
the timely Israeli’intervention.
If this is not self-defence
then the inherent right of self-defense has lost all its
meaning.

73. Mrs. Jeanne MARTIN CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
from French): On behalf of the delegations of India,
Indonesia, Yugoslavia and my own delegation, and under
rule 35 of the provisional rules of procedure, I wish to
withdraw the amendment /S/1091 7/ which we had submitted to the draft resolution presented by France and the
United Kingdom (S/10916/. The sponsors consider that
their amendment referred to the draft resolution in
document S/l091 6 and not to revised draft resolution
S/l091 6/Rev. I. We therefore consider that our amendment
is not relevant to the revised text and wish to withdraw it.

79. International law, the Charter and United Nations
resolutions prohibit States from harbouring and supporting
terrorist organizations which operate against other States.
The Arab Governments, without whose assistance the
terrorist organizations would not have been established and
could not have pursued their activities, are let off without
even a word that they must abide by their international
obligations and eliminate the murder gangs.
80. In its basic conception and approach and despite
cosmetic changes introduced at the last minute, the draft
resolution adopts the Arab thesis in all its defiance of
international law and morality. The text is an affront to the
victims of terrorism and to those who are trying to combat
the scourge of Arab murder of innocent people. There can
be no mist&
about it. The resolution shields those
responsible for international terrorism and penalizes those
who are the targets of terrorism. It could give encouragement to terrorist organizations and mean acquiescence in
the continuation of such barbarities as Lod, Munich.
Khartoum and Nicosia. No explanatory statement can
obscure this truth, Those who favour it can hardly remain
blameless if the text inspires the terrorists to new bestialities. It is, indeed, a sad and sombre day for the family
of nations to see a draft such as this emerge and find it
placed before the Security Council for approval.

74, My delegation wishes to reserve its right to speak at a
later stage on the revised draft resolution. Until then, I
slmuld like to propose that we adjourn the work of the
Council under rule 33, paragraph 3 of the provisional rules
of procedure so that we can continue our consultations,
75. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
last name on my list of speakers is that of the representative
of Israel, on whom I call.
76. Mr. TEKORH (Israel): The sponsors of draft resolution S/10916/Rev..l, submitted today, have in. a single text
summed up and highlighted the iniquity and absurdity of
the Arab position. It is no secret that the draft was
formulated essentially by Egypt and Lebanon.
77. Arab terrorism is threatening the entire fabric of
international life. Unequivocal censure of this menace is
essential to mankind’s safety. The draft, even in its revised
farm, passes over this in silence. The international community is groping for ways to combat Arab terrorism. The
draft calls for a condemnation of action carried out against
the organizers and perpetrators of terrorist atrocities. This
kind of logic would label anyone who fights crime as a
criminal. This kind of logic would have smeared British,
French or Jewish fighters against the Nazis with the stigma
of nazism.

81. Mr. SEN (India): 1 wish to speak on a point of order.
The representative of Guinea invoked rule 33 of the
provisiona rules of procedure, a motion which, I believe,
takes precedence over all other business of the Council. I
did not wish to interrupt while the representative of Israel
was speaking-partly
because it would have been impolite
and partly because, since he is not interested in the rules of
procedure, I did not really know whether this applied to
him, However, since rule 33 has been invoked, I suggest
that we dispose of the request of the representative of
Guinea before proceeding further.

78. Against whom was the Israeli action directed’? Abou
Yussef, Kamal Nasser and Kamal Adwan struck down in
that action were murderers and initiators of murder
responsible for, among other outrages, the Lod massacre,
the Munich killings, the Khartoum slaughter and the
Nicosia attacks. It is too early to disclose all the information and to divulge how many more such crimes were about

82. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiorl from Spanish): 1
have no further names on my list of speakers for this
meeting. If no other member of the Council wishes to
speak, I shall adjourn the meeting.
The meetingrose at 2.1Op.m.

7

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sent en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
XCAK

IZOJIYUHTE,

Hz~aHw
BarneM
HasnR.

Oprannannnn
06x.e~wnemmrx
HaqaR
MOXHO ~ynnrb
B KHUXH~IX
Mar-aw &rewrcmax
no BC~X palonax
uupa.
HaeonwTe
cnpas~n
06 UJA~HHRX
B
KHRIKHOM MLH-~RHA~ WIN mmw~e
no anpecy : Opramisanns
06%eAHHeHHbrX
CeKqrrrr no npoAa.me m~ariu~I,
Hbrc-ITops
unu Xenesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

3HHax

Litho

in United

Nations,

UBAAHHfI

OPrAHHBA4NN

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

OD’bEAHHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAqHT1:

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas. Nueva York 0’ Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price:

$U.S.

1 .OO (or equivalent

currencies)

73-82001-June

1978-2,260
