S/PV.8299

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8299th meeting

Thursday, 28 June 2018, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
17 February to 3 June 2018) (S/2018/609)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-20222 (E)
*1820222*

S/PV.8299

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda.
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 17 February to
3 June 2018) (S/2018/609)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
take part in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/609, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan, covering the period
from 17 February to 3 June 2018.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita: I am grateful for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in South
Sudan and the ongoing peace process since the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General on
14 June (S/2018/609).
Let me begin by condemning in the strongest
possible terms the killing of a peacekeeper of the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) earlier this week. Let there be no doubt
that this is a war crime. In the coming days, we will
engage all possible stakeholders to identify those who
are responsible for heinous acts and expect the South
Sudanese authorities to bring them to justice.
The security situation on the ground remains a
serious concern with parties to the conflict in consistent
breach of the cessation of hostilities agreement that they
themselves pledged to honour. In the context of this
fighting, UNMISS has documented gross violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law,
particularly in central and southern Unity. Reporting
2/10

28/06/2018

on security incidents and the situation on the ground
is a mandated task of UNMISS, and the Mission uses
various tools to report on them. However, a distinction
must be made between incidents reported by UNMISS
and the reports of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, which
is mandated to verify ceasefire violations and then
report on them.
Since the publishing of the Secretary-General’s
report on 14 June, UNMISS has recorded various
security incidents. In Unity, between 5 and 6 June, the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A)
in Opposition forces reportedly fought in Guar, Koch
county, followed by attacks on Buok, Bieh, Leah, Lual,
Botha and Padeah villages, in Leer, Mayendit and
Koch counties. Reports of military attacks resumed
on 12 June, with an alleged attack by Transitional
Government of National Unity forces on Dablual,
Mayendit county. Those were followed by further
alleged attacks by Transitional Government of National
Unity forces on Buaw, Koch county on 13 June and on
the SPLM/A in Opposition positions in Mirmir, Ruol
and Rubnor, Koch county, on 14 June.
During the alleged attacks from 12 to 14 June, a
number of civilians were reportedly killed and injured,
civilian homes burned, and cattle and food looted. Also
on 14 June, two men in a pickup were reportedly killed
by a rocket-propelled grenade fired at their vehicle
near Malal, north of Koch. The weapon was allegedly
fired by SPLA in Opposition forces in the area. On
18 June, Transitional Government of National Unity
forces, accompanied by a tank, allegedly attacked
SPLM/A in Opposition forces in the area of Pilling,
Thonyor-Kuidak in Leer county. On the following
day, Transitional Government of National Unity forces
allegedly attacked Thonyor and Pilling. Fighting
continued near Thonyor on 19 June, which reportedly
resulted in civilian deaths and injuries.
On 17 June, in Western Equatoria, SPLM/A in
Opposition forces reportedly attacked the SPLA
barracks at Makpandu. Fighting was also reported
between Transitional Government of National Unity
and SPLM/A in Opposition forces at Wadhalelo in
Jur River county and Ngobaggari in Wau county
from 14 to 16 June. On 18 June, in Western Bahr elGhazal, UNMISS continued to receive information on
ongoing attacks since 14 June on pro-Machar SPLA
in Opposition positions in Baggari in Wau county
18-20222

28/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and Wadhalelo in Jur county by the SPLA. Allegedly,
the SPLA now occupies both locations, which were
formerly under control of the opposition.
On the same day, during an UNMISS patrol to
Masna, in Wau county, ongoing fighting in Wadhalelo
in Jur county was confirmed, as artillery and small
fire arms were heard. On 20 June, UNMISS received
information that, due to continued clashes between
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition and SPLA forces in
Saura and Li-Rangu, 10 and 17 kilometres to the north
of Yambio, Western Equatoria, respectively, many
people from the Ndavuro. Makpara and Yabongo areas
of Yambio fled to Yambio town. In addition, civilians
from Ikpiro and Napere reportedly took refuge south
of Yambio, in Masia and Kuze. On 23 June in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, UNMISS once again received reports
of fighting between the SPLA and the pro-Machar
SPLA in Opposition in areas near Wau. The SPLA
reportedly deployed troops and military equipment,
including tanks, into Baggari and Mboro. The fighting
reportedly took place in Baggari, Wadhalelo, Mboro
and Biringi, near Wau.
In the course of preparing the Secretary-General’s
report pursuant to resolution 2418 (2018), UNMISS
requested the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism to share its
verified reports. UNMISS received the Monitoring
Mechanism reports on 26 June, which concluded that,
since 1 June, there have been 11 verified incidents
of fighting among parties and 12 other potential
incidents that are under investigation. The Monitoring
Mechanism report will be shared with the Council as an
annex to the Secretary-General’s upcoming report, and
on July 5 Under-Secretary-General Lacroix will brief
the Council thereon.
The continued fighting in South Sudan has had a
direct impact on the humanitarian situation, in general,
and food security, in particular, such as displacement
from agricultural land and the destruction of food
stocks; and an indirect impact, such as disruptions to
food systems and markets and reduced water supply.
The people of South Sudan are heavily suffering, as the
country is rapidly approaching the peak hunger season
of this year. Hunger and malnutrition have reached
record levels, and 1.75 million people are on the brink
of a catastrophe. By late July, more than 7 million
people could be severely food insecure in the absence of
sustained assistance and access, according to the latest
food security analysis. It has been estimated that more

S/PV. 8299

than a million children under the age of five will be
malnourished in 2018. That is a heavy and unfair price
being paid by the most vulnerable members of society
though no fault of their own. Moreover, in 2017, 30 aid
workers were killed as a consequence of the conflict,
and 7 have been killed since the beginning of this year.
The past two weeks have seen significant activity
vis-à-vis the peace process led by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). On 21 June, the
IGAD Council of Ministers met to discuss the way
forward, which led to the first face-to-face meeting
between President Kiir and Mr. Machar in Addis
Ababa. The same day, an Extraordinary Summit of
IGAD Heads of State and Government was held, during
which it was decided that the two leaders would meet
again in Khartoum under the auspices of the Sudanese
President Omer Al-Bashir to be followed two weeks
later by another meeting hosted by President Kenyatta
in Nairobi. The meeting in Khartoum took place on
25 June and was also attended by President Museveni
of Uganda. In Khartoum, both President Kiir and
Mr. Machar pledged to work for peace, and they have
begun to discuss some of the contentious issues related
to power-sharing and security arrangements.
On 27 June, President Salva Kiir Mayardit,
Mr. Riek Machar Teny and representatives of the
South Sudanese Opposition Alliance, SPLM “Former
Detainees” and other political parties signed the
Khartoum declaration of agreement among parties to
the conflict of South Sudan. Although the Declaration
broadly deals with all the contentious issues, further
discussions are needed to iron out details to ensure that,
this time, the parties implement the agreement under
an effective implementation mechanism. Yesterday,
the Secretary-General welcomed the signing of the
declaration and urged all parties to demonstrate the
political leadership required at this critical juncture of
the peace process and commit to reaching agreement
on the outstanding issues of governance and security
arrangements in moving towards a fair, inclusive and
implementable agreement.
The engagement by the regional leaders and face-toface meetings between President Kiir and Mr. Machar
are positive developments that must be supported and
capitalized upon. However, peace in South Sudan will
not be achieved or sustained merely based on a bilateral
deal between the two leaders. While the outcome of
regional and international efforts to deliver a political
settlement remains unclear, I must reiterate that peace

18-202223/10

S/PV.8299

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

will be sustained only if the revitalized agreement
is inclusive and fair, addresses the root causes of the
conflict and engages all stakeholders, including women
and young people. In that regard, I wish to acknowledge
the efforts exerted by the Office of the IGAD Special
Envoy for South Sudan to enhance the participation of
women in the revitalization process.
Lastly, let me emphasize that the process will also
require the constant support and engagement of the
Security Council so that all stakeholders understand
that a peaceful South Sudan will be supported by the
international community, with consequences for those
who continue to fuel the conflict.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her useful briefing.
I express our appreciation to her for her commitment to
carrying out her heavy responsibilities since she took
over her Office.
The past couple of weeks have witnessed intensive
engagement on South Sudan within the framework
of the high-level revitalization process, and there is
indeed positive momentum in that regard. The Council
of Ministers of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the IGAD Special Envoy
have been actively involved in shuttle diplomacy to
engage the parties on some of the most important and
outstanding issues related to security and governance.
IGAD has made efforts to facilitate those discussions
by presenting a bridging proposal.
In that connection, issues were left for the principals
to meet face-to-face and iron out their differences.
The Addis Ababa meeting between President Salva
Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar, under the auspices of
my Prime Minister as the Chair of IGAD, provided
such an opportunity after two years. Even though no
breakthrough was achieved, the fact that the two met
to discuss issues face to face was a step in the right
direction. We believe that the Assistant SecretaryGeneral is right in recognizing the importance of
that development.
All of us saw the outcome of the thirty-second
IGAD Extraordinary Summit, held last week, which
basically laid out the steps that need to be taken over
4/10

28/06/2018

the coming days to move the peace process forward.
In that context, we very much welcome the outcome
of the second face-to-face meeting between President
Kiir and Mr. Machar in Khartoum, under the auspices
of President Omer Al-Bashir and in the presence
of President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of
Uganda, on the basis of the decision adopted by the
IGAD Summit.
We commend the two leaders for signing the
declaration of principles and hope that will facilitate
the resolution of some of the outstanding issues and
pave the way for the finalization of the IGAD bridging
proposal. In that regard, we welcome the statement
issued by the Secretary-General yesterday (SG/
SM/19114). We hope the Security Council will send
the right signal to the parties, encouraging them to stay
the course and reach an agreement to end the suffering
of the South Sudanese people. That message was also
reinforced today by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.
The coming days will be very critical. The two
leaders are expected to meet again in Nairobi, with
the facilitation of President Uhuru Kenyatta. We hope
the Nairobi meeting will build on the momentum
generated in Addis Ababa and Khartoum to facilitate
the successful conclusion of the peace process.
In order to take advantage of the African Union
(AU) Summit in Nouakchott, important meetings by
IGAD and AU are going to take place on the margins.
We hope those meetings will give the peace process
a final push. It is against that backdrop that we are
meeting today. The Council should put its weight
behind those efforts.
We know there has been a lot of frustration over
the South Sudanese peace process because of so many
twists and turns. We all know that there are issues that
need further clarification, and we are not there yet in
terms of achieving a final settlement. Nevertheless,
we cannot afford to lose hope for peace. We can only
encourage what little gain has been made and seize the
momentum that has been generated recently to push the
parties to make the necessary compromise and conclude
the peace process. As the Secretary-General indicated
in yesterday’s statement, it is critical for IGAD, the
African Union and the United Nations to work together
at this critical juncture in the peace process.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned by the overall
security situation. That was adequately covered by the
18-20222

28/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Assistant Secretary-General. That is why we welcome
the declaration of a permanent ceasefire by the parties
in Khartoum, which will enter into force within 72
hours. What matters now, of course, is that the parties
honour that commitment and implement the ceasefire.
IGAD has strongly condemned the repeated violations
of the cessation of hostilities agreement and has decided
that the Sudan and Kenya should further investigate
the reports of violations and submit to the next IGAD
Summit the appropriate targeted punitive measures to
be taken.
We also note that the humanitarian situation remains
dire. It is vital that all parties ensure safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access to allow humanitarian actors on
the ground to reach those in need of urgent assistance.
The role of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) continues to be very important. We
are grateful to the civilian and military personnel of
the Mission for their dedication and commitment in
carrying out their mandate. We also commend the
efforts made in ensuring adequate conditions for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.
We support the statement issued by the Council
yesterday (SC/13399) and join the Assistant SecretaryGeneral in strongly condemning the attack on
the UNMISS convoy, which claimed the life of a
Bangladeshi peacekeeper. That is unacceptable and
we hope the Government will undertake the necessary
investigation to hold those who committed that crime
to account.
Finally, with regard to the Regional Protection
Force , the Ethiopian infantry battalion is now being
fully deployed and the arrival of the troops and the
equipment will be complete before the end of this month.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to express my
gratitude to Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, for her arduous
work in discharging her duties and for her excellent
presentation today of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in South Sudan (S/2018/609).
The Government of Equatorial Guinea wishes to
once again commend the tireless work and efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to bring together the opposing

S/PV. 8299

parties for a direct and constructive dialogue on peace
and stability in South Sudan.
Approximately one month ago (see S/PV.8273), the
Chamber bore witness to the existing divergence with
regard to the situation in South Sudan. The differences
consisted in disagreement on how to proceed, but we all
had the same goal in mind — for all parties to respect the
ceasefire and to return to the negotiating table. Today
we can say with a high degree of optimism and certain
satisfaction that the goal has been reached. That is why
all delegations here today are to be congratulated, since
our success is due, in part, to the attention we devoted to
this issue and the pressure the Council brought to bear.
Equatorial Guinea has closely followed the
high-level diplomacy that, over the course of last
month, has facilitated face-to-face meetings between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar, which have
culminated in yesterday’s signing of a joint agreement
that establishes a permanent ceasefire and sets forth
new commitments in some of the most contentious
areas. We cannot but commend those actions, which
are undeniably decisive steps in the right direction.
Nevertheless, we remain cautiously optimistic, since it
is not the first time that the parties come to agreements
only to violate them later. We therefore call upon the
sense of responsibility of the opposing leaders and
remind them that this is a historic opportunity for their
people and the international community. We trust that
they will rise to the occasion.
Moreover, Equatorial Guinea is quite concerned
about the contents of the latest reports and briefings on
the situation in South Sudan. We emphatically condemn
the attacks on UNMISS forces on 4 June in the city of
Leer, the recent cowardly attack in Central Equatoria
province that killed a noble Bangladeshi soldier and all
other attacks mentioned by Ms. Keita. We reiterate that
such crimes must not go unpunished.
Additionally, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations presented a fact sheet on violations of
the UNMISS status-of-forces agreement, pursuant
to which, inter alia, the parties committed to taking
all appropriate measures to ensure the security and
freedom of movement of UNMISS, its members,
associated personnel and property and assets.
In the light of that, we must respectfully remind
all parties concerned that, in addition to seeking
peace, they are obligated to alleviate the humanitarian
needs of the population. That obligation can be met

18-202225/10

S/PV.8299

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

only by facilitating humanitarian operations and
only when the threats and risks that humanitarian
assistance organizations and their brave personnel face
are eliminated.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea calls on the
Government of South Sudan to continue with its usual
collaboration with UNMISS, IGAD and the African
Union so that together they can reach the ultimate
objective of bringing peace and stability to the people
of South Sudan, who truly deserve it. We also welcome
the joint statement by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union on the successful
signing of the agreement we mentioned earlier. We are
certain that the issue will be dealt with on the sidelines
of the African Union Summit that is currently under
way in Nouakchott.
Allow me to emphasize something that we have
often said in our statements on this agenda item. Despite
the most recent developments, it must be reiterated that
now more than ever it is important that the parties to the
conflict refrain from any actions that could aggravate
the situation and take clear steps towards implementing
the agreement signed in December 2017. That involves
an end to the hostilities, the protection of civilians,
access for humanitarian aid and an immediate return
to the negotiating table in order to address in detail the
outstanding issues.
In conclusion, we reiterate the delight of my
Government regarding the positive and encouraging
news coming from that young and sisterly nation,
which we wish and expect to have a great future
despite the fact that they must work hard, learning
from past lessons. We are also grateful to the parties,
in particular the regional leaders President Kenyatta
of Kenya, President Omer Al-Bashir of the Sudan and
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, for acting and
for the efforts of former President of Mali Alpha Oumar
Konaré and his contribution. They made it possible to
begin this new chapter. We call on them to continue to
work with great dedication in order to safeguard that
small but great victory.

28/06/2018

General for Peacekeeping Operations, for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
South Sudan (S/2018/609).
With regard to the latest developments in the
political arena, we highlight the rapprochement between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar. The recent
meetings of the two leaders give hope to a people that
has been devastated by the conflict. Bolivia commends
the agreement that establishes a permanent ceasefire,
which should take effect in the coming hours. We call
for its implementation, and we hope that the parties
demonstrate a real commitment to peace and stability
in South Sudan.
The Khartoum agreement between the parties to
the South Sudan conflict addresses crucial elements,
such as the opening of humanitarian corridors, the
withdrawal of troops, the separation of forces and the
release of political prisoners, in addition to a 39-month
transition period in order to call national elections,
which need to be implemented promptly. On that last
point we welcome the fact that an agreement that gives
a reasonable time for the adequate preparation of such
elections has been reached.
However, despite those positive developments, it is
a reality that the situation in South Sudan remains one
of the most critical. The deterioration of the security
situation and the country’s complex economic position
further aggravate the humanitarian crisis, which is
increasingly difficult to manage and affects more than
half of the South Sudanese population. The reports
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs show that there are 7 million people who require
humanitarian assistance and millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees in neighbouring
countries facing a lack of basic services and serious
food insecurity.

Finally, and no less important, we applaud the
release of the 10 humanitarian workers who were
kidnapped on 25 April in the vicinity of the town of
Yei. They have been transported to Juba safe and sound.

In addition to that, South Sudan has become one of
the most dangerous places for humanitarian workers.
We strongly condemn the attack against the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on 26 June,
which resulted in the death of a member of the Mission.
We express our condolences to his family. We call on
the parties to respect international humanitarian law, as
well as to ensure an optimal operational environment
for UNMISS.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-

Likewise, we commend the efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), together with
UNMISS, in the clearing and destruction of explosive

6/10

18-20222

28/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8299

devices. That work will contribute to resettling the
displaced persons and to creating conditions favourable
to the provision of humanitarian assistance. We
regret the death of an UNMAS staff member while
carrying out his work. In the same way, we express our
condolences to his family.

role of IGAD, through its High-Level Revitalization
Forum, as well as that of the United Nations, the African
Union and various leaders of the region, in facilitating
the dialogue between the Sudanese parties. We wish to
encourage them to persevere in their efforts to achieve
an inclusive, transparent and viable agreement.

Given such a complex outlook, we are aware that it
is very difficult to find immediate solutions. However,
the Khartoum agreement represents a response to the
current situation. In any case, progress cannot remain
as only an intention. We once again reiterate that
leadership and political will are necessary for the full
implementation of those agreements.

We emphasize the importance of regional and
international support and assistance to ensure that, this
time, the peace commitments are fully respected and
implemented for the benefit of a population that faces
one of the most serious humanitarian crises currently.
In the immediate future, that implies observation of
the permanent ceasefire, the opening of humanitarian
corridors and the release of prisoners of war and
political detainees.

At the same time, this is an appropriate opportunity
to commend the work of regional organizations, the
effort and commitment of both the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union,
which, through constant mediation between the parties
and the Revitalization Forum, achieved an inclusive
dialogue and brought the parties to starting talks about
their main differences.
Likewise, based on the reports of the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, we encourage regional organizations
to take measures against those that hinder the peace
process and do not implement the agreements achieved.
To conclude, we express our gratitude to the
members of UNMISS and to the entire United Nations
team for their commitment to the South Sudanese
people and for the work that they undertake in such a
difficult and complex security environment.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting and the valuable
information provided today by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita.
Peru notes with expectation the direct dialogue
between President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar. We
welcome the declaration of the Khartoum agreement
between the parties to the conflict in South Sudan,
signed yesterday, which we hope will lead the country
towards sustainable peace.
We trust that the next rounds of talks will make
it possible to resolve issues of the governance and
security of the country and to reach an agreement on
the proposal of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) with regard to such pending
issues. We would like to acknowledge the important

We must recall that the conflict in South Sudan has
forced the displacement of more than 4 million people
and that an estimated 7 million will face serious food
insecurity in the coming months. For it to last, peace
must allow for their urgent needs to be met and provide
them with a future of development. To that end, we
must express our concern about the serious difficulties
that humanitarian assistance faces in reaching the
population. The most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/609) describes fatal attacks, arrests,
bureaucratic interference, undue charges and the
intimidation and harassment of humanitarian workers.
All that must stop.
We want to acknowledge the dedicated work of
the humanitarian organizations and their workers. We
deeply regret the death of a Bangladeshi Blue Helmet
due to the attack on a humanitarian convoy this week.
The fact must be investigated and those responsible
must be brought to justice.
We commend the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan on its efforts to protect civilians. We highlight
the initiative undertaken with the United Nations
Development Programme to establish a specialized
unit to protect the rights of women and children and to
develop an action plan to prevent, mitigate and respond
to conflict-related cases of sexual violence. We are
concerned in particular about the considerable increase
in the number of human rights abuses and violations
and breaches of international humanitarian law in
recent months, as negotiations took place to revitalize
the peace process.
In conclusion, we underscore that we cannot remain
indifferent to the deaths of 383 civilians — including

18-202227/10

S/PV.8299

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

elderly people, persons with disabilities and
children — and conflict-related sexual violence, which
has affected 278 women and girls. Such horrendous
crimes must be stopped and those responsible must face
justice.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join previous speakers
in thanking Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for her comprehensive update on the situation in South
Sudan, as well as her tireless efforts and those of her
able team to bring about peace in Africa. Allow me to
make the following observations and recommendations.
Like other delegations, Kazakhstan welcomes the
signing of the Khartoum declaration of agreement by
the parties to the conflict. We highly commend the
concerted efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), as well as the mediation efforts
of the leadership of the Sudan and Uganda, which
helped secure the peace deal. However, much remains
to be done to achieve lasting peace and stability in
South Sudan. The conflict has ruined the economy
and millions of people have fled their homes in order
to survive. Military action has intensified ahead of the
rainy season and there is widespread violence against
civilians. Aid workers and the personnel of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) have
remained but the humanitarian aid operation remains
disrupted and nearly half of the population suffers from
starvation and malnutrition.
Against that backdrop, Kazakhstan hopes that the
peace agreement will help build trust between the South
Sudanese parties and prevent further escalation of the
humanitarian and economic crisis in South Sudan. We
are pleased to hear that President Kiir and Mr. Machar
have respectfully committed to implementing the
agreement. We expect that their words will become
deeds.
We look forward to the cessation of all hostilities
and to the facilitation of humanitarian access
and expect that the parties will strictly adhere to
international law, including international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and refugee law.
We also expect that a revised bridging proposal will be
concluded by the end of the current Khartoum talks.
We also believe that political negotiations should take
place in parallel with intercommunal reconciliation and
confidence-building among local populations, as well
comprehensive strategies in economic development and
8/10

28/06/2018

resilience-building, with the full engagement of women
and youth.
With regard to the upcoming negotiations on the
renewal of the South Sudan sanctions regime, we
look forward to receiving the report of the SecretaryGeneral requested in resolution 2418 (2018). We
reiterate that the position of countries of the region and
regional organizations, namely, IGAD and the African
Union, should be taken into account in the Council’s
deliberations on any additional measures. It is of critical
importance that the Council remain united in support
of IGAD and African Union efforts.
In conclusion, we strongly condemn the recent
attack on UNMISS, which resulted in the killing of
a Bangladeshi peacekeeper. We express our deepest
condolences to his family and to the people and the
Government of Bangladesh and call on the Government
of South Sudan to investigate the attack.
I conclude by thanking UNMISS for implementing
its mandated tasks under very difficult circumstances
and by commending the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, Mr. Shearer, and
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Mr. Haysom, on their tireless
efforts and commitment to seeking a solution to the
crisis in the country.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita for her excellent
briefing.
First of all, I would like to firmly condemn the
cowardly attack on a convoy of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on 26 June, which
resulted in the death of Bangladeshi soldier, and extend
condolences to the family of the victim and to the
Government of Bangladesh.
My country remains deeply concerned about the
security situation in South Sudan five years after the
start of the conflict. Despite the cessation of hostilities
agreement signed by the parties to the conflict on
21 December 2017, clashes continue in several regions of
the country, leading to loss of life and the displacement
of many civilians. My country strongly condemns
violations of the cessation of hostilities agreement and
again calls on the parties to the conflict to honour their
commitments and end the clashes. My delegation is also
concerned about the ongoing inter-ethnic violence and
welcomes the civilian disarmament initiative adopted
18-20222

28/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by the Government of South Sudan. Côte d’Ivoire
encourages the Government to redouble its efforts to
ensure the security and well-being of the population.
My country remains convinced that lasting peace
will not be achieved in South Sudan without a political
solution negotiated by the parties to the conflict.
We welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African
Union and UNMISS to encourage the parties to the
conflict to resume negotiations towards a lasting and
inclusive political settlement to the crisis. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the diplomatic efforts
of the Ethiopian Prime Minister, which led to the
meeting between President Salva Kiir and former First
Vice-President Riek Machar, held in Addis Ababa on
20 June. We welcome the fact that mediation efforts
by the Sudanese President led to the signing by the
parties in Khartoum on 27 June of a declaration of
agreement, in which they commit to implementing
a permanent ceasefire and to continuing discussions
to reach an agreement on power-sharing and security
arrangements. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the good offices
of the leaders of IGAD member States and reaffirms
that it is up to the parties to the South Sudanese conflict
to honour the commitments made through the signing
of the declaration, which constitutes a decisive step in
the quest for peace in South Sudan. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire supports the deployment of an IGAD-African
Union contingent tasked with enforcing the permanent
cessation hostilities agreement, as mentioned in the
agreement.
The fragile nature of the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan remains a source of concern for
the international community. With approximately
2.5 million refugees and 1.8 million internally displaced
persons, it is one of the most serious humanitarian
situations in the world. Humanitarian organization
estimates of more than 7 million people who are food
insecure and more than 1 million children at risk for
malnutrition serve to underscore the urgent need for
increased humanitarian assistance to South Sudan. Côte
d’Ivoire thanks humanitarian organizations for their
considerable efforts to help people in need and strongly
condemns the recurring attacks on humanitarian
workers. We urge the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan to guarantee the safety of humanitarian workers,
remove the obstacles to humanitarian assistance and
enable humanitarian access to the population, in line
with the 21 December 2017 agreement.

S/PV. 8299

The human rights situation also remains a source of
concern, in particular because of acts of sexual violence
committed against women and the use of child soldiers
by the parties to the conflict. My delegation therefore
calls for the urgent establishment of transitional justice
institutions, such as a hybrid court for South Sudan,
which will be an effective tool for protecting human
rights and combating impunity.
My country would like to congratulate UNMISS
on its excellent work in discharging its mandate in a
particularly challenging environment. We underscore
our support for the Mission and urge it to continue its
work, specifically to protect civilians and human rights.
My country therefore urges the Government to respect
the status-of-forces agreement, which remains the legal
framework for cooperation between the Government
and the United Nations Mission with a view to restoring
peace and stability in South Sudan.
In conclusion, the latest political developments give
us hope that lasting peace is possible in South Sudan.
However, it remains dependent upon the political will of
the South Sudanese leaders and their robust ownership
of the process of exiting the crisis, as well as on the
regional support provided by IGAD and the African
Union. In that regard, my country calls on the United
Nations to support the current momentum and all the
efforts of the countries involved.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): My delegation would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June and for your wise leadership during your tenure.
We would also like express our wish that the host
country win the World Cup in a few days’ time. I would
also like to acknowledge and welcome the presence
of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
On Tuesday, 26 June we heard the sad news that
Lieutenant Commander Ashraf Siddiqui, a Bangladeshi
peacekeeping officer protecting a humanitarian
convoy in Yei area, had been killed. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to express our
heartfelt condolences to the family of the officer, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh and the
United Nations family at large. The Government of the
Republic of South Sudan will cooperate with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan to see to it that those

18-202229/10

S/PV.8299

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

28/06/2018

who committed this crime are identified and brought
to account.

next few hours, President Salva Kiir will decree a
comprehensive ceasefire all over South Sudan.

Last month, the Security Council adopted resolution
2418 (2018), which, at the time, we thought unwise and
premature because the peace negotiations led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
were in progress and that peace process should be given
every chance to succeed. We stated last month that
there was light at the end of the peace tunnel.

In the meantime, we would like to appeal to the
Council and, through it, to other international actors
and entities concerned with the situation in South
Sudan to give the IGAD peace process currently and
earnestly under way in Khartoum their full support.
The Security Council must be seen as fully supporting
the peace process for South Sudan, not just eager to
dole out blame and punishment whenever there is a
setback in the process of peacemaking.

Today we are happy to report that the light is much
brighter than it was last month. We are delighted to
report to the Security Council that there was positive
news from Khartoum yesterday, namely, that the
warring parties — not a just bilateral arrangement
between Salva Kiir and Riek Machar, but all the
warring parties in South Sudan — had signed a peace
declaration in which they have all pledged to work
together to bring peace to the people of South Sudan.
While the document signed is a framework for peace,
we are hopeful and very optimistic that a final peace
agreement will be concluded in the very near future.
At this juncture, I would like to announce that, in the

10/10

In conclusion, we would like to thank the IGAD
leaders and the members of the Security Council for
going the extra mile to give peace a chance in South
Sudan. Their patience and perseverance will soon be
duly rewarded by an agreement that will be acceptable
and implementable.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

18-20222
