United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/59/82
Distr.: General
16 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 65

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2004
[on the report of the First Committee (A/59/459)]

59/82.

Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament
measures

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/45 N of 10 December 1996, 52/38 G of
9 December 1997, 53/77 M of 4 December 1998, 54/54 H of 1 December 1999,
55/33 G of 20 November 2000, 56/24 P of 29 November 2001 and 57/81 of
22 November 2002 and its decision 58/519 of 8 December 2003, entitled
“Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”,
Convinced that a comprehensive and integrated approach towards certain
practical disarmament measures often is a prerequisite to maintaining and
consolidating peace and security and thus provides a basis for effective post-conflict
peace-building; such measures include: collection and responsible disposal,
preferably through destruction, of weapons obtained through illicit trafficking or
illicit manufacture as well as of weapons and ammunition declared by competent
national authorities to be surplus to requirements, particularly with regard to small
arms and light weapons, unless another form of disposition or use has been
officially authorized and provided that such weapons have been duly marked and
registered; confidence-building measures; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants; demining; and conversion,
Noting with satisfaction that the international community is more than ever
aware of the importance of such practical disarmament measures, especially with
regard to the growing problems arising from the excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons, which pose a threat to peace
and security and reduce the prospects for economic development in many regions,
particularly in post-conflict situations,
Stressing that further efforts are needed in order to develop and effectively
implement programmes of practical disarmament in affected areas as part of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration measures so as to complement, on a
case-by-case basis, peacekeeping and peace-building efforts,

04-48118

A/RES/59/82

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
prevention of armed conflict, 1 which, inter alia, refers to the role which the
proliferation and the illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons play in the
context of the build-up and sustaining of conflicts,
Taking note of the statement by the President of the Security Council of
31 August 2001 2 underlining the importance of practical disarmament measures in
the context of armed conflicts, and, with regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, emphasizing the importance of measures to contain the
security risks stemming from the use of illicit small arms and light weapons,
Also taking note of the report of the Secretary-General prepared with the
assistance of the Group of Governmental Experts on Small Arms 3 and, in particular,
the recommendations contained therein, as an important contribution to the
consolidation of the peace process through practical disarmament measures,
Welcoming the work of the Coordinating Action on Small Arms, which was
established by the Secretary-General to bring about a holistic and multidisciplinary
approach to this complex and multifaceted global problem and to cooperate with
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of practical disarmament
measures,
Welcoming also the report of the First Biennial Meeting of States to Consider
the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in
New York from 7 to 11 July 2003, 4 as well as the convening of the open-ended
working group to negotiate an international instrument to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
Stresses the particular relevance of the “Guidelines on conventional arms
1.
control/limitation and disarmament, with particular emphasis on consolidation of
peace in the context of General Assembly resolution 51/45 N”, 5 adopted by the
Disarmament Commission by consensus at its 1999 substantive session;
2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the consolidation of
peace through practical disarmament measures, submitted pursuant to resolution
51/45 N, 6 and once again encourages Member States as well as regional
arrangements and agencies to lend their support to the implementation of
recommendations contained therein;
Emphasizes the importance of including in United Nations-mandated
3.
peacekeeping missions, as appropriate and with the consent of the host State,
practical disarmament measures aimed at addressing the problem of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in conjunction with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes aimed at former combatants, with a view to
promoting an integrated comprehensive and effective weapons management strategy
that would contribute to a sustainable peace-building process;
_______________
1

A/55/985-S/2001/574 and Corr.1.
S/PRST/2001/21; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 January 2001–31 July 2002.
3
A/58/207.
4
A/CONF.192/BMS/2003/1.
5
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42),
annex III.
6
A/52/289.
2

2

A/RES/59/82

4.
Welcomes the activities undertaken by the Group of Interested States, and
invites the Group to continue to analyse lessons learned from previous disarmament
and peace-building projects, as well as to promote new practical disarmament
measures to consolidate peace, especially as undertaken or designed by affected
States themselves, regional and subregional organizations as well as United Nations
agencies;
Encourages Member States, including the Group of Interested States, to
5.
lend their support to the Secretary-General, relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and non-governmental organizations in responding to requests by
Member States to collect and destroy small arms and light weapons in post-conflict
situations;
Welcomes the synergies within the multi-stakeholder process, including
6.
Governments, the United Nations system, regional and subregional organizations
and institutions as well as non-governmental organizations in support of practical
disarmament measures and the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, 7 in
particular, inter alia through the Coordinating Action on Small Arms;
7.
Thanks the Secretary-General for his report on the implementation of
resolution 57/81,3 taking into consideration the activities of the Group of Interested
States in this regard;
8.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on disarmament and nonproliferation education, 8 as well as his report on the United Nations Disarmament
Information Programme; 9
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-first session a report on the implementation of practical disarmament
measures, taking into consideration the activities of the Group of Interested States in
this regard;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
item entitled “Consolidation of peace through practical disarmament measures”.
66th plenary meeting
3 December 2004

_______________
7
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
8
A/59/178 and Add.1.
9
A/59/171.

3
