111.

73

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Taking note of the report of the Disarmament Commission on the work accomplished during its session in 1984
on the question of the reduction of military budgets, 57
l. Declares once again its conviction that it is possible
to achieve intemational agreements on the reduction of
military budgets without prejudice to the right of ~11 Sta tes
to undiminished security, self-defence and sovere1gnty;
2. Reaffirms that the human and material resources
released through the reduction of military expenditures
could be reallocated to economic and social development,
particularly for the benefit of the developing countries;
3. Calls upon ali Member States, in particular the most
heavily armed States, to reinforce their readiness to ~ooperate in a constructive manner with a view to reachmg
agreements to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain military
expenditures;
4. Appeals to ali States, in particular to the most heavily armed States, pending the conclusion of agreements on
the reduction of military expenditures, to exercise selfrestraint in their military expenditures with a view to reallocating the funds thus saved to economic and SCX;ial
development, particularly for the benefit of developmg
countries;
5. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue, at its 1985 substantive session, the consideration of
the item entitled "Reduction of military budgets" on the
basis ofthe relevant working paper annexed to its report, 58
as well as other proposals and ideas on the subject-matter,
with a view to finalizing the identification and elaboration
of the principies which should govem further actions of
States in the field of freezing and reduction of military
expenditures, keeping in mind the possibility of embod)'.ing such principies in a suitable document atan appropnate stage;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Reduction of military
budgets".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

B
The General Assembly.
Deeply concerned about the arms race and present tendencies to increase further the rate of growth of military
expenditures, the deplorable waste of human and economic resources and the potentially harmful effects on
world peace and security,
Considering that a gradual reduction of military expenditures on a mutually agreed basis would be a measure that
would contribute to curbing the arms race and would
increase the possibilities of reallocating resources now
being used for military purposes to economic and social
development, particularly for the benefit of the developing
countries,
Convinced that such reductions could and should be carried out on a mutually agreed basis without detriment to
the national security of any country,
Reaffirming its conviction that provisions for defining,
reporting, comparjng and verifying military e:i-penditures
will have to be basic elements of any intemat10nal agreement to reduce such expenditures,
57 See O/fícia/ Records ofthe General Assemhlv, Thirty-nmth Session. Supplement Ño. 42 (A/39/42), para. 24.
58 /bid., Supp/ement No. 42 (A/39/42). anne, X

Recalling that an intemational system for the stan_dardized reporting of military expenditures has bee~ mtroduced in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 35/
142 B of 12 December 1980, and that annual reports on
military expenditures are now being received from a number of Member States,
Considering that a wider participation in the reporting
system of States from different geographic regions and re_presenting different budgeting systems would promote 1ts
further refinement and would, by contributing to greater
openness in military matters, increase confidence between
States.
Noting, in this connection, the proposal to convene an
intemational conference on military expenditures,
Recalling its resolution 37 /95 B of 13 Dec~mber 1982,
in which it requested the Secretary-General, w1th the ass1stance of a group of qualified experts and with the voluntary co-operation of Sta tes, to unde_rtake the task. ~f constructing price indices and purchasmg-power pant1es for
the military expenditures of participating States,
Emphasizing that the above-mentioned activities and
initiatives as well as other ongoing activities within the
United N~tions related to the reduction of military budgets, have the objective of facilitating future negotiations
aimed at the conclusion of intemational agreements on the
reduction of military expenditures,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General5 9containing the replies received in 1984
from Member States in the framework of the above-mentioned reporting system:
2. Stresses the need to increase the number of reporting States with a view to the broadest possible participation from different geographic regions and representmg
different budgeting systems;
3. Reiterates its recommendation that ali Member
States should report annually, by 30 April, to the Secretary-General, using the reporting instrument, th~ir military expenditures for the latest fi,scal year for wh1ch data
are available;
4. Also takes note with appreciation of the progress
report of the Secretary-General 60 on the ongoing exercise
undertaken in pursuance ofresolution 37/95 B, and which
will result in a final report to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Group of Experts on the Reduction of Military Budgets
with the necessary assistance and Secretariat services;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Reduction of military
budgets".
97th p/enary meeting
12 December 1984

39/65. Chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons
A
CHEMJCAL ANO BACTERIOLOGICAL (BJOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the urgent necessity of strict observance by
ali States of the principies and objectives of the Protocol
59 A/39/521 and Add. l and ~

60 A/19,399

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

74

for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, 61 and of
the adherence by ali States to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, signed in London, Moscow, and Washington on 1O April 1972, 62
Noting that it has been reported that such weapons have
been used,
Noting a/so intemational efforts under way to strengthen
relevant intemational prohibitions, including efforts to
develop appropriate fact-finding mechanisms,
Rededicating its efforts to protect mankind from chemical and biological warfare,
1. Calls for strict observance of existing intemational
obligations regarding prohibitions on chemical and biological weapons and condemns actions that contravene them;
2. Welcomes the ongoing efforts to ensure the most
effective prohibitions possible on chemical and biological
weapons;
3. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to accelerate
its negotiations on a multilateral convention on the complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and on their
destruction.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

B
PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraph 75 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 63 which
states that the complete and effective prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of ali chemical
weapons and their destruction represents one of the most
urgent measures of disarmament,
Referring to the unanimous and categorical reaffirmation by ali Member States at the twelfth special session of
the General Assembly of the validity of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session,64
Convinced of the need for the earliest conclusion of a
convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of ali chemical weapons and on
their destruction, which would significantly contribute to
general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Reca/ling its resolutions 36/96 B of 9 December 1981,
37/98 A of 13 December 1982 and 38/187 A of 20
December 1983,
Expressing profound concern at the intended production
and deployment of binary chemical weapons,
Taking into consideration the decision by the Conference on Disarmament on the mandate for the Ad Hoc
Committee on Chemical Weapons, as well as the work of
this Committee during the session of the Conference in
1984, 65
Deeming it desirable for States to refrain from taking any
action that could delay or further complicate negotiations
6I League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929), No. 2138, p. 65.
62 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

63 Resolution S-10/2.

and to display a constructive approach to such negotiations and the political will to reach an early agreement on
the chemical weapons convention,
Aware that the qualitative improvement and development of chemical weapons complicate ongoing negotiations on the prohibition of chemical weapons,
Taking note of proposals on the creation of chemicalweapon-free zones aimed at facilitating the complete prohibition of chemical weapons,
I. Reaffirms the necessity of the speediest elaboration
and conclusion of a convention on the prohibition of the
development, production and stockpiling of ali chemical
weapons and on their destruction;
2. Appeals to ali States to facilitate in every possible
way the conclusion of such a convention;
3. Urges the Conference on Disarmament to intensify
the negotiations in the Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical
Weapons with a view to achieving accord on a chemical
weapons convention at the earliest possible date and, for
this purpose, to proceed immediately to drafting such a
convention for submission to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
4. Reaffirms 1ts cal/ to ali States to conduct serious
negotiations in good faith and to refrain from any action
that could impede negotiations on the prohibition of
chemical weapons and specifically to refrain from the production and deployment of binary and other new types of
chemical weapons, as well as from stationing chemical
weapons on the territory of other States.
97th p/enary meeting
12 December 1984

e
CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of ali chemical weapons and to
their destruction,
Reaffirming the urgent necessity of strict observance by
ali States of the principies and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925 61 , and of
the adherence by ali States to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, signed in London, Moscow and Washington on 10 April 1972, 62
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, which incorporates, inter a/ia, the report of its
Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons, 65
Considering it necessary that ali efforts be exerted for the
continuation and successful conclusion of negotiations on
the prohibition ofthe development, production and stockpiling of ali chemical weapons and on their destruction,
l. Takes note of the work of the Conference on Disarmament during its session in 1984 regarding the prohibition of chemical weapons and, in particular, appreciates
64 See Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Twe/jlh Specia/ Session,
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13, document A/S-12/32, para. 62.
65 /bid., Thinp-ninth Session. Supp/ement No. 27 (A/39/27), para. 98.

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Commlttee

the work of its Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons
on that question and the progress achieved therein;
2. Expresses its regret and concern that an agreement
on the complete and effective prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons
and on their destruction has not yet been elaborated;
3. Urges again the Conference on Disarmament, as a
matter of high priority, to intensify, during its session in
1985, the negotiations on such a convention and to reinforce further its efforts, inter alia, by increasing the time
during the year that the Conference on Disarmament
devotes to such negotiations, taking into account ali
existing proposals and future initiatives, with a view to the
final elaboration of a convention at the earliest possible
date, and to re-establish its Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons for this purpose with the 1984 mandate;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the
results of its negotiations.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

D
REVIEW CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION AND STOCKPILING OF BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL) AND TOXIN WEAPONS AND
ON THEIR DESTRUCTION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2826 (XXVI) of 16 December
1971 in which it commended the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling
ofBacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, and expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Convention,
Noting that, in accordance with the provisions of article
XII ofthe Convention, the first Review Conference ofthe
Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition ofthe Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction
was held at Geneva from 3 to 21 March 1980,
Bearing in mind that the Review Conference decided, in
its Final Declaration, that a second Review Conference
should be held at Geneva at the request of a majority of
States parties not earlier than 1985 and, in any case, not
later than 1990, 66
Recalling its resolution 35/144 A of 12 December 1980,
in which it welcomed the Final Declaration of the Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention,
l. Notes that, at the request of a majority of States parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, a
second Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention will be held in 1986, and that, following appropriate
consultations, a preparatory committee is to be established
prior to the holding of the Review Conference;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance and to provide such services, including
6 6 See Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Deve/opment. Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, Final Document
(BWC/CONF.1/10) (Geneva, 1980), sect. 11, art. XII.

75

summary records, as may be required for the second
Review Conference and its preparation.
97th p/enary meeting
12 December 1984

E
CHEMICAL AND BACTERIOLOGICAL (BIOLOGICAL)
WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37/98 D of 13 December 1982,
and particularly paragraph 7, in which it requested the
Secretary-General, with the assistance of qualified consultant experts, to devise procedures for the investigation of
information concerning activities that may constitute a
violation of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on
17 June 1925,61 or ofthe relevant rules of customary international law and to assemble and organize systematically
documentation relating to the identification of signs and
symptoms associated with the use of agents covered by the
1925 Geneva Protocol,
Recognizing that the use of such agents in war is universally condemned,
Underlining the importance of impartially and rapidly
ascertaining, through an appropriate international procedure as provided for in resolution 37/98 D, facts that may
constitute a violation of the provisions of the Geneva Protocol or of the relevant rules of customary international
law,
Recalling its resolution 38/187 C of20 December 1983,
in which it took note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to paragraph 7 ofresolution 37/98 D67
and requested him to complete during 1984, with the
assistance of the Group of Consultant Experts established
by him, the task entrusted to him under the terms of paragraph 7 ofresolution 37/98 D, and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session,
1. Takes note of the report by the Secretary-General, 68
to which is annexed the report of the Group of Consultant
Experts established by him't:oncerning the implementation
ofthe provisionsofparagraph 7 ofresolution 37/98 D and
of resolution 38/ l 87 C;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, with the submission of
the report of the Group of Consultant Experts, the provisions for the implementation of resolution 37/98 D are
completed.
97th p/enary meeting
12 December 1984

39/147. lsraeli nuclear armament
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on Israelí nuclear
armament,
Recalling resolution 38/64 of 15 December 1983, in
which, ínter alia, it called upon ali countries ofthe Middle
East, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East, to agree to place ali their nuclear
activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards, and invited those countries also, pending the
67 A/38/435.
68 N39/488.
