OFFICIAL

RECORDS

1943rd

MEETING:

14 JULY 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l943)

. . . . , . , . . , . . .. , .. . . . . . .. . . , . .. . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , , , . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against the
Reoublic of Uganda:
((1)Letter dated”6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(17)Letter dated 6 July ,1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);
((‘1 Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(4 Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires ~.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12124). . . . . . . . . . , . , . , , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . +. .

1

S/PV. 1943

‘:
3,

., NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sr~ppletncnts of the Officid Recotds of the Sewrity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrrtiort.s rr!7d
Dwisioru
qf tkc Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1943rd MEETING
Held in New York, on Wednesday,
Prcsitlent:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy).

Pscsent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/l943)

of the agenda

2. Complaint
by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against
the Republic of Uganda:
((I) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant
Executive Secretary of the Organization of
African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(h)
Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mauritania to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12128);
(t,) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(tl) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge
d’affaires tr.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Uganda to the United Nations addressed to
the President ot’the Security Council (S/12124)

Adoption of the agenda

Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current
chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of
the “act of aggression” by Israel against the Republic of Uganda:
(a) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the Organization of African Unity
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12126);
(6) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of. Mauritania
to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);

14 July 1976, at 3 p.m.

(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(d) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Chargk d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12124)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its previous meetings
[1939th to 19421d nwe’tin,q.s], I invite the representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea,
India, Israel, Kenya, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Qatar,
Somalia, Uganda, the United Republic of Cameroon
and ‘Yugoslavia to participate in the Council’s discussion, without the right to vote.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have received a letter
from the representative of Cuba containing a request
to be invited to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote. In accordance with the provisions
of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite the representative of Cuba to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
3. I invite the representative of Cuba to take the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is his turn to
speak.

4. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): First of all,
Mr. President, I should like to Join the other members
of the Council and yourself in expressing our sincere
condolences to the people and the Government of the

(

i I

!

!

Federal Republic of Germany at the loss of an eminent ‘v “10. As previously explained by the Minister for
national leader, Mr. Gustav Heinemann,
an eminent -‘f’Foreign Affairs of Uganda, the hijackers placed
explosives in strategic positions and demanded the i
international personality who was President of the
withdrawal of Ugandan security forces to a position
/
Federal Republic of Germany from 1969 to fl974.
200 metres away from the aircraft terminal building.
’
They prevented the Ugandan forces from approaching
5. Today is 14 July, and on this occasion I should
the
building. Our Ugandan brothers had no choice but
like to express my delegation’s congratulations
to the
to
accept
the demands of the hijackers.
French delegation. We express the hope that France,
traditionally
the defender of freedoms, will join us
11. Moreover, the hostages were provided with
hand in hand in fighting for progress, freedom and
medical care, food and other necessary services and
justice in the world and to demolish many other
supplies. The French crew and many of the hostages
“Bastilles’‘-physical
and spiritual-in
our world that
have confirmed this fact, especially with regard to the
hinder the genuine progress of humanity towards a
medical team, consisting of doctors and nurses, that
just and prosperous international community.
was made available to the hostages in need of medical
attention.
6. 1 shall not go into the details of what happened
at Entebbe Airport in Uganda on 4 July. The Council
12. Thanks to the efforts and persuasion of Presihas received full information concerning the Zionist
dent Amin, a number of the hostages were released,
aggression in the letter from Mr. Idi Amin, President
especially those’belonging
to States other than Israel
of Uganda [S/12/24]. Moreover, in his statemeqt on
or having a dual nationality.
President Amin freFriday [/9397/l /n~eti,z~], the Minister for Foreign
quently visited the hostages, reassuring them by
Affairs of Uganda set forth all the details of this unconfirming the untiring efforts he was making to
precedented crime. Also, the statements of the Forsecure their release. He received messages of appreeign Minister of Mauritius, in his capacity as current
ciation and thanks from many Governments and from
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Organithe hostages themselves for his sincere and humanization of African Unity [I940th melting];
the Permatarian efforts.
nent Representative of Mauritania,
in his capacity
13. At the same time, the Zionist authorities publicas Chairman of the African Group [1939r/2 meefirlg],
ly announced their intention to negotiate with the
and the Ambassador of Qatar, in his capacity as
hijackers. Last Friday, the representative of France
Chairman of the Arab Group [ihid.], have all shed
confirmed to the Council that the Israeli authorities
more light on this tragic event.
had contacted his Government to make known their
intention of negotiating, with the French Giovernment
7. We know that on 28 June President Amin was
acting
as intermediary.
informed by Entebbe Airport Control that a hijacked
plane with 250 passengers on board was seeking per14. But during this time the Zionist authorities were
mission to land and that it had only 15 minutes’ fuel
plotting their wanton aggression against Uganda,
left. The President and the people of Uganda were
They were developing their plans and rehearsing the
placed in a delicate dilemma-whether
to refuse to
attack. In fact, from the very beginning, the Zionists
allow the aircraft to land and thereby run the risk that
intended to attack Uganda, using the hijacking incithe passengers would be killed, or to allow the aircraft
dent as an excuse’. Clearly, from the ver:y beginning
to land and bear the consequences of the hijacking.
the Israeli Government was bent on attacking Uganda
because it has not forgiven the heroic people and
8. Motivated by humanitarian
considerations
and
Government of Uganda for unmasking the ugly profile
a sense of the responsibilities
devolving upon him
of Israel in Africa and its collaboration wi,th the racist
because of his position and in response to a request
rCgimes in South Africa and Rhodesia. Mr, Rabin
from France, the President of Uganda allowed the
confirmed this strategy when he told the Knesset on
aircraft to land. Following that-and
this was wit4 July: “The Israeli Defence Force and the intelligence
nessed by the hostages, the French authorities and
community lost not a single hour required for thinking,
the crew of the hijacked plane-president
Amin made
planning and preparation.”
And yet, only three days
sincere and untiring efforts to help the hostages and
before that announcement, the Israeli Foreign Ministo save as much as he could in this delicate and very
ter had stated in the Knesset: “According
to the
difficult situation. He communicated with the hijackinformation available to us, all the hostages are safe”.
ers with a view to allowing the hostages to be served
food and refreshments.
15. As I have previously stated, the Zionist entity
is attempting to justify its aggression by this act 01
9. The Ugandan authorities: had initially
intended
hijacking. It is trying, in vain, to present its ~akei
to supply the aircraft with food and fuel in order that
aggression as a rescue operation, justified by inter
national law and humanitarian
motivations,
I[ ha!
it could proceed elsewhere. ,Howeyer, the hijackers
refused to proceed to any other place, The Ugandan
attempted to accuse the President of Uganda an(
authorities were anxious to co-operate with them to
smear his name and the name of his country, claimin
that he had been in collusion with the hijackers.
ensure the safety of the hostages.
2

16. The Zionists are using their usual, traditional
tactics of allegations, fabrications and lies in order to
cover up the weakness of their aurguments and the
sinister character of their intentions. Their noisy propaganda is supported by their protectors, allies and
lackeys, as well as by the powerful Western mass
media and the colonialist, imperialist and capitalist
newspapers.

lems of hijacking or international
terrorism, because
international terrorism cannot be fought by State terrorism.
22. I will not indulge in lengthy quotations of abundant juridical and legal texts supporting my statement
in this respect; I should like only to draw the attention
of the Council to a very important and pertinent article
appearing on 9 July in the French newspaper i-0
Mot&,
which is a respectable newspaper known all
over the world, and which cannot be accused of being
anti-Semitic or pro-Arab. The Foreign Minister of
Mauritius yesterday quoted some of this important
article, written by Mr. Jean Schwoebel. I will quote
some long passages of this article:

17. Although
this clearly was a flagrant attack
against a sovereign State, a Member of this Organization, the Zionists have tried, in vain, to distract the
attention of the international
community from the
aggression, which was in fact an act of treachery,
felony and dishonesty. The Zionist invaders exploited
the good faith of our Ugandan brothers and others,
including the hijackers themselves, who trusted the
word of honour given by the Zionist authorities. In
fact, even The Ncu) York Times said on 11 July:

The United Nations Charter did not envisage the
problems raised by terrorism and the taking of hostages, but States Members of the United Nations
are bound by the basic principles which it proclaims, and which are the basis of peace and security
in the world: no State shall mete out justice itself
or interfere in the affairs of other States; and in any
conflict States shall resort to peaceful methods and,
if necessary, have recourse to the Security Council.

“the 707 informed the control tower in Entebbe that
the Hercules aircraft were carrying the imprisoned
guerrillas
that the hijackers had demanded
in
exchange for the hostages”.
18. The Zionists had announced to the entire world
their willingness to negotiate; and yet they approached
the negotiating
site with their weaponry. People
trusted their word but, as their sinister record demonstrates so clearly, the notion of honour is unknown
by the Zionist gangs.

“The recognition of these principles has constituted enormous progress in relation to previous
international law, which only attempted to ensure
a precarious balance among the major Powers. It
affords the small countries relatively effective protection to the extent that the great Powers, desirous
of avoiding a new obviously suicidal war, have
agreed to submit to certain common rules and even
to a degree of control by the United Nations.

19. In order to justify this ugly act of aggression, the
Zionists not only have tried to accuse Uganda and its
President, but have tried, in vain, to cast doubts on
the behaviour of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO), recognized by the United Nations and the
majority of the world community as the legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people. It is clear to
the international community that the PLO denounced
the hijacking from the outset and sent one of its most
prominent
representatives to Kampala in order to
participate
in the negotiations
with the hijackers.
Even the supporters of Israel--even
the United
States-have
had occasion to express their appreciation to the PLO for its role in aiding in the evacuation
of American citizens from other areas of the world.
However, the hijackers, who were not under the
control of the PLO, turned down its offers. Yet the
Zionist representative has tried, in vain, to destroy
the true image of the PLO as a serious, honest and
decent national movement of liberation.

‘L... It is astonishing, if not disquieting, that not
one of the Western leaders has expressed the slightest reservations concerning an act of force which
was carried out unquestionably
in violation of the
Charter, and which has reintroduced the principle
of ‘might makes right’ into international
relations.

20. Israel’s wanton aggression is a serious and grave
crime against international
law and its established
rules and principles. It flouts the principles and purPoses of the United Nations Charter; it also constitutes a dangerous practice contrary to the principle
of good faith in negotiations.

“The right of all States to protect their nationals,
a right which some jurists have called ‘humanitarian
protection’, has been invoked to justify a violation
of Ugandan sovereignty. None the Iess, to leave the
assessment of such a right to every State is not only
contrary to the undertakings
of United Nations
Members, but also extremely dangerous. Moreover, it is forgotten that negotiations carried out
by French diplomats
were proceeding and had
already produced not insignificant
results; those
negotiations had not been interrupted, as acknowledged by Paris when the Israelis carried out their
raid on Entebbe. Mandated by all of the States concerned, France intended to pursue those negotiations to their conclusion, and would not have failed
to determine responsibility,
in case of failure.

21. The crime committed by the Zionists will not
serve the cause of peace, nor will it resolve the prob-

“The Israelis have accused the Ugandan Chief
of State of complicity
with the terrorists who
3

--I

hijacked the airbus, and in the Security Council
it will be up to them to justify this accusation...
It will not be easy for them, however, to substantiate it with clear and decisive proof. Although
moral complicity with the terrorists on the part of
Marshal Amin Dada is far from being excluded, it
is accompanied by the fact of extreme prudence.
Testimony
in his favour is not lacking-particularly that of French diplomats, who have acknowledged that the Ugandan Chief of State had himself
provided them with invaluable assistance. There is
also the testimony of a number of hostages who
expressed their appreciation to the Ugandan Chief
of State for having contributed to easing their fate
in Entebbe.”

23. Hijackers generally belong to politically motivated groups, and are therefore sometimes extremely
idealistic in terms of their goals. In recent years, they
have shown, in spite’of their unacceptable and controversial behaviour, their trust in the spoken word
and their willingness to negotiate. The crimirial act
committed by Israel will result in increased distrust
by hijackers of the given word and of the feasibility of
negotiation
and compromise.
Most certainly, the
world will in future confront more cynical and more
cautious hijackers, and the problem,of hijacking and
of international terrorism will never be solved.

&&,.. The Israeli raid in Entebbe constitutes a no
less serious danger that similar future actions may
also be justified.,, Should it be recognized that the
right of ‘humanitarian protection’ belongs only to
militarily powerful States and can be exercised only
against the weaker countries? In any case, it would
be difficult to envisage that Israel would undertake
the same sort of operation in Amsterdam or in Paris
if, by chance, an aeroplane transporting
Israelis
that was hijacked by terrorists were to land at
Schipol or Orly. The Canadian Minister for Foreign
Affairs. . . frankly admitted.. . that Canada would
not tolerate foreign intervention on its soil in the
event of terrorist action.”

“The exchange of fire”-the
article is descri’bing
what happened at Entebbe-“with
the hijackers
guarding the terminal was short but fierce. All but
one of them apparently was cut down outside the
terminal. Only B&e, the German, rushed inside,
machine-gun in hand.

24. In order to prove what I have said, I will quote
once again from T/TCJNPI+ York Timers, of 11 July:

“For’ a hair-raising few seconds, the hijacker
looked at his hostages sprawled in front of him. He
could have killed many with a single burst from his
gun. But, according to Mr. Hat--Tuv, he paused,
then shouted something like: ‘Retreat, get down’,
and tuned the muzzle of his w&pon on the approaching Israeli soldiers. A moment later, he was
killed by a burst of Israeli fire.

And he is right.

“ ‘I couldn’t believe my eyes when I realized he
wasn’t going to shoot us’, Mr. Har-Tuv said.”

“Is it thus necessary, in order to combat terrorism, to resort to the law of the jungle and flout
international law with not the slightest regard for
the sovereignty of small States, even if they are
black? For this is a flagrant violation of Ugandan
sovereignty on the part of the Israelis. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Waldheim,
formally stated as much upon his return from
Mauritius...

25. I would also draw attention to a side point that
is very important. The Israeli attack was based partly
on information given by the released hostages, and
this is very dangerous because in the future the hijacker will remember the lesson. We must think about
this. It is very importdnt because, as I said, this attack
of Israel on Uganda will not stop the hijacking. It will
not resolve the problem of hijacking.

“ ‘Humanitarian
protection’ has in the past been
nothing but an alibi of the major Powers to justify
their so-called gunboat diplomacy, a policy which,
under the pretext of ensuring security and, the
defence of the rights and privileges of their nationals,
enabled them to extend their colonial domination
practically throughout the world. The Rhodesians
and the South Africans, who uncorked the champagne upon learning of the success of the Israeli
raid, were not mistaken. In any case, in that way
they expressed their hope that the West, thus
regaining its sense of mission and finally using its
military superiority to the full, would decide at last
to put an end to those egalitarian claims-which
it considers abusive-on
the part of the majority
of developing countries and the domination
which
those countries ndw exercise in the United
Nations.“*
* Quoted

in French

26. The Arabs and Africans are really grateful to the
Israeli Mafia for teaching us that fighting is no. game.
We sire also grateful to them because now we realize
the value of the Zionist promise and the Zionist engagements and negotiations.
Everyone now understands the morals of the Zionists and the Israeli concept of negotiations. When they come to the United
Nations and ask for negotiations with the Arabs, they
intend to come to the negotiations with a dagger under
their cloak.
27. I will not go into any details, as I said before,
since previous speakers have covered many aspects
of this tragedy, but I do want to deal with some aspecls
which my delegation feels are very important.
28. The entire world witnessed the jubilant celebrations by the Western Powers and their mass media,

by the speaker.

4

31. First, the Western Powers have manifested a
racist and fanatic solidarity with the white minority
settlement in Palestine. For them, the Israeli aggression merely demonstrated
a highly successful operation performed by the white man against the blacks
of Africa and against the browns of the Arab lands
-against the blacks and the browns of another and
hostile world, that of the Arab-African
community.
Also, the jubilation of the Western world corresponds
with their obsession with technical efficiency and
technical success-even
at the sacrifice of decency,
honesty, honour and moral principles.
The Israeli
attack revived in Europe the old colonial dreams. It
was viewed by some of the mass media of Europe as
a rebirth of the old European virility and vigour, as
well as a nostalgic reminder of the good days of
Europe.

as well as by the imperialist establishment, following
the news of the Israeli aggression. They displayed a
hysterical reaction, applauding the crime and hailing
the aggression. A super-Power sent a message of
support and congratulations
to the Zionist entity for
this “achievement”.
That Power expressed its congratulations to the Israeli establishment even before
it had received all the details of what had occurred at
Entebbe. Its radio, the Voice of America, diffused the
news of the aggression only minutes after its occurrence. We expect such a reaction from this Power,
which has always supported Israel and expressed its
unlimited
and unjust commitment
to the Zionists’
unjust cause. It is the ,same Power which has often
expressed its hostility towards the struggle of the
Arabs and Africans for their liberation and against
the minority racist regimes in Palestine or in the
southern part of Africa. This new manifestation of
support for Israel and of hostility to the Africans and
the Arabs follows its recent veto in the Security Council againt the admission of the independent African
country of Angola.

32. Secondly, the role of the racist Zionist entity as
an instrument to serve and protect the imperialist
and
capitalist interests in .the region and in the area has
been confirmed. Israel wants the Western Powers to
give it the green light to perform the role of policeman
in our region in order to keep the peoples and the
resources of the African and Arab community
under
control in co-operation with the racist white regimes
in South africa and Rhodesia. It is an historical fact
that the Zionist movement has from the outset offered
itself as a servant of the imperialist
and capitalist
interests in our land.

29. We have also noticed the general satisfaction in
the West, and especially in the United Kingdom and
in West Germany, regarding the Israeli aggression.
Concerning the reaction of the racist rkgime in South
Africa, I should like to refer to the newspaper, LL’
Mollcle, of 7 July 1976. It states, under the title “The
proponents of white order are jubilant”, the following:
“Mr. Vorster, Prime Minister of South Africa,
addressed on Monday, 5 July, a congratulatory
message to Mr. Rabin after the Israeli raid in Uganda.
Several South African associations sent telegrams
of support to the Government in Jerusalem.

33. Thirdly, one important goal of the Israeli aggression was to demoralize the Africans and to demoralize
the Arabs, to encourage division among them and to
convince them that their struggle against the racist
colonialist
white settlers will achieve nothing in
Palestine or in South Africa. The Israelis want to
convince us that a concentrated
drive against the
white minority racist regimes is hopeless, is a lost
cause, and that the only alternative for us is a return
to subservience, under our old masters. In this regard,
the weekly MUI~C~~PSIL’I. Gluridion of 11 July said:

“The success of the Israeli raid comforts the
South African whites with the idea that the armies
of black Africa cannot fight without assistance
from outside and can be easily vanquished by white
armies whose technology and spirit of initiative
are superior.

6,. . . throughout Africa.. . there must also be a new
feeling of military
vulnerability.
If three Israeli
planes, lumbering out of a clear blue sky, can demolish half Uganda’s costly MIGs on the tarmac
and rout an army in entrenched positions, then some
of the pretence of African armed might. . . is stripped
away. How safe is Lusaka or Dar or Nairobi’from
a sudden technological
strike’? And what perceptions of, say, the Southern Africa crisis may be
altered by such knowledge?”

LL. . .
“The South African military are convinced that
white Africa can easily be defended against black
Africa. ‘There is no real reason for concern except
when a major Power such as the Soviet Union intervenes, either by a massive supply of military equipment or by sending troops or instructors’ they
say.““4:

Ti7c W~/s/zingforl Posf

articulated this idea in one of
its recent headlines: “Israel’s raid underlines the helplessness of the African States”.

30. The tragedy of Entebbe really revealed many
distressing, dangerous and’grave things. It revealed
many dangers and grave psychological factors which
still affect the Western establishment and the Western
bourgeois society. I should like to draw attention to
the following.
X’~?!foled

in French

34. Fourthly, the Israeli aggression underlined the
danger of the commitment
of a super-Power to an
aggressive and racist rkgime like the Zionist entity.
The aggression was made possible by American-made

by the speaker.

5

aircraft, American sophisticated
equipment, American technology and American know-how, in addition
to American encouragement and patronage. We know
that American law proscribes and prevents the use
of military equipment
delivered or sold to foreign
Governments for any purpose other than international
security or self defence. On this occasion I should like
to observe that even the American press could not
ignore this embarrassing aspect of the problem concerning the American
involvement.
Today, The
Washington Post says:

strophic dimensions of the unlimited American commitment to the Zionist racist entity and to the Zion&
movement. We still have faith in people, we do not
despair of people. Our quarrel is with the American
establishment and with the Zionist movement and the
Zionist gangs who still are influencing
American
policy.
36. Permit
comments.

me now to make some short personal

“The State Department has concluded that there
was ‘no violation’ of American law in Israel’s use
of US-manufactured
C-130 military aircraft in the
spectacular commando raid into Uganda on July 3-4.

37. It is really most distressing to notice that
Mr. Scranton recognizes a breach of the territorial
integrity of Uganda, and that that breach is “impermissible under the Charter of the United Nations”
[194lst meetilzg, partr. 771 but that he nevertheless
applauds the Israeli aggression as

“The conclusion surprised no one, especially
after President Ford quickly commended Israel for
rescuing 103 hostages held at a Ugandan airport.
The significance of the State Department ruling
-and the firm position of the United States in the
United Nations on the raid- is the precedent it can
establish, US officials concede.

“one of the most remarkable rescue missions in
history, a combination of guts and brains that has
seldom, if ever, been surpassed. It electrified millions everywhere, and I confess I was one of them.”
[Ibid., pcrrtr. 95.1
I deplore this confession from our colleague Mr. Scramton. I deplore this passionate and irrelevant reaction
from a man whom we have always appreciated for his
calm, his decency and his elegant manner. I confess
that all of us, during these months of working together
in this Council, have greatly respected Mr. Scranton
as a loyal son of the American nation, even though
we have differed with him and his Government on
political issues. I register my disappointment
and
astonishment at such a statement. However, we may
find an explanation for such a reaction by placing this
irrational and sentimental eruption provoked by the
criminal attack at Entebbe, against the kind of racial,
if not racist, background still entrenched in the Western
bourgeois society.

“In the case of US law on arms sales, the, State
Department, in effect, took a swift route out of the
questioned use of weapons sold to Israel with legal
strings on them. This law requires such arms to be
used only for internal security, self-defence, regional defence, or measures consistent with the UN
Charter.
“The department rules that Israel had used the
three C-130 American transports in Uganda for
’ legitimate
self-defence’
permitted
under the
Foreign Military Sales Act. This was an unusual
application
of self-defence terminology,
because
the raid took place 2,500 miles from Israeli territory.

38. The PRESIDENT
(int~rpr’etrrtio/? .fkm Frc~~lrl:
The next speaker is the representative of France.
Before calling upon him, I should like to take this
opportunity to offer him, on behalf of all members8 of
the Council and on behalf of my delegation, our
warmest congratulations on the national holiday of his
country. The date of 14 July is one of profound and
lasting significance in the history of the liberty of
peoples and the affirmation of human rights, and it
seems to me important to mention it in this debate, in
the course of which the matters of the independence
and sovereignty of peoples and of fundamental human
rights have occupied such an important place.

“An even more novel American legal interpretation was the one presented at the UN Security Council on Monday, US officials acknowledged.”
We see from this article the sting of conscience
Americans feel about this problem.

the

35. When the Zionist entity executed its flight from
occupied Palestine to the heart of Africa, did that
involve a case of self-defence or a case of internal
security? We ask America to address itself to this
question. We realize, however, that our appeals and
questions to America have repeatedly fallen on deaf
ears. We do not expect any response, especially
during this election year, a time when the Zionists can
make or break American politicians.
However, we
still address our appeals and our legitimate inquiries
to the American people. In time, that great people
will discover the gross Zionist conspiracy against its
country and against its own vital interests. One day,
the American people will discover the true cata-

39. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (intc~t.plPtntio/I jiY)II?
Fwnch): Mr. President, I wish first of all to thank
you for the kind words you have addressed to my
country. You have, I believe, so well defined the ideals
that inspired the French Revolution, which began on
14 July, that I can add nothing to what you said except
to offer, even though this is my national holiday, to
make my contribution to our labours.
6

40. My delegation would first of all like to convey
here to the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany its condolences on the death of President
Gustav Heinemann.
France had indeed profound
esteem for the breadth of vision, the political courage
and the total loyalty of Mr. Heinemann, who was a
colleague and friend of President Pompidou and whose
role in the friendly co-operation between our countries was considerable. We feel asour own the cruel
loss just sustained by the Federal Republic of Germany. I myself had the honour of knowing Mr. Heinemann. I had high regard for the human warmth of his
approach, and I would add my own personal condolences to those of my delegation.

because it is the blackmail alone,which set in train the
negotiation, one of the parties to which belongs to
none of the categories known to international
law.
45. These considerations illustrate the tremendous
difficulty of categorizing the diction undertaken
by
Israel. If there was a violation of the sovereignty of
Uganda, it was not in order to infringe the territorial
integrity or the independence
of that country but
exclusively’to save endangered human lives, and this
in an extremely particular and special situation. One
could well invoke here article 2 of the Definition of
Aggression annexed to General Assembly resolution
33 I4 (XXIX), which deals with what is “pri/n~r.fircic”
an act of aggression and says that it is permissible to
judge it “in the light of other relevant circumstances”.

41. By reason of its tragic consequences, the hijacking of the French airbus operating on the Tel AvivParis line to the airport at Entebbe, Uganda, illustrates
one of the most serious dangers to which the international community is exposed. The French delegation,
therefore, although it has various reasons for sharing
the feelings aroused by this incident in France and
elsewhere, believes that we should approach our
examination of the incident without passion and, as
far as possible, within the framework of principles.

46. It is equally difficult to render a judgement on
the conduct of Uganda.Article
9 of the Convention foi
the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,
signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970,’ to which
Uganda acceded on 27 March 1972, provides that
when the hijacking of an aircraft has occurred or is
about to occur, “Contracting
States shall take all
appropriate measures to restore control of the aircraft
to its lawful commander or to preserve his control of
the aircraft.” But who could blame Uganda for having
thought first of all of the life of the passengers and the
crew and having taken measures to ensure their security, to give them a minimum of comfort and to facilitate the freeing of most of them, even if such conduct
might in the final analysis make it more likely that the
unlawful demands of the hijackers would be met’?

42. My delegation has already given detailed testimony concerning the course of events. It is therefore
not necessary to review the facts, except to recall
that their sequence, right up to the violent denouement, makes it difficult to attribute responsibility.
As, however, we should respond to the questions
raised in the Council, even though, in our view, they
disguise the real problem, I shall confine myself, on
this point, to a few brief comments.

47. In my first statement [/939th mc>cfi/zg] I gave a
clear explanation with regard to the events which followed the decision of the Government
of Uganda.
I gave an account of the relations which from that
point on and with regard to the facts of which we at
that time had knowledge were established between
the Ugandan authorities and the hijackers.

43. Let us first take Israel, the subject of the complaint by several African countries. At first sight there
would not seem to be any doubt that the surprise
attack by an armed force on a foreign airport for the
purpose of achieving an objective by violence indeed
constituted a violation of international law. However,
in order to make an objective judgement, we should
take into account the circumstances that led up to this
action. Obviously, the incident would not have taken
place if there had not been beforehand an unlawful
threat to the lives and security of innocent persons.
The Israeli intervention had the purpose and the effect
of freeing certain Israeli citizens who, together with
French citizens, were being subjected to the most
detestable kind of blackmail, that in which the victim
is threatened with immediate death and deprived of
the slightest influence over arbitrarily
determined
events and factors which, when they come into play,
in one way or another determine his life or his death.

48. Does the concern aroused by this affair warrant
a further inquiry? In truth, it does not seem to us that
a measure of this kind could shed much more light as
long as we are confined to the question of the responsibility of the States involved in the drama at Entebbe.
The concern, the difficulty stem from the fact that
these States are, in spite of their apparent opposition,
linked together in the consequences of the inexorable
chain of events triggered off by the same eviI-aerial
hijacking accompanied by the taking of hostages.
49, This affair is typical in this respect. It demonstrates to what degree the initiative
of a group of
individuals bent on carrying through their criminal
intentions if their demands are not met, whatever their
motives, can affect international relations. The initial
violence committed by persons who are not subject
of international law against persons who temselves
enjoy no representative quality leads to a torrent of
irregularities and illegalities which, this time, are the

44. Some claim that the Israeli action was unnecessary becausethe negotiation with the hijackers was on
the point of success. But, apart from the fact that it
is impossible after the event to be sure that such an
Optimistic assessment is justified, it should be realized
that such reasoning implicitly
legitimizes blackmail
7

I shall now, in accordance with a long-established
practice, make a statement in my capacity as representative of ITALY.

work of States and culminate in another act of violence. The consequences of this concatenation
of
events are deplorable in terms of the loss of human
life, the anguish caused to the hostages and their
families, and material damage or in terms of the undermining in relations between States of the stability and
confidence necessary for peace.

54. Let me confess at the very outset that as I begin m
my statement in this debate, I am overtaken by mixed
feelings and above all by a deep sense of anxiety.
Sitting in the Chair and having the advantage, or disadvantage-1 really do not know which-of
being Ithe
last speaker among the members of the Council, 1
could not fail to sense the strong undercurrent of
emotion running through each statement made in this
debate. And I find it hard to divest myself altogether
of the current responsibilities
of the presidency and
the consequent duties of impartiality
which iare
expected of me. I shall certainly do my best to mleet
those expectations. I shall leave it to my colleagues
round this table to judge whether, in the views I shall
express, I have been inspired more by my temporary
higher responsibilities than by my responsibilities as
representative of my country. I personally believe
that the two sets of views are nearly, if not entirely,
identical.

50. Of course the perpetrators of these acts would
maintain that they are waging a struggle in the service
of a cause and, because they do not possess the resources of a State, they are waging war in the best
way they can, attempting to achieve the best results
at the lowest cost. The invoking of su.ch motives
cannot provide the least justification.
Apart from the
fact that there is no authority competent to judge of
the legitimacy of an action undertaken in such circumstances, the nature of the motives cannot justify
recourse to such means, The international
community
is making slow progress towards the elimination
of
war, it cannot allow groups to. have recourse, in the
service of their cause, to means which are all the more
repugnant
because they endanger only innocent
lives. Furthermore,
there are forms of violence which
actually harm the cause which they are meant to serve.
The disavowal at the very outset by the PLO and the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine of the
action of the hijackers of the airbus derives from a
correct understanding
of the true interests of the
Palestinians.

55. The African delegations, in a show of solidarity
which is quite understandable and which I, for one,
fully respect; have forcefully upheld the unconditional
inviolability
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of a Member State, strongly rejecting any attempt to
weaken or tone down the condemnation or deploring
of the Israeli raid on the Entebbe international airplort
because of extenuating circumstances.
Behind that
firm position there is, if I well understand it, one main
concern generally shared by our African friends
-namely,
that once such action is condoned or
ignored, it will be easier to return to the so-called gunboat policy, leaving small, defenceless States to the
mercy of neighbouring or distant Powers. That is
indeed a legitimate concern and nobody could quarrel
with it. And, in all fairness and in spite of some contrary views expressed, understandably, in the heat of
the debate, it must be acknowledged that, as the
verbatim records show very clearly, no member of
this Council has taken this concern lightly.

51, France, here and elsewhere, has never failed to
recall the need for a negotiated settlement of the
Middle East problem on the threefold basis of the
withdrawal from occupied territories, recognition of
the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland
and the right of all the countries of the area to live in
peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed
frontiers. These acts of violence on both sides, by
creating new sources of friction, distrust and resentment, unfortunately do nothing to bring such a desirable settlement any closer.
52. My country has always deplored violence from
whatever quarter. It deplores it again today with
regard to the tragedy which has unfortunately caused
deaths on both sides. France is also very much concerned at the consequences of this kind of tragedy
for international
relations when, as has just been the
case, a choice arises between the saving of human life
and respect for national sovereignty.
If we are to
draw a conclusion from the tragic affair at Entebbe,
it is that we must do everything in our power by means
of negotiation to ensure that the lawful rights of everyone are recognized. The right to life of innocent persons transported in aircraft is by no means the least
legitimate; it is obvious and it is sacred. It is becoming
urgent to seek in this area, as in other areas, ways
of enabling countries to work together on this more
actively and more effectively.

56. On the other hand, Israel and other delegations
have strongly upheld the right or the duty of a Government to use appropriate means, including limlited
and localized use of force, to protect the lives of its
endangered nationals in the territory of another Slate
when the latter has proved unable to ensure such
protection. In this respect, different views have been
put forward during the debate, each being supported
by the citation of prominent jurists or of the Charter
of the United Nations, There seems to be little ground
for agreement 09 this point, also because this Council,
notwithstanding the outstanding juridical background
of some of its members, is essentially a political body
and not an appropriate forum to settle such a delicate
question. The problem, however, cannot be ignored,
in my view, and I wonder if we could not agree at
least on having it referred to the International
Law

53. The PRESIDENT:
Since all members of the
Council have spoken on the item under consideration,
8

Commission in order to lay the groundwork for the
adoption of a universally accepted doctrine on the
matter and avoid, at least for the future, a repetition
of the differences which have emerged in this debate.

tion, it is not enough to speak in favour of them? What
is required is action to fulfil these principles. In other
words, if no practical action is taken by the world
community
to implement
some agreed-upon rules
consistent with those principles to prevent nations,
groups or individuals from violating the principles,
what other choice is left to the countries victims of
these violations than to take the defence of law into
their own hands? The history of mankind shows that
this was the case in the dark ages, when individuals
or States took up the right to make justice wherever
the State authorities or the international
community
were unable to do so or impotent. That is the challenge
we are facing today. Either we let-to use a somewhat
colorful expression-the
new Dostoyevsky demons
at present acting in our national societies and in the
international
community
take over and disintegrate
our civilization, replacing order by chaos, or we react
jointly with appropriate means. I do not underestimate
the sacrifice which each country is called upon to
make-not
in basic principles, but in its individual
positions and interests. The main requirement, at this
crucial juncture for the future of our people and that of
the world community,
which are closely intertwined,
is to rise above our individual interests and positions,
giving priority to the common interest of mankind,
which affects equally each State Member of the United
Nations. That is not easy, I know-the
more so since
I am fully aware of the deep-rooted causes that have
produced these disruptive phenomena of international
terrorism, and in particular air terrorism.

57. Against those motivations
of a predominantly
human and juridical
nature stands, however, the
indisputable right of each Member State to full respect
for its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity, Here again, I believe, no one questions the fact
that crossing the frontiers or the territorial air space
of an independent nation like Uganda without permission or previous notice is an infringement of its sovereignty.
58. Even on that controversial point, however, it
seems to me that an element of consensus has emerged.
It was mentioned in most eloquent terms by the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, and
I prefer to use his words:
“So far as the sanctity of human life is concerned,
we have made it clear before, and I want to make
it clear again, that to my Government and my people, no less than to myself personally, life is sacrosanct; the loss of human life is to be regretted,
whether it be Jewish life, African’ life, Arab life or
any other type of life. Human life must be preserved,
human life must be protected, and every step must
be taken to ensure the preservation of that life.”
[1942d

meeting, pwcr.

IL%?.]

59. Even if there may be differences of opinion as
to the conclusions to be drawn from this principle,
there is one point on which we all agree: the right to
life is sacrosanct, irrespective of race, nationality,
religion or political affiliation, and the reaffirmation
of the need for unconditional respect of it should be
the paramount ‘concern of the Council.

62,

The representative

of Guinea has ‘kindly quoted
281 what I stated in this connexion in the Sixth Committee at the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. May I add to this
quotation some other points reproduced in the official
summary records of meetings held between 20 September and 12 December 1972. That was four years
ago. I quote:
[/94&h

mWi/lg,

paw.

60. And that brings me to the thifd aspect of the
events we have been considering-an
aspect which
some delegations put in the forefront of their statements and others in the background, but which no
delegation had deemed it possible to ignore and which
has been unanimously
condemned.
The Foreign
Minister of Mauritius, speaking in his capacity of
current Chairman of the Organization
of African
Unity, had made this point in very clear terms. I am
referring to the phenomenon of terrorism, in particular
of international terrorism and air piracy, which has
grown in recent years to unprecedented dimensions
and represents an actual threat of disruption of the
air transportation
system and disintegration
of the
normal structures of our societies as well.

And I suggested seven points to be included
recommendation
to the General Assembly.

61. Now, while I fully agree with Ambassador Salim
that principles must have priority over any other consideration, I feel it is my duty to put some questions
to the Council which I believe are pertinent. Is it not
true that in order to uphold the main principles enshrined in the Charter and achieve their implementa-

63. That was the position of my Government in 1972,
and still is; and we think that this is highly regrettable,
because it means that the international
community
has failed so far to find a remedy to both aspects of
the situation I mentioned at the time. Major problems,
such as that of the Middle East, the very existence

“Italy is primarily concerned, for the time being,
with purely criminal cases of terrorism and those
manifestations
of political terrorism which occur
outside the immediate
area of existing political
conflicts and affect the interests of States not parties
to such conflicts. Acts of violence directed against
innocent persons or innocent countries undermine
the very foundations of international order; hence
my delegation gives a high priority to the elaboration
of an international
convention designed to curb
international terrorism.“*

9

in a

of which increases international tensions and is used
by irresponsible persons to give political and patriotic
justification to their criminal actions, are still far from
solution. And moreover, the world community has
been unable to fill the unacceptable loopholes existing
in the system of international law in the field of prevention and suppression of these crimes.

68. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprrtntion
from Russian):
Mr. President, I will be brief. I should like to say a few words
in connexion with your own statement.
69. You, as representative
of Italy, categorically
condemned international
terrorism.
You said you
were in favour of taking effective measures to prevent
such actions in the future, and you advocated the
severe punishment of those who undertake such
actions.

64. Previous efforts, which produced among other
regulations, the Conventions of Tokyo,’ The Hague’
and Montreal,4 have achieved little result in the struggle
against terrorism. These partial failures should be
used as a lesson to work out new and more effective
instruments allowing the international community to
overcome its present state of impotence. This is
exactly what the nine members of the European Community had in mind long before the hijacking of the
French civilian aircraft on its way from Tel Aviv.
Accordingly, they took the decision yesterday, in one
of their periodic meetings at the level of Heads of
State or Government, to elaborate among themselves
a treaty containing more coercive measures to eradicate and prevent international terrorism, kidnappings
and hijackings.

70. In this regard, I should like to draw your attention, and that of the members of the Council, to iI
report published on 12 July in The New YOI-k Tims,
which reveals that your country gave shelter to two
terrorists who, in the course of a hijacking, killed1 the
stewardess of a Soviet aircraft and wounded two pilots
of the aircraft. They spent some time in Turkey, after
which they found refuge in your country.
71. Now, how can we reconcile this with your statement about the need for the punishment of the criminals? And we are talking here not of a political crime
but of a regular criminal offence, an assassination.
We heard yesterday of a woman whose fate was’ unknown. Now, in the case of the stewardess, the fate
of that woman is known: she tried to protect the passengers, but those criminals killed her, and you
country, Sir, is harbouring the ‘criminals, according
to TITCJN~jt1 Yod Times of 12 July.

65. The United Nations, as a universal organization
intended to promote peace and progress in the world,
is certainly the most appropriate forum in which to
elaborate similar instruments on a global scale.
66. Any further delay in taking urgent action in order
to reverse the trend of events and to prevent and
suppress international terrorism would deprive us of
the only effective deterrent against two equal threats:
first, the use of force at the expense of defenceless
or weak countries, involved against their will in the
detention of hostages by terrorists; secondly, the
spreading and strengthening of irrational
criminal
groups which are at work inside our national societies
and in the international community to bring about the
end of our civilization.

72. Now, how are we to reconcile your personal
condemnation, Mr, President, with the action which
is reported in The Ncrv York Times? Perhaps you
could give us an explanation of this.
73. The PRESIDENT:
Speaking as the representative of ITALY, may I say, in reply to the representative of the Soviet Union, that I am not aware of the
incident he has mentioned but I shall make an inquiry.
In any event, at this stage, if I were he, I would no1
take for granted what is reported in any article, even
an article in one of the most prominent newspapers
in the world’, T/w NLW~ York Times,

67. The Council, rising to the occasion, has a unique
opportunity: on the one hand, firmly to uphold the
principle of unconditional respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, and, on the other
hand, to promote the proposed action, the follow-up
of which should be undertaken within the competent
organs of the United Nations. These two objectives,
if I understand correctly, are exactly what the Secretary-General had in mind when, at the end of the statement he made to the Council on 9 July he advocated:

74. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of Americi0:
This is merely a brief comment on a rather peripherul
subject which was raised, as he said, in a personal
capacity by the representative of Libya.
75. I appreciate the sympathy and regard expressed
by the Libyan representative for Mr. Scranton, ancf
I am sure Mr. Scranton would wish to reciprocate.
But I am distressed at the Libyan representativc”s
expressed disappointment at some of Mr. Scramton‘s
statement, which he then proceeded to quote, but
which he quoted only in part. Now, since the Liby;ln
representative is fhtent in both French and English.
I think he might have read the English text a little
more carefully. Perhaps then he would not have beer1
so disappointed, although even then he might not have
agreed with it.

“Let me conclude by expressing the hope that,
despite the strong views which will undoubtedly be
expressed in the debate, the Council will find a way
to point the world commun$y in a constructive
direction so that we may be spared a repetition of
the human tragedies of the past and the type of
conflict between States which the Council will
now be considering.” [1939th nlc’cting, ptrrrr. 16.1
10

76. In short, I cannot accept the situation in which the
Libyan representative quotes only part of Mr. Scranton’s remarks and thus misquotes them and makes a
false point. Since I would not want to believe that
the Libyan representative would wilfully misquote
Mr. Scranton, perhaps I can best serve the interests
of the Council by reading out the full text of the pertinent portion of those remarks. IcJuote from Mr. Scranton’s statement of 12 July: “Israel’s action is rescuing
the hostages necessarily involved a temporary breach
ofthe territorial integrity of Uganda.” [/Y~/s/ /r?<~~~tin~,
prr/*o. 77). Now the Libyan representative makes much
of that concession, which is a statement of fact. We
have all agreed here that there was a breach of territorial integrity, but he departed there, and this is how
Mr. Scranton went on:

[Ibid.,

82. A number of delegations here have tried to distort the item before the Council by putting forward
fallacious arguments and misinterpretations
of law.
A patently aggressive and bloody act has been lxclaimed and some have attempted to justify’ it.
83. The Charter contradicts any twisted interpretation that some might attempt to give to this act. This
can be seen from Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, which states that:

“Normally,
such a breach would be impermissible under the Charter of the United Nations.
However, there is a well established right to use
limited force for the protection of one’s *own nationals from an imminent threat of injury or death
in a situation where the State in whose territory
they are located is either unwilling or unable to
protect them. The right, flowing from the right of
self-defence, is limited to such use of force as is
necessary and appropriate to protect threatened
nationals from injury.
“The requirements
tionals were clearly

81. It is the view of the Cuban delegation that the
action of Israel at the Entebbe airport on 4 July last
unquestionably
constitutes a flagrant violation of the
basic provisions of the United Nations Charter. The
criminal violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of an independent and non-aligned country,
a Member State of the United Nations can in no way
be justified and constitutes an intolerable outrage to
international peace and security.

“All Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial
integrity or political
independence
of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations.”
84. In the light of this article, my delegation would
like to ask the members of the Council: Has Uganda
resorted to the threat or use of force against Israel?
Has Uganda threatened the territorial
integrity
OI
independence of the Tel Aviv regime?

of this right to protect namet in the Entebbe case.”

prr/Yrs. 77 rrllll 78.1

77. The PRESIDENT:
There are some other representatives who have asked to speak. The first is the
representative of Cuba, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

85. The reply is clear, simple and obvious. Uganda
was simply trying to find a solution for the predicament of the passengers, who had been brought by
force into its territory.
Uganda, in a humanitarian
gesture, agreed to the landing of the French ail-bus
when it had barely enough fuel for a 15-minute flight.
In response to this gesture, it was the victim of a
surprise attack which took the lives of many of its
sons and caused it considerable material losses.

78. Mr.
Spcrnish):

ACOSTA
(Cuba) (interprettrtion
.f>om
Mr. President, the Cuban delegation is
extremely pleased to see you presiding over the proceedings of the Council. This satisfaction is all the
greater because Italy and Cuba ‘maintain the most
cordial relations to our mutual advantage. I should like
to thank you and through you the other members of
the Council for having allowed Cuba to participate in
the debate.

86. This action is consistent with the traditionally
aggressive and racist policy of the Government
of
Israel, on which the United Nations and international
public opinion have a voluminous and alarming file of
information.

79. We should like to express our condolences to the
People’s Republic of China on the death of Marshal
Chou-teh, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the
National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic
of China and to the Federal Republic of Germany on
the death of Mr. Gustav Heinemann, former President
of that country.

87. Of course, we are not surprised that some delegations have claimed an alleged right to the use of
armed force to,protect the nationals of a country on
foreign territory. This has been the traditional excuse
used by the imperialists
to commit all sorts of misdeeds throughout the world. Latin America has deep
scars as a result of such a concept. Now, with the
events at Entebbe, they claim justification
for the big
stick policy in Africa as well.

80. With regard to the item under discussion, my
delegation believes that at this stage of the debate it
would be futile to go into a detailed account of the
events at Entebbe and the background to them, Some
of the speakers who have preceded me have made it
unnecessary for me to undertake that task.

88. My delegation has no doubt that acts of terrorism
are a threat to the lives of innocent civilians and are
reprehensible. But the same can be said of the official
11

as to accuse other States of being centres of terrorism.
What country is there today which can parallel Israel’s
record of brutality and aggression against a defenceless population? What country has ordered the systematic aerial bombardment
of defenceless villages
and camps, if not Israel?

terrorism practiced by Israel against a country whose
Government
became involved, unintentionally
in a
difficult conflict, This, Israel’s act ofaggression against
Uganda, is the item on the Council’s agenda.
89. My delegation asks the Council to condemn the
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Uganda by Israel and to demand that Israel compensate Uganda for the damage caused.

97. I could go on and recite a long history of Israel’s
atrocities against its neighbours, but if I did so I would
fall into the trap which Israel and its supporters would
like us to fall into. I shall not do SO. The purpose: of
this debate is not to discuss terrorism. It is not to discuss relations between States. It is to discuss Israel’s
flagrant aggression against the sovereignty and iterritorial integrity of Uganda.

90. The events of 4 July are, furthermore, a Warning
to all non-aligned countries, and a call for the unity of
Africa, an Africa which defends the fine and noble
future to which its sons are entitled.
91. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Democratic Republic of Somalia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

98. It is a matter of regret that those members who
have confined their remarks to questions of terrorism
have not extended a word of sympathy to the innocents who died at the hands of the Israeli commandos
at Entebbe Airport. The consequences of the Entehbe
incident may prove it to be a Pyrrhic victory for the
Israeli Government. I say this because if there should
be another unfortunate hijacking incident, the Israeli
Government and those who collaborated with it in this
matter may well find their credibility so impaired by
the present incident that negotiations are made almost
impossible.

92. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): May I first of all associate myself with those who have preceded me in
expressing sincere condolences to the delegation of
the Federal Republic of Germany on the untimely
death of Mr. Gustav Heinemann, the former President
of the Federal Republic of Germany.
93. The Council is today seized of a question that,
in our view, touches upon the fundamental reasons
for which this organization was founded. That question is the unprecedented illegal and condemnable act
of aggression against the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of a Member State. It is the only item on
the agenda, and we had hoped that the Council would
confine its attention to it. We see no reason why this
item should be diluted by the slanderous accusations
that have been directed against Member States which
rightfully
believe that the lofty principle of safeguarding and upholding the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all nations, irrespective of their size and
power, must be respected and preserved.

99. The Somali Ambassador served as an intermediary in the Entebbe incident not because of political
considerations but because of the humanitarian
responsibilities which devolve upon him as dean of the
Arab Group of ambassadors accredited to the IRepublic of Uganda. His services, which were greatly
appreciated by those who were actively involved in
the conduct of the negotiations, led to the release of
a great many of the hostages. If he had refused to take
on those responsibilities,
what would the civihzed
community have said? Are we to understand from
what the Israeli representative has said in the Council
that countries involved in such negotiations are coonspirators?

94. The accusation made by the representative of
Israel in the Council yesterday when he said that
Somalia was a threat to neighbouring States is characteristic of the policy which his Government has
pursued over the years in an attempt to cause misunderstandings and to undermine African unity so that
Israeli interests may best be served.

100. The factors involved in the Entebbe incident,
and also their ramifications, deserve the most serious
consideration of the Council before a final decision on
the subject is taken.

95. The African States have not been slow to recognize that policy. It is a fact that the overwhelming
majority of them have severed relations with Israel
and have rejected its offers of financial and economic
assistance, knowing from their experience that such
assistance is a device to compromise their independence and sovereignty. The African States have not
been slow to recognize the collusion of Israel with the
Pretoria regime with a view to perpetuating the subjugation of the African people in South Africa,

IO]. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Uganda. I now call upon him,
102. Mr. ABDALLA
(Uganda): Mr, President, on
behalf of the delegation of Uganda, I wish to thank
You for the way you have guided the work of the
Council. I wish also to express my sincere thanks, to
all the delegations that have made valuable contri:butions to the discussion.
103. NO matter what the Zionist representative said
when addressing this Council on Friday last [193!?tlr
~77@fi~l, the fact remains that Zionist Israel stands

96. It is ironic that Israel, which was born of and
nourished on terrorism, should now be so shameless
12

accused in the dock for committing a serious crime of
wanton aggression against innocent Ugandans who
were making every effort to save all the hostages. It
is therefore altogether incredible that Uganda should
stand accused and that the Israeli representative
should try to make this Council believe that Uganda
collaborated with the hijackers.

108. We urge the Council to concentrate its attention
on the Israeli act of aggressidn against Uganda, and
nothing else. When you have considered it, we ask
you to condemn it unreservedly.
109. AS you know, the President of the Republic of
Uganda did his utmost to have all the hostages released, and this he did in the interest of humanity. As
YOU are already aware, most of the hostages had been
released at the time of the invasion without a single
loss of life. Israel, instead of appreciating this fact,
went ahead and invaded Uganda, and this resulted in
serious destruction of both life and property. One
lesson that ought to be drawn from this is that few
States, in the future, will be willing to go out of their
way to save the lives of potential victims of hijacking,
in view of Israel’s action against Uganda,

104. The only issue before the Council is the Israeli
act of aggression against Uganda. The Council should
therefore unanimously
condemn Israel for its aggression and, at the same time, demand from Israel
compensation for the lives of the people killed and
wounded and the property destroyed during the invasion. The Israeli representative produced no convincing evidence to support Israel’s case. All that was
said by the Israeli representative consisted of nothing
other than a pack of lies calculated to divert the attention of the Council from the real issue before it,
namely, the Israeli act of aggression against Uganda
concerning which this meeting was called.

110. The Israeli representative has told this Council
that the PLO maintains an office in Kampala, Uganda.
If this is so, it should suiprise nobody, since the PLO
has observer status here at the United Nations. Any
country can have relations with the PLO. Even here
in New York the PLO has an office.

105. Instead of being grateful to Uganda for having
saved the lives of the hostages, Israel invaded
Uganda. The Council has been told that Israel is
proud of what it did in Uganda and that it is not even
ashamed of publicly asserting that it would do it again.
The Council should view the conduct of Israel in
Uganda as amounting to the conduct of a thief. Israel
is like a thief who breaks into your house at night,
kills the people therein and destroys property with
impunity
and afterwards boasts before the whole
world that he is strong.

111. On Friday, the Council was told that Israel
invaded Uganda because Uganda, allegedly, was
guilty of an offence of piracy j/l/*, ,q~~ltilrnl, that is
piracy against the whole world. In other words,
Uganda’s action was assimilated to piracy on the high
seas. When Israel committed the aggression against
Uganda, not drily did it take hostages out, as Israel
says it intended to do, but it also killed many innocent
people and wantonly destroyed a considerable amount
of our property, including a number of expensive
aircraft. Now, which of the two is a pirate? Is it Uganda
or is it Israel? This I will leave the Council to decide.

106, It is true, Uganda was invaded. But it is not the
first time in modern history that such a thing has
happened. Perhaps one need not go further than to
cite one modern incident, namely that of Pearl Harbor,
when American warships were completely wiped out
by the Japanese forces during the Second World War.
The world could not believe that story. Yet it was true
that America had fallen victim to a surprise attack.
Did this in any way mean that America was weak,
militarily
speaking’? Or did it mean that the United
States military capability was at an end?

112. The other argument advanced was that Israel
invaded Uganda in exercise of its inherent right of
self-defence as laid down in Article 51 of the Charter.
The Israeli representative laboured this point at great
length, quoting many examples which in fact were
irrelevant to the issue and merely calculated to divert
the attention of the Council from the problem which
is before it, namely, the Israeli act of aggression
against Uganda, This premeditated aggression against
Uganda was nothing other than a violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of an independent
State which is a member of the Organization of African
Unity and a State Member of the United Nations,
committed contrary to Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter. In fact, were we to accept this Zionist argument, it would be tantamount to giving an open
licence to aggressively inclined countries like south
Africa and Israel to invade other peace-loving countries. Consequently, this argument must be rejected
by the Council in toto.

107. The circumstances surrounding the invasion
of Uganda should therefore be looked at in that light.
At the time of the invasion, the Government of Uganda
had placed only a handful of soldiers at the old Entebbe
Airport, just one platoon to guard the area. Also, they
were armed only with rifles and nothing else. This
was done in order not to scare the hijackers, which
would seriously have endangered the lives of the
hostages. It is also true that before the invasion Uganda
was negotiating in good faith with Israel, while Israel
was all along preparing and rehearsing its naked act
of aggression against Uganda. Uganda was deceived.
But this will not happen again. I wish to assure the
Council that Uganda is strong and that our armed
forces are more capable than ever of repulsing any
would-be aggressor, be it Israel or any other country.

I 13. It will be recalled that up to the time of the invasion President Amin had succeeded in persuading the
hijackers to release many hostages and to extend the
13

1

-,_

and this airplane is now our property. We are going
to take you where we please.’ Other hijackers
armed with pistols, hand grenades and stubby
machine-guns ordered the passengers to put up their
hands. The apparent leader, a thin, elegantly dressed
man who appeared to be European, picked up the
public-address
microphone
in the cockpit and
announced: ‘We are Palestinians.’
”

deadline. He was still doing his best to get all the hostages released, but Israel took the law into its own
hands and decided to invade Uganda.
114. The last argument used by Israel to sway the
Council was that Uganda failed, or showed no willingness, to preserve the lives and property of the hostages who were then on Ugandan soil. In other words,
Israel made considerable efforts to show that Uganda
failed to protect the lives and property of the foreigners. The Council has been informed that the hijacking
appears to have taken place with the prior knowledge
of the Ugandan Government. It has also been alleged
by the Zionist representative that my President was
a party to, or connived at, the hijacking of the French
airbus, and many facts were quoted by him as proof
of this.

117. The Israeli representative took a simplistic ,view
of the complexity of the hijacking at Entebbe. The
problem of negotiating with hijackers is a hi~ghly
delicate one, Can the representative of Israel inform
the Council how many people lost their lives at Lod
Airport? Has the Council forgotten the incident at
Khartoum or the Vienna incident which involved the
Ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries? The efforts of President Amin at Entebbe
should be looked at against that background. The
situation was dangerous and needed very careful
handling, We in Uganda took a serious view of the
matter and adopted a pragmatic approach to a problem
of this nature, and that is why our President decided
to negotiate with the hijackers for the release of the
hostages.

115. I shall begin by quoting from the French representative’s statement of last Friday. This is what he
said :
“As we are aware, this affair started with the
hijacking on 27 June, over Corfu, of an Air France
airbus which was flying from Tel Aviv to Paris with
250 passengers on board.

118. The Israeli invasion of Uganda should also be
looked at in a wider context, in that South Africa in
the south of Africa and Israel in the north are trying
to form an axis of power to intimidate and control
Africa. This danger is further reinforced by a statement which was made by General Gur that, even if
Kenya had refused to allow the Zionist airplane landing
facilities, they would have landed there by force,

“The French authorities, when informed of this
hijacking, alerted some of their embassies, including
that in Kampala, asking them to take steps for the
plane to be given permission to land, since it was
soon going to run out of fuel. That is why our Ambassador in Kampala approached the Ugandan
authorities about this, and permission to land was
given immediately.

119. As I said at the beginning of my first statement,
this Council was convened in order to consider the act
of aggression committed
by Zionist Israel ag,ainst
Uganda. The Israeli representative,
however, desperately tried to divert the Council’s attention from
this point by lauchfng wild and completely
false
allegations against my country and my President. This
of course is part and parcel of world-wide Zionist and
imperialist propaganda meant to cover up the Israeli
cowardly act of aggression against Uganda.

“The airbus landed at Entebbe on 28 June at
3.40 p.m. The French Ambassador went to the
airport, but he was unable to establish direct contact
either with the hijackers or with the crew and the
passengers. Marshal Idi Amin also went to the
airport.” [Ihi~i., pmrs. 181 to 183.1
116. Let me also perhaps repeat what I said on
Friday and the consistent view of my Government,
namely, that Uganda does not condone terrorism,
Uganda did not supply any weapons to the hijackers,
as alleged by the Israeli representative. As proof of
this, one need,not go further than the N~II~~I~Y& issue
of 12 July where, among other things, it is said:

120. I wish once more to call upon the Counciil unreservedly to condemn in the strongest possible terms
Israel’s barbaric, unprovoked and unwarranted aggresSiOn
against the sovereign Republic of Uganda.
Uganda demands from Israel full compensation for
the damage to life and property caused during ttle
Israeli invasion. Our authorities are in the process
of working out the particulars of the claim arising OLIN
of the damage.

“The hijacked plane, Air France flight 139,
originated in Tel Aviv and was en route to Paris.
It made its scheduled stop in Athens, and among
the boarding passengers were a pair of Arab youths
carrying a large tin labelled ‘stuffed dates’, which
may have contained weapons or explosives. ,The
twin-jet airbus lifted off and soon a grimly familiar
scenario began. Michel Marius Henry, an 84-yearold Frenchman travelling first class$. said two men
suddenly rose from nearby seats, pulled revolvers
and announced in English: ‘We are revolutionaries

121. My country and my President have been badly
attacked by the representatives
of Israel and the
United States. I wish once again to exercise the right
Of reply to the false allegations made in the Council
by those representatives.
14

122. The representative of the United States referred
to my country during his statement [/Y4/st nlee~i~tgl.
He did not only echo the Zionist representative’s false
allegations to the effect that Uganda was an accomphce in the hijacking of the French airbus but he even
told the Council how electrified he had been by the
naked act of aggression committed by Israel against
Uganda-an
African country a_nd a member of the
Organization of African Unity and a State Member of
the United Nations.
123. Such utterances on the part of the representative of the United States cannot in any way surprise
us. I say this because the whole world is only too well
aware of the amount of control the Zionists exercise
in the United States right from the top to the bottom.
We know very well the influence Zionist Israel wields
in the decision-making
bodies of the United States.
This is what the American Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, General Brown, was reported to have said
not long ago:

Africa my Government has put itseIf squarely on
the side of those who seek majority rule, with the
determination
that it be achieved by peaceful
means. I am very happy that that policy has been
adopted while I have been here.” [Ihid., pcrrrr. 90.1
127. That is the height of hypocrisy, for how can they
claim to support African majority rule in Southern
Africa while at the same time they are opposed to the
use of force by the African liberation movements
fighting to liberate their motherland?
Mr. Scranton
should have known better; he should have known that
Africa and African freedom-fighters
did not have
recourse to armed struggle until it became clear that
that was the last resort, since the racist regimes in that
part of Africa have adamantly refused to hand over
power to the majority by peaceful means.
128. 1, ask again: how can the United States representative claim that the United States supports Africa
when, at the same time, these are the people who are
pouring money into the hands of racists in South
Africa by way of investments,
thus helping those
racists to perpetuate their upurfhcid regime? How can
the United States claim that it supports Africa when
these are the very people who are opposed to the
liberation forces in Africa, as demonstrated by the
role they played in Angola, where one of their mercenaries has rightfully been executed?

“It’s so strong you wouldn’t believe it. We have
the Israelis coming to us for equipment. We say we
can’t possibly get the Congress to support a programme like that. They say ‘Don’t worry about
the Congress. We’ll take care of the Congress.’
“Now, this is somebody from another country
but they can do it. They own, you know, the banks
in this country, the newspapers. You just look at
where the Jewish money is in this country.”

129. The Zionist
representative
spoke at great
length and charged my President with complicity in
the hijacking episode at Entebbe. I want once again
to reject categorically all his allegations as total nonsense, rubbish and a pack of lies. Uganda allowed
the French aircraft to land at Entebbe on purely
humanitarian grounds and after having been requested
to do so by the Government of France. What would
have happened to the 250 passengers of the French
airbus had Uganda said “No” to the request to land
at Entebbe? What would have been the situation
today? Therefore, the allegations made by the Zionist
representative in the Council are the worst kind of
cynicism the Council has ever heard. You save somebody’s life and then he turns up to kill you and the
members of your family, alleging that you wanted to
kill him!

124. Can one, therefore, be surprised to hear the
representative of the United States applauding an act
of aggression committed by Israel against the innocent
people of Uganda, whose only crime-if
it can be
called a crime-was to have allowed an aircraft which
had only 15 minutes of fuel left to land at Entebbe,
thus saving the lives of more than 250 people? I leave
it to the wisdom of the members of the Council to draw
the necessary conclusion.
125. But I must say that sooner or later the people
of the United States, who, I am sure, are not happy
with the ever-increasing control by the Zionists over
their affairs, will put an end to that control by the
Zionists, just as we did in Uganda when we expelled
the Zionist exploiters who were milking the economy
of our country, to the tune of not less than 3 million
shillings a day at the time they were expelled. I onl.y
want to sound a sincere warning to the United States
representative here that if the United States is not very
careful, Zionism will one day land the United States
in troubles from which it may never be able to extricate itself.

130. But why has Israel embarked on a character
assasination campaign against Uganda and its President? Why have the imperialists and their agents,
through their mass media, resorted to this smear
campaign? The reason for this is clear and simple.
13 1, First of all, the Zionists were caught red-handed
in an act of flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Uganda. Their
hands are stained and will always remain stained with
the blood of those innocent Ugandan soldiers they
murdered in cold blood at Entebbe Airport. The
reason for the Israeli aggression is, among other
things, that Uganda played and continues to play a

126. I should now like to quote the following from
the statement made here by the United States representative:
“To my African friends here and elsewhere I must
say that on the issue of the liberation of southern
15

leading role in unmasking the ugly face of Zionism.
The reason, once again, is that Uganda expelled the
Zionist exploiters from its soil because of their wanton
exploitation of its economy, whereby they were taking
away every day more than 3 million shillings. It is
also because Uganda played an important role in the
breaking off of diplomatic relations between Israel
and virtually all the African countries in sympathy
and solidarity with the just cause of the Arab people
and the Palestinians, whose lands are still under the
illegal occupation of the Zionists. It is also because
Uganda has denounced and will continue to denounce
the Pretoria-Tel Aviv axis, which’ was SO manifest
during the October’ war and which has now become
even more evident after the Rabin-Vorgter
talks and
the Vorster-Kissinger talks.

136. That is the reason why I have told the Council
that what the representative of Israel told us here w;as
nothing other than a pack of lies calculated to divert
the attention of the members of the Council from the
real and only issue before it-namely,
the Israeli act
of aggression against the people of Uganda, which
constituted a flagrant violation of.the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Uganda.

132. The Zionist representative arrogantly spoke of
the “respect” his country has for Africa, and also of
the relations between Uganda and its neighbours. Let
me say this. The Israeli attempts to divide Africa are
doomed to failure. They are doomed to failure because
Africa is mature enough and master of itself. The
Africans know who their enemies are. Africa will not
be divided, either by Zionists or by the American
warships and war aircraft now at the port of Mombasa.
The presence of those warships and military aircraft
in that part of Africa constitutes a direct threat to
international peace and security as well as to the
independence of the entire African continent, and, as
such, it must be condemned in the strongest possible
terms.

139. From a preliminary inquiry I made on the basis
of the description of events he himself gave, I assume
that he was referring to the hijacked Soviet aircraft
that landed years ago in Turkey. What happened
during those years and afterwards, I do not know
officially. It certainly did not, and does not, involve
any responsibility on the part of the Italian authorities,
It seems to me, in any event, that this case further
demonstrates the need for an international convention
imposing strict obligations on States to prosecute
hijackers and not allow them to travel freely in the
world-at least not before they have been brought to
justice by the country where they were captured. 13y
the way, I believe that that is what happened to the
hijackers captured by the Turkish authorities who
condemned them to spend a period in jail, in accordance with their criminal law.

137.

I reserve my right to reply if the need arises.

138. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the next,
and perhaps last, speaker in this debate, I should like
to add a few words as the representative of ITAL,Y
to the answer I gave previously to the representative
of the Soviet Union.

133. 1 want to say that American imperialism,
having
been squarely defeated by the heroic peoples of Viet
Nam, Cambodia and Laos, is now turning its ugly head
towards Africa. But let me assure the Council that
American imperialism
is also doomed to suffer in
Africa the same defeat it suffered in Indo-China.
This
is clearly illustrated by its defeat most recently in
Angola.

140. I now call on the representative

of Israel.

141. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): Mr. President, at what
may obviously be the conclusion of these proceedings,
may I appeal to you and to the members of the Coumcil, and above all to my African colleagues, to take
action as a matter of humanity to discover the whereabouts of Mrs. Dora Bloch. If, unhappily, as I suspelst,
she is not alive and has been murdered, may I appeal
for the body of this old lady, aged 75, to be returned
to her family for decent burial. I cannot believe that
this appeal of mine to the Council will go unansw.ered.

134. As to the relations between Uganda and its
neighbours, I will only say that any misunderstanding
between us must be viewed as a family problem and
as temporary in character, and I am confident that
whatever problems there may be will be sorted out
and solved in the African way, and that the imperialists
will be kicked out.

142. The PRESIDENT:
If I may be allowed, in the
light of the whole debate, to interpret the sentiment
of the members of the Council on this particular humanitarian case, I would convey this appeal to the
Foreign Minister of Uganda.

135. May I remind the Zionist representative
that
we in Uganda are proud of having put the economy
of Uganda in the hands of indigenous Ugandans, but
may I also remind him that when we did so, we undertook to pay compensation to all those affected. Compensation has already been paid so far to those from
India and the United States; and, for the information
of everyone, I wish to say that negotiations are still
under way as far as the British Asians are concerned.
Zionist Israel should not therefore try to confuse us
by equating the right of the people to control their
own economy with racism.

143. I have no further names on my list of speakers.
I would assume, therefore, that we have concluded
our debate, and if no other representative wishes to
take the floor at this stage, in accordance with the
normal procedures and well-established
practice,
I shall take it that the Council is ready to proceed
to a vote on the two draft resolutions before the Council which are contained in documents S/12138. a.nd
,I
S/12139 respectively.
16

’

144. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, before we proceed to the voting stage,
I should like to take the floor on behalf of my African
colleagues, the delegations of Benin and the Libyan
Arab Republic, with respect to the conduct of the
voting on our own draft resolution [S/12139].
145. In both of the interventions that I have made
before the Council, I have emphasized Africa’s concern as clearly reflected by the African spokesman in
the Council, my brother from Libya and my brother
from Benin, atid als&-~nd~tibo~&
all-by the Chairman of the twenty-seventh
regular session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity, my brother, the Foreign Minister of Mauritius,
as well as by a number of other African delegations
not members of this Council that have taken the floor
to express the unanimous feeling and the unanimous
‘concern of the Organization of African Unity and its
member States with respect to the violation, of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Uganda.
146. I myself had stated, in both my interventions,
that we would have preferred this debate to take place
without excessive emotionalism
in order to give an
opportunity to all our colleagues to treat the complaint
submitted to the Council by the African States on its
own merits-to
enable them to pronounce themselves
on the merits of this particular complaint, which concerns the violation of the sovereignty of one of our
members. Unfortunately,
this has not been possible.
We have seen, as evidenced in the draft resolution
introduced by the representative of the United King:
dom on behalf of both his delegation and the delegation
of the United States of America [S//2/38], an attempt
to gloss over completely the fact of the violation of
Uganda’s sovereignty.
147. I shall, of course, have occasion to explain my
delegation’s vote op this draft resolution before proceeding to the vote, but for the time being, referring
to our own draft resolution, we find that, in view of
all these circumstances and in view of the confrontations which have been exhibited and in view of the
fact there seems to be a determination
to ignore completely, or at least to gloss over, Africa’s legitimate
complaint, it would not be ideal for us to press OUI
draft resolution to a vote.
148. Accordingly, on behalf of the sponsors of this
draft resolution, we do not insist that it be voted on.
However, we would like to make it clear that this
draft remains in the records of the Council and that
the African States reserve their option to renew at an
appropriate moment the discussion of this important
problem within the context of the underlying principle
for which we are fighting in this particular situation,
That is all that I have to say on behalf on my colleagues-Benin
and the Libyan Arab Republic-and
of the delegation of Tanzania in respect of the draft
resolution which we have sponsored. We shall, as

I have said, explain our vote on the United
United States draft resolution.

Kingdom-

149. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to assure the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania that
I have carefully noted what he has said on behalf of
his delegation and of the delegations of the other
African members of the Council.
150. I shall now call on those representatives
wish to explain their votes before the. voting.
_

who

151. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): In my statement of
12 July [1941st rtlc~c~in~], I said that in the view of
my delegation the issue before the Council was aggression by Israel against Uganda and that the Council
could pronounce itself only in one way-that
is, by
upholding the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and condemning the act of
aggression by Israel against Uganda. Further, I had
added that the Council should demand that compensation for the great loss of life and property caused by
the Israeli action be paid to Uganda. We were gratified
to see that, but for a very small number of speakers,
all participants in the debate shared these Views,
which are based on facts and respect for the principles
of the Charter, international
law and international
morality.
1.52. In our view, the draft resolution presented by
Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic and the United Republic of Tanzania, which is not being pressed to a
vote, is a response to the general wishes and deals
adequately with the issues before us. It is moderate
in its language, and the action proposed by it is the
minimum which the situation demands. We support it
now and will support it later whenever this matter is
again considered by the Council.
153. In our statement on 12 July, we also expressed
our readiness to discuss the evil of terrorism at any
time and in any forum. I reiterate that we in Pakistan
have never condoned or supported acts of terrorism,
including hijacking. Further, we have said that we
should not be selective in defining terrorism and that
it should be discussed in its entirety and in all its
aspects.
1.54. As regards the draft resolution
on hijacking
presented by ‘the delegations of the United Kingdom
and of the United States, we note with regret that it
does not deal with the subject before us. We also note,
in particular, the fact that in its operative paragraph 3
the draft merely reaffil:ms the need to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all States,
without any reference to the Israeli violation
of
Uganda’s sovereignty and territorial integrity in contravention of the provisions of the Charter.
155. As I said a while ago, my country and Government are opposed to and deplore hijacking. However,
as this draft resolution, in its substance and thrust, is

..

not really related to the subject that we are discussing,
the delegation of Pakistan regrets to state that it will
not be able to participate in the vote on that draft
resolution.

dom and the United
S/12138.

156. Mr. HAYNES
(Guyana): On behalf of the
delegation of Guyana, I wish to make just a brief
observation concerning the draft resolution in document S/12138, which is to be put to the vote.

In fb~~orl,*: France, Italy,
Kingdom of Great Britain
United States of America.
Agtrinst:

157. The subject matter of that draft resolution
-the problem of hijacking-is
not on the agenda of
this meeting of the Council. What is really before us
is the complaint of the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, the Prime Minister of
Mauritius, concerning the act of aggression of Israel
against the Republic of Uganda. Of course, as we have
already pointed out:

Ahstrrining:

“Those who seek to misconstrue the implications
of the issue with which we are faced today-that
is,
the aggression of Israel against Uganda-only
render more difficult the global search by the international community through the General Assembly
for a solution to the phenomenon of international
terrorism. Guyana, for its part, remains ready to
make its contribution to that ongoing search at the
appropriate time and in the appropriate forum.”
[/94&h J71PPtif7L4’, /?ClJYf. 87.1

States contained

in document

Japan, Sweden, United
and Northern Ireland,

None.
Panama, Romania.

163. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call upon those
representatives who wish to explain their votes after
the voting.
164. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, I am grateful to you for allowing me to speak in
explanation of vote and also in response to what I may,
if he will forgive me, describe as the very dignified
statement made by my colleague and friend the representative of Tanzania.

158. For the reason I have outlined, my delegation
will not be participating in the vote on this draft resolution.
1.59. Mr.

BOYA (Benin) (intPI.p~Ptcrtion frwr
In our previous statement [/941st f72ePting]
my delegation already said that the item on our agenda
is the act of aggression committed by Israel against
Uganda. Regardless of the importance and urgency
of the problem of international terrorism and aerial
piracy mentioned in draft resolution S/12138, my
delegation feels that that draft does not deal with the
agenda item. We therefore regret that we shall not be
able to participate in the vote.

165. Before I explain my delegation’s vote I should
like to associate myself with the representative of
France in expressing my deep regret at the death of
Mr. Heinemann, the former President of the Federal
Republic of Germany. My country, which has such
close and friendly relations with the Federal Republic,
is particularly sad’dened at the death of a wise and
distinguished statesman who fought so hard in his
lifetime for democracy, truth and human decency.

Ffx~nch):

161. The two-Power draft resolution in document
S/12138 would actually compel us to alter the agenda
item and to take up another issue which, though important, is not included in the Council’s agenda. We
have stated our position on two occasions. We shall
not be able to participate in the vote on this draft
resolution.

166. Turning now to the draft resolution in document S/12138, which we have just not adopted, I
would observe that in the first preambular paragraph
of that draft no reference is made to the communication from the Prime Minister of Mauritius, the current
Chairman of the Organization
of African Unir-yI would only say that it was a sin of omission, not a sin
of commission, and had the draft proceeded in a normal manner it might have been necessary for us at
some stage to propose the appropriate amendments.
I hope the Foreign Minister of Mauritius will accept
my apology for not having included a reference to his
communication
in the body of the draft resolutiorl
which has unfortunately
not been adopted by the
Council.

162,. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now vote
’ on the draft,resolution sponsored by the United King-

167. This has been a long, difficult and, at times,
emotional ,debate. I do not think that is necessarily

160. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretrrtiou jhm Russitrn): The sponsors of the three-Power draft resolution contained in
document S/12139 have withdrawn their proposal,
and it was precisely that draft which we vievired as a
proper foundation for a decision on the question being
considered by the Council.

18

such a bad thing. Indeed, it was perhaps almost ineviUganda that the Government and people of the United
table. What we are dealing with here are important
Kingdom are not prepared to submit to threats from
and complex issues which mean a great deal to all of
whatever quarter those threats may come. You can
persuade the British to do a great deal, but blackmail
us and which have important implications for the conduct of international relations. I think it is only right,
will not work.
therefore, that we should have used this occasion to
speak our minds freely and frankly, and, in spite of
174. There can, I think, be little doubt that these are
the fact that we have not been able to reach agreement,
difficult questions. They will be the subject of much
I believe that a great many of the concerns that have
debate in the future, and we should certainly not try
been expressed during the debate are in fact widely $-‘ to shirk them. But it was precisely because of the
shared.
difficulty of reaching agreement in the Council on
issues such as these within the course of a debate such
168. It seems to me that certain common strands run 1,’ as that which we have been holding this week that,
through the majority of the statements that have been
in my statement of 12 July [/94&h mccli,?g], I sugmade in the debate.
gested that the Council would do .well to concentrate
its attention not on seeking to pass a judgement
on
,‘.
169. First, I think that almost all of us, if not all of ;,’ what had taken place but instead on looking to the
those who have spoken, have made clear their conavoidance of such events in the future. It was for that
demnation of hijacking and international
terrorism
reason that my delegation, together with the United
and that there is in the Council general acceptance of ), States delegation, put forward the draft resolution
the need for further international action to be taken,
condemning the hijacking of the Air France jetliner,
if not now, at least at the earliest appropriate moment,
‘deploring the loss of life resulting from it, reaffirming
to prevent further acts of hijacking and to punish those
the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial
responsible. We have noted with great interest this
‘integrity of all States in accordance with the United
unanimity of approach, and we will wish to consider
Nations Charter and calling for the consideration by
the international community of ways to assure the
very carefully what should now be done. In this
context I should particularly like to draw the Council’s
future safety and reliability
of international
civil
attention to the statement on this subject made by
aviation.
the Heads of Government of the member States of the
European Council at their meeting in Brussels on I2
175. In view of the very wide agreement that has
and 13 July.
been expressed within the Council with each of those
four main points, we very much regret that it has not
170. The second point to which I would attach
been possible to secure agreement on the adoption of
special importance
is the concern that has been
this draft resolution today.
expressed around this table for the need to uphold the
176. We are, however, very grateful not only to
rule of law and the Charter of the United Nations and
to ensure respect for the sovereignty and> territorial
those delegations who voted in favour of it, but also
integrity of all States. My Government fully underto those delegations who, for one reason or another,
stands the concern that has been expressed on many
not feeling able to participate in the vote, nevertheless
sides for the implications
of the Israeli action at
expressed themselves in agreement with the terms 01
Entebbe in respect of those principles.
the draft resolution. Our sponsorship of that draft
resolution does most certainly not imply any hostility
171. The third point to which .I should like to draw
on the part of my Government towards any other
attention, and which has, I think, been at the root of
State or States, nor should it be thought to evidence
the present debate, is the question of how to reconany lack of sympathy on our part for their preoccupacile the duty, which a State undoubtedly has, to protions or their interests. Our interest in this was to
tect the lives of its citizens with the need to respect
promote what we regarded as a balanced and an
the principles I have just enumerated.
equitable draft covering all aspects of the events at
Entebbe in a way which we hoped would lay the
172. Fourthly, perhaps I could add a further point
groundwork for future international
co-operative
about which I am sure there is no dispute. We all very
action to deal with the scourge of terrorism.
much regret the loss of life to which these events have
led, whether those involved were black or white. One
177. My delegation regrets that the Council should
of the reasons why Mrs. Bloch played such a large
have been unable to reach an agreed outcome. Neverpart in this debate is simple. It is not that she was
theless, we feel that the discussions here have served
white, nor only that the whole world has been appalled
a purpose in bringing out and identifying,
perhaps
at the apparent fate of a 7S-year-old sick woman. It is
highlighting, some of the important issues that are
that the Government of Uganda chose to lie about her.
involved, and contributing to a greater understanding
of them. Although, therefore, it has not been possible
173. May I also-and I am glad the Foreign Minister
to agree on action today, we hope that this debate will
of Uganda is here to listen to what I have to say, at
serve as a stimulus to further international
discussion,
least I hope he is-assure
the Foreign Minister of, particularly on the subject of hijacking, and that at
19

fundamental standard to which my Government fully
adheres. As my country reviews its history in the yeat
1976c we particularly recall our own keen concern with
this principle from the very outset of our life as a
nation. We do not, however, view the exceptional
nature of the incident at Entebbe as unjustified under ,
international law. At the same time, we do not see it
as a precedent which would justify any future unauthorized entry into another State’s territory that is
not similarly justified by exceptional circumstances.
,t
184. This debate has provided, in our view, a valua’ble opportunity to air the entire question of hijacking
and the issues surrounding the Israeli operation at
Entebbe. The debate has heightened public and governmental awareness of the real threat which air
hijacking poses to the world today. The Council has
provided a unique forum for a full discussion of what
actually happened at Entebbe ,and the antecedent
cause of that incident. One lesson that has emerged
clearly for all of us in this debate: we have had impressed upon us the terrible toll of human life and
property taken by hijacking and the use of innocent
people as hostages.

some time in the near future we shall be able to agree
on action in the United Nations which, we hope, will
prevent future acts of hijacking and rid the world of
this terror by night which threatens the fabric of our
societies, which endangers confidence among States
and which places at risk the lives of the innocent.
178. Mr. ABE (Japan): I should like to explain briefly
the vote my delegation cast on the draft resolution
introduced by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the delegations of the United States
and his own country, which is contained in document
S/12138. My delegation voted in favour of it. We wish
to state, however, that in our view, the Israeti military
action, primrr fbcie, constituted a violation of the
sovereignty of Uganda, which we very much deplore.
We feel that the draft would have been much better if
this point had been taken care of in it. None the less,
my delegation, which is firmly opposed to hijacking
and all other acts of international
terrorism, could
subscribe to all the elements contained in that draft
resolution and therefore voted in favour of it.

I
!
i:

179. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America):
Before making a few concluding remarks, I should like
to join others in expressing to the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany my condolences on the
death of President Heinemann, a man for whom we
had great respect in my country and who represented
a country with which the United States has close and
enduring ties.

185. My delegation has been encouraged by several
statements made during this debate by Members of the
United Nations who have stated their intention to
press for action by this Organization against hijacking.
In particular, we applaud the statement made by the
representative by the Federal Republic of Germany
[l94/st meeting], who announced that his Government will urge action at the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly for international
measures to
prevent the taking of hostages. My Government will
strongly support the efforts of the Federal Republic
of Germany and we shall work closely with them and
with others to encourage all Members of the United
Nations to support a convention to that end. We are
pleased to note, in that connexion, that the representative of the Soviet Union, speaking in the Council
on 13 July, said: “We are ready, along with other
States, to take new additional measures against acts of
international terrorism” [19421~/ mwting, pmr. I@].
The sooner all the member nations of this body formally recognize that hijacking is a world-wide problem,
the sooner we take positive steps to do away with this
plague of international lawlessness, the safer life will
be for ourselves and our children.

180. I should like to make several observations on
the conduct and substance of the debate which we
are now concluding.
181. The United States very much regrets that the
Council dit not take positive action against the criminal act of hijacking committed the week before last
against the Air France aircraft and its passengers.
We believe that the draft resolution that we co-sponsored with the United Kingdom
was a balanced
attempt at recording the Council’s determined opposition to hijacking as well as its respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and its concern
for the loss of human life in this tragic incident. We
take considerable satisfaction in the fact that, with a
majority of the membership participating
in the vote,
not a single delegation could bring itself to vote against
such a balanced draft resolution.

186. Mr. SALIM (United
I shall be very brief.

182. We deeply regret the deaths of those on all
sides in this controversy, those who had no responsibility for the act of terrorism which gave rise to the
subsequent events. We extend our sincere condolences once again to all the families concerned, and
particularly to the family of Mrs. Dora Bloch.

Republic

of Tanzania);

187. I wish first to associate the delegation of Tanzania with the profound condolences extended to the
delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany at the
most untimely passing away of Mr. Gustav Heinemann, the former President of that country, We would
request the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany to be kind enough to convey to the Government and the people of the Federal Republic of Germany our profound sense of loss.

183. We are most sensitive to the major point stressed
by our colleagues from Africa during this debate: that
the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of States
must be sustained and protected. This is a natural and
20

:, I,,/

188. Secondly, Ijust wanted to explain the Tanzanian
delegation’s position as briefly as possible. We did; not
take part in the vote on the draft resolution sponsored
by the delegations of the United Kingdom and the
United States for reasons which I explained earlier
this afternoon in my previous statement. We consider
that this draft resolution is not one which should really
have been introduced in the context of the discussion
in which the Council is now engaged. In taking up the
position which has now long been established by our
colleagues from the People’s Republic of China of not
participating in the vote, we did so because we felt
that it would not have be&n proper for our delegation
either to abstain or to vote against the draft resolution
as, by doing so, we would have been expressing our
position on the merits of that draft resolution, and we
do not think that this is the time, nor do the circuml
stances permit us to do so.

convened the Council and for having given it a very
healthy exercise in giving free vent to feelings on an
unprecedented situation, where stress has been laid
on the causes and the effects of what took place in
Uganda. I hope that the debates on this subject will
prove useful for future guidance and that no one who
has been listening to these debates, which at times
have been acrimonious but which most of the time
have been very serious, will forget the stress and the
emphasis that all the members of the Council and those
who spoke have laid on the sacred principles enshrined
in the Charter.
196. It is fitting also to mention that the decision to
convene the Council on this issue was taken by Assembly of the Heads of State of the Organization of
African Unity at the Mahatma Gandhi Institute in
Mauritius-an
institution
which bears the name of
that great peace lover. And I think that it is appropriate
that I should quote one of his sayings-“Truth,
standing alone, will triumph”.

189. Lastly, there is much in the draft resolution
that we find is not objectionable, and we think it would,
have been unfair for us to express our position without going into a proper scrutiny of the text.

197. How can we forget-however
temporary it
was-the violation of the territorial integrity of a sister
State of the United Nations?

190. One final observation: I do not subscribe to the
views expressed by our colleagues from the United
Kingdom and the United States that this draft resolution is a balaliced one.

198. I should like here, in conclusion, to quote fat
the meditation of my colleagues the words of Wendell
Phillips, and I hope that their substance and the spirit
which inspired him when he wrote them will linger
for a long time in the minds of those who are powerful
enough to say that might is right:

191. The PRESIDENT:
There is no other delegation
wishing to speak in explanation of vote. The voting
procedure has therefore come to an end.

“To the human and the humane there is always
a spirit of understanding. What is gained by force
is half gained; what it gained by argument is gained
forever.”

192. There is one last speaker, the Foreign Minister
of Mauritius, on whom I now call.
193. Sir Harold WALTER (Mauritius): I should like
at the outset to convey to the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany my Government’s condolences on the sad bereavement of which we all
know.

199. I am grateful to the representative of the United
Kingdom for his belated effort to repair an omission.
May I say, being British educated, how British this
statement is: to be wise after the event!

194. I should also like to express my congratulations
to the Government and the people of France on their
.fLLtt
rrrrtiolrrrle. It is amazing that on 4 July the Assembly of Heads of State was seized in the early hours
of the morning of what happened in Uganda and that
on 4 July it was the great American day. And how
strange the coincidence that on I4 July we should be
finishing with the debate on this sad and tragic affair.

1 United Netions,
~JWI/,Y SPI.~FS, vol. 860, p. 105.
7‘~l~c~/l/~~-.sl~l~l~~/f/l
2 Oj~ic~irrl N~WIIYIS oj’ t/w Gc~~cw~l As.~III/~!\‘,
S~wiwr.
Six//r Co/~rrr~i/rcv~,
1369th meeting.
para. 28: (The ofticiel
records of the Sixth Committee
are issued in summary
form.)
J United Nations,
Twl~t,v SPI+S. vol. 704, p. 219.
4 Ibid.. vol. 974, p. 177.

195: Mr. President, I should like, on behalf of the
Organization of African Unity, to thank you for having

21

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world,

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Uoies
monde
entier.
Informcz-vous
aupres
des ventcs,
New York ou Gen&e.

COMO

CONSECUYR

in, United

Nations,

New

York

DES

NATIONS

DE

LAS NACIONES

,Unid;rs
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Neciones

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNlES

sent cn vcnte dans les librairies
et lcs agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations

PlJBLlCAClONE~

Las pubhcuciones
de las Naciones
todas panes
del mundo.
Consulte
Nucva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
rro& bookstorcs
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section.
New

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas.

83-60801-February

1985-2.200
