Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(e) lncreased utilization of science and technology for
social and economic . development; arrangements for the
transfer and exchange of technology, including know-how
and patents, to the developing countries.
Article 25
(a) Toe establishment of legal and administrative measures for the protection and improvement of the human
environment at both national and international levels;
(b) Toe use and exploitation, in accordance with the
appropriate international régimes, of the resources of areas
of the environment such as outer space and the sea-bed
and ocean floor and the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction, in order to supplement national
resources available for the achievement of economic and
social progress and development in every country, irrespective of its geographical location, special consideration being given to the interests and needs of the developing countries.
Article 26
Compensation for damages, be they social or economic
in nature-including restitution and reparations-caused as
a result of aggression and of illegal occupation of territory
by the aggressor.
Article 27
(a) Toe achievement of general and complete disarmament and the channelling of the progressively released
resources to be used for economic and social progress for
the welfare of people everywhere and, in particular, for
the benefit of developing countries;
( b) The adoption of measures contributing to disarmament, including, ínter alía, the complete prohibition of
tests of nuclear weapons, the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of chemical . and bacteriological (biological) weapons and the prevention of the
pollution of oceans and inland waters by nuclear wastes.

1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2543 (XXIV). lmplementation of the Declaration on S~ial Progress and Development

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development, 5
C onscious of the importance of the Declaration for
the formulation and implementation of national policies
and measures and for undertaking joint and separate
action to promote higher and improved standards of
living, full employment and conditions conducive to
rapid economic and social progress,
Strongly desirous of achieving the effective realization of the provisions of the Declaration,
l. Recommends that all Governments should take
into consideration in their policies, plans and programmes the principles, objectives and means and
methods of the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development;
2. Decides that the D.eclaration shall be taken into
account in the formulation of the strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade and in
the implementation of programmes of international
action to be carried out during the Decade;
3. Urges a11 Govemments to take into account the
provisions of the Declaration in their bilateral and
multilateral relations in the field of development;
11 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

SS

4. Recommends that international organizations and
agencies concerned with development should consider
the Declaration as an important intemational document
in the formulation of strategies and programmes designed to achieve social progress and development, and
that it may be taken into consideration in the drafting
of instruments that the United Nations may undertake
in the field of social progress and development;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange, in
co-operation with Governments, the widest possible
dissemination of the Declaration;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to inform
the General Assembly, in a summary form in annexes
to the reports on the world social situation, of the
measures adopted by Govemments-not included in
other reports provided on a regular basis-and by the
international organizations concemed for the realization
of the provisions of the Declaration and for the implementation of the present resolution.
1829th plenary meeting,
11 December 1969.
2544 (XXIV). Programme for the observance
in 1971 of the lnternational Y ear for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its firm resolve to achieve the total and
unconditional elimination of racial discrimination and
racism, against which the conscience and sense of
justice of mankind have long been aroused and which
in our time represent a serious obstacle to further
progress and to the strengthening of international peace
and security,
Recalling its decisions and the decisions of other
United Nations organs designed to combat racism and
condemning the policy of apartheid and racial discrimination as being incompatible with the principies of
the Charter of the United Nations and constituting a
crime against humanity, and recalling further its r~
peated appeals to the States concemed to take appropria te measures to eliminate racial discrimination,
apartheid, nazism and other manifestations of racism,
Noting with satisfaction the entry into force of the
lnternational Convention on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6 which opens up new
possibilities in the struggle against racism,
Considering that, in the interests of peace and the
social progress of peoples and to ensure that a11 enjoy
human rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination on such grounds as race, colour, national or ethnic origin, new and still more vigorous
and intensified efforts should be made, both at the
international and the national levels, to achieve the
rapid and total elimination of racial discrimination, including the policy of apartheid, nazism and all of its
contemporary forms, as well as other manifestations
of racial intolerance,
Referring to resolution XXIV entitled "lnternational Year for Action to Combat Racism and Raciaµ
Discrimination", adopted by the Intemational Confetence on Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968,7 and
e Toe Convention entered into force on 4 January 1969.
7 Final Act of the lnternational Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.
