39

Resolutiont1 adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Ke,eping in mind the principles and purposes contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 entitled "Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples",
Considering that by resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27
November 1%1 the General Assembly established a
Special Committee of seventeen members on the application of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Considering further that in paragraph 8 of that resolution the General Assembly requested the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territpries
to assist the Special Committee in its work,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same
basis ~s hitherto until such time as the General Assembly has decided that the principles embodied in
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples have been fully implemented;
2. Decides further that the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories shall examine
the political and constitutional information transmitted
by the Administering Members as well as information
relating to functional fields, and submit its reports to
the General Assembly with its observations and conclusions thereon ;
3. Instructs the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to undertake intensive
studies of political, educational, economic and social
conditions and problems of Territories located in the
same area or region, except where circumstances require individual consideration;
4. Recalls its resolution 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and instructs the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories to invite the cooperation of the Special Committee of seven members
established by General Assembly resolution 1699
(XVI) of 19 December 1961;
5. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to transmit to the
Special Committee on the application of the Declaration
on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples the reports referred to in paragraph 2
above, and to provide it with pertinent material available. to the Committee on Information including such
studies prepared for its consideration as may be required for the discharge of the Special Committee's
functions.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

*
* *
At its 1253rd meeting, on 18 December 1961, the Fourth
Committee, acting on behalf of the General Assembly, elected
four members to the Committee o~ Information from NonSelf-Governing Ten:itories for a period of three years to fill
the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office
of the Dominican Republic, Ghana, India and /raq. 1 • At its
1083rd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1961, the Assembly
confirmed this election.
The following States were elected:

ECUADOR,

PAKISTAN,

PHILIPPINES and UPPER VOLTA.
18
Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/5048, para. 2.

1701 (XVI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 1 July 1960 to 19 July
1961, 17
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
take account of the recommendations and observations
contained in the report;
3. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council should
consider at its n\·c11ty-eighth session the com111,:11ts and
suggestions which'were made, d1.1ring the discussion of
the repl0 rt at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly, regarding the remaining Territories nuder
trusteeship, as well as the Council's methods of work
and procedure, in order to bring them into accordance
with the requirements of the new sitnation in the field
of the International Trusteeship System.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1702 (XVI). Question of South West Africa
The G§neral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) _of 14 pecemlJ!!r
1960 entitled "Declaration on the grantmg of mdependence to colonial countries and peoples", and its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 establishing
a Special Committee of seventeen members on the application of the Declaration,
Recalling its resolutions 1568 (XV) of 18 Decem1.)er
1960 and 1596 (XV) of 7 April 1961,
Noting with approval the special report of the Committee on South West Africa,18
Bearing in mind the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the special report of the Committee on
South West Africa on the measures to be taken to
ensure the institution of the rule of law and such democratic processes, reforms and programmes of assistance
as will enable the Mandated Territor,y of South West
Africa to assume the full responsibilities of sovereignty
and independence within the shortest possible time,
Noting 'Wi,th deep regret that the Government of the
Republic of South Africa has prevented the Committee
on South West Africa, with threats, from entering the
Territory,
Noting with increased disquiet the progressive deterioration of the situation in South West Africa as a
result of the ruthless intensification of the policy of
apartheid, the deep emotional resentments of all African
peoples, accompanied by the rapid expansion of South
Africa's military forces, and the fact that Europeans,
both soldiers and civilians, are being armed and militarily reinforced for tl1e purpose of oppressing the indigenous people, all of which create an increasingly
explosive situation which, if allowed to continue, will
endanger international peace and security,
Considering that the Government of South Africa
has persistently failed in its international obligations
"Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4818).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/4926).

18

4,()

General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

in administering the Territory of South West Africa on
behalf of the international community,
Reaffirming that it is the right and duty of the
United Nations to discharge fully its obligations towards the international Territory of South West
Africa,
Convinced that the implementation of resolution 1514
(XV) and the discharge of the responsibility of the
United Nations under the Charter towards the international community and the people of South West
Africa require the taking of immediate steps by the
United Nations,

I. Solemnly proclaims the inalienable right of the
people of South West Africa to independence and
national sovereignty;
2. Decides to establish a United Nations Special
Committee for South West Africa, consisting of representatives of seven Member States nominated by the
President of the General Assembly, whose task will be
to achieve, in consultation with the Mandatory Power,
the following objectives:
(a) A visit to the Territory of South West Africa
before 1 May 1962;
( b) The evacuation from the Territory of all military forces of the Republic of South Africa;
( c) The release of all political prisoners without distinction as to party or race ;
(d) The repeal of all laws or regulations confining
the indigenous inhabitants in reserves and denying them
all freedom of movement, expression and association,
and of all other laws and regulations which establish
and maintain the intolerable system of apartheid;
( e) Preparp-tions for general elections to the Legislative Assembly, based on universal adult suffrage, to
be held as soon as possible under the supervision and
control of the United Nations;
(f) Advice and assistance to the Government resulting from the general elections, with a view to preparing the Territory for full independence;
(g) Co-ordination of the economic and social assistance with which the specialized agencies will provide
the people in order to promote their moral and material
welfare;
(h) The return to the Territory of indigenous inhabitants without risk of imprisonment, detention or
punishment of any kind because of their political
activities in or outside the Territory;
3. Requests the Special Committee to discharge the
tasks which were assigned to the Committee on South
West Africa by the General Assembly in sub-paragraphs (a), ( b) and ( c) of paragraph 12 of its resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November 1953;
4. Urges the Government of South Africa to cooperate fully with the Special Committee and with the
United Nations in the execution of the provisions of
the present resolution;
5. Decides to call the attention of the Security
Council to the present resolution, in the light of paragraph 7 of resolution 1596 (XV) in which the General
Assembly drew the attention of the Council to the
situation in respect of South West Africa, which, if
allowed to continue, would in the Assembly's view endanger international peace and security ;
6. Requests all Member States:

(a) To do everything in their power to help the
Special Committee to accomplish its task;
( b) To refrain, should the occasion arise, from any
act likely to delay or prevent the application of the
present resolution;
7. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the Special
Committee on the application of the Declaration on the
granting of independence to colonial countries a?-d
peoples informed of its activities and of any difficulties
which it may encounter;
8. Requests the Special Committee to study any
measures likely to facilitate the execution of the other
recommendations of the Committee on South West
Africa, and to report to the General Assembly at its
seventeenth session ;
9. Decides to maintain the question of South West
Africa on its agenda as a question demanding urgent
and constant attention;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to facilitate the
application of the present resolution.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

*

* *
The President of the General Assembly, in pursuance of the
above resolution, appointed the members of the Special Committee established under the terms of paragraph 2 of thal
resolution.
The Special Committee is composed as follows: BRAZIL,
BURMA, MEXICO, NORWAY, PHILIPPINES, SOMALILAND and TOGO.

1703 (XVI). Petitions relating to the Territory
of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion of 11 July
1950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa, 19
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 No:vember
1953 to examine petitions in accordance with the
Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee dealing
with petitions relating, inter alia, to the status of S~mth
West Africa and conditions in the Territory, the situation in the Windhoek Location, conditions in the Ovamboland Native Reserve, conditions in the Warm bad
Native Reserve. and conditions in the Hoachanas
Native Reserve, 2O
Noting with disappointment that its recommendations
to the South African Government in resolutions 1564
(XV), 1567 (XV) and 1568 (XV), paragraph 3, of
18 December 1960, relating to political freedom in
South West Africa, to the Windhoek Location, and
generally to the question of South West Africa, have
never been implemented,
Noting with the gravest concern, as evidenced in the
petitions, the unswerving determination of the Mandatory Power to intensify the application of its apartheid
policy and of other policies contrary to the principles
and purposes of the Mandate, and that any attempts
to protest or resist those policies have been met only
,.. International status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: I.CJ. Reports 1950, p. 128.
00
Official Records of the General Asse,nbly, Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/4957), part I, section III.
