UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
nd
MEETING:

3 1 MARCH

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
PClgfc,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2342)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +a..

1

,.. . . . . . . . . .

I

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Nicaragua
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/14913) . ...*.

I

Adoptionoftheagenda

..,.,..,...,,,,.,....,.,............

S/PV,2j42

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplernmts
of the L$h’al Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Comcil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

h

2342nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 31 March
---_-

1982, at 10.30 a.m.

Mrs. Jeane J. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America).

Prcsidcnt:

p,*csrjnt: The representatives of the following States:
china? France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan.
p~lnama, Paland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Chile, Colombia, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. Mauritius, the Syrian Arab Republic and Zimbabwe in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2342)

I.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

Letter dated I9 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nicaragua to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretnry-General
rs/ 14913)

Adoption

of the agenda

Letter dated 19 March 1982 from the Permanent
resentative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
dressed to the Secretary-General
(S/14913)

Repad-

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/14936, which contains the
text of a letter dated 30 March. from the representative of Nicaragua addressed to the President of the
Council.

I.

The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at the previous meetings on this item (23351*h,
2-]-?7th. 233%h rend 2.34 1st nzcctin,qs 1, I invite the
representative of Nicaragua to take a place at the
Council table. I invite the representatives of Angola.
Argentina, Benin, Cuba, El Salvador, the German
Democratic Republic, Grenada, Honduras, India, Iran,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, Seychelles, Sri Lanka,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nnm, Yugo?;lavin and Zambia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

4.

Mr.

KAMANDA
wa KAMANDA
(Zaire) (intrr,fkotn FWIW~I): Madam President. I should
first of all like to convey my warm and sincere congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency for the month of March. We have had many
occasions to appreciate your talents and your outstanding human and intellectual qualities in the course
of the debates in the Council. The intelligence, diplomatic tact and wisdom with which you have been
conducting the proceedings of this Council serve only
to honour even further the representative of a great
Power imd great people with which Zaire enjoys
excellent relations of friendship and co-operation.

I7rrtntion

_5t I should also like to pay a tribute to Sir Anthony
Parsons. your predecessor. for the distinction,
born
of remarkable simplicity. human sensibility, rich expel

rience and a keen sense of dialogue and dynamic compromise, with which he conducted the proceedings of
the Council in February.

rights of peoples to self-determination-all
those
obligations and duties are. I should like to recall. of
universal application.

6. The Republic of Zaire has followed with genuine
concern the grave deterioration
of the political situation in Central America and the Caribbean. It is only
natural that the development
of the situation in that
historically sensitive area should be a matter of concern for the Council, since it is difficult at the present
time to detach the many hotbeds of local or regional
tension in the world from the current world context
of cold war, distrust and a crisis of confidence in international relations, and of insecurity and uncertainty
for so many peoples and countries in the world.

I I. That is why the Council would be .justified in
inviting. at the same time as it calls upon the parties
concerned to have recourse to dialogue and negotiation to resolve their difference. all Member States to
contribute to the quest for peaceful solutions to the
problems of Central America and the Caribbean, to
refrain from heightening tension and dissension or
exacerbating
contradictions
between
American
States. in order to meet the wishes of the Charter,
which calls on each and every one of us to develop
friendly relations among nations based on respect fol
the principle of equal rights and self-determination of
peoples, and to take all other appropriate measures to
strengthen universal peace. In that spirit, Zaire is
gratified at the initiative taken by Mr. Josh Lripez
Portillo and at his proposal for negotiations to restore
peace in the region of Central America and in the
Caribbean.

7. The statements we have heard from the Coordinator of the Governing Junta of National Rcconstruction of Nicaragua, Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra
[23.?5th rnt~~~tin‘~], from the representative
of the
United States of America [ihid.] and from other parties concerned about the present situation in Central
America and in the Caribbean, clearly should encourage the Council to remind all parties-that
is, Member States-of
their duties and obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations, and particularly of the
necessary respect for the principles
enshrined in
the Charter and other international
instruments such
as the Declaration on Principles of International
Law
concerning
Friendly
Relations
and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations,’
the resolution titled Development
and strengthening
of good-neighbourliness
between
States,2 the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security” and the Declaration
on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
and Interference
in the
Internal Affairs of States,-’ just to mention those few.

12. In disputes ofthis nature. the complexity of which
is understood by everyone-particularly
as, in historical processes, ends are often transformed into means
and means into ends-no one should be tempted to
take the place of the States of the region and attempt
to find appropriate solutions for their problems.
13. Exchanges of recriminations
would be to no
purpose if the United Nations in general and the Security Council in particular are to be and to remain a
centre for the harmonizntion of the efforts of nations
to achieve common goals.
14. The problems in Central America and the Caribbean should therefore be solved by the peoples and
States of Central America and the Caribbean, which
are bound by so many links forged by history. geography. language and culture and complement each
other in so many ways, in an atmosphere free from
any subversion, from any pressure and from acts of
force from any quarter.

8. The Council should therefore, in our view, recognize that the parties have stated their determination and their readiness to settle their difference by
peaceful means and by direct contacts, in a spirit of
good-neighbourliness,
in accordance with the Charter
and the principles of positive international
law.

15. The duty of the international
community is to
help the States concerned to come together to transcend their contradictions and bring about regional
co-operation
by solving the economic, social, intellectual, humanitarian,
and political problems which
arise: to transcend egocentric impulses where everyone gives himself preference: to transcend ethnocentric impulses where it is one’s own people one uses
as a point of reference and of preference: to transcend
sociocentric impulses, where one’s own society becomes the centre of reference and of preference: to
transcend, finally, in the interests of peace, that failing
so characteristic of this end of our century-the
failure to recognize the same facts as the adversary, a
fnilure that only encourages the facile mechanisms
of rejection which, in the closed universe of totalitarian concepts, are disqualification,
diversion and
indignation.

9. In that context, we believe that the Council should
encourage the interested or concerned parties to resolve any dispute that exists between them by appropriate negotiations,
conducted
in conditions
and
within a context that would ensure every chance of
success. and should ask the Secretary-General
to
follow the development
of the situation and to report
on it.
IO. The obligations and duties of each Member State
of the United Nations under the Charter to respect
the principles of non-interference
in the internal affairs
of States, the non-use of force or the threat of the
use of force in international
relations, the territorial
integrity and political independence
of States, nonrecourse to subversion and other attempts at destnbilization,
peaceful settlement
of disputes and the
2

16. Here as elsewhere, what we are calling upon
others to respect in our regard we should be in a
position to respect in regard to others. The principles
of the Charter are and must remain valid for all States,
whatever their political, economic and social options.
and in all circumstances. It is precisely when we fail
to respect the principles which we call upon others to
respect that we run the risk of discrediting both those
very principles and our own right to demand respect
for them from others.

saying that he conducted what may well be his last
presidency of the Council with great distinction.
but
sometimes that which should go without saying still
needs to be said. 1 should therefore like to offer him
our good wishes and thanks.
22. Not every major issue between States comes
before this Council. But when we are called on to
consider any such issue, those of us who are members of the Council at the time carry a heavy responsibility.

17. I have had occasion to recall in other circumstnnces that it is the gap between what we demand that
others respect and our own attitude with regard to
respect for the same principles in analogous situations
which lies at the very root of the maintenance of a
climate of distrust and tension in international relations-a
climate which allows matters to get out of
hand in defiance of reason.

23. My delegation interprets that responsibility
as
obliging us, in addressing ourselves to any such issue.
to uphold the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations at all times. We see it further as
an obligation for the Council and its members to seek.
wherever possible, to promote peaceful solutions to
international disputes before they reach crisis level.
24. To do this is to work for one of the basic purposes of the United Nations as spelled out in Article I
of the Charter, that is:

18. I cannot conclude my remarks without saying
how much the delegation of Zaire appreciates the
measured way in which the Nicaraguan delegation
approached this problem before the Council when it
stated:

“to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, ad.justment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach
of the peace”.

“We have requested this meeting for serious and
extremely urgent reasons, and not to make use of
this forum to hurl insults at the United States Government . . ,:

25. Three points are important
to us in that basic
Charter formulation.
They are “peaceful
means”,
“justice”
and “international
law”. But I should like
to add a fourth point, taken from the very next paragraph of Article I of the Charter: the concept of

.a. I .
“We have not come here to level accusations . . .
and
.. . . *

“friendly relations among nations based on respect
for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples”.

“Nicaragua calls on the Security Council to issue
an explicit pronouncement . , . regarding the obligation to seek peaceful means of solving the problems
of the Central American region and the Carribbean . , + [i/hi, ptrrrrs. 28, 74 rrtd 871.

26. Those points taken together set a broad framework for the Council’s consideration
of the issue
which has come before it.
27. Clearly. there is a difference of view about Nicaragua’s decision to take this matter to the Council.
But we are glad that its right to do so was not questioned, and it is now for us who have to address the
issue as members of the Council to seek by every
means to encourage a peaceful settlement. In our view,
that would mean the restoration of friendly relations
between the United States and Nicaragua-on
the
basis, of course, of full respect by all for fundamental
Charter principles. The question for us, however. is
how best we can help to bring that about.

19. I therefore feel that in its patient quest for an
appropriate solution to the problem before it, the
Council should stay within the framework of that
eminently politic and judicious request,
20. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Madam President, this is
the last day of the month, but it is also the first time
I have had occasion to speak in the Council in the
month of March. Had I spoken earlier, I should have
expressed to you my good wishes for your future
conduct of the office of President. As it is, it seems
more appropriate to thank you and to congratulate
YOU warmly on the way you have presided over our
work during a very difficult month.

28. We know that the immediate issue must be seen
against the wider background of events in the region
and of the upheaval which Nicaragua had to go through
three years ago to rid itself of the Somoza rCgimc.
Today, several countries in Central America are in
turmoil. In those countries, highly stratified societies

21. I should like to take this opportunity also to
thank your predecessor, Sir Anthony Parsons. Fol
those of us who know him, it goes almost without
3

structured on a grossly unequal basis and frequently
maintained
by repression have crumbled or are beginning to do so. Small nations whose real need is
peuce and development
have been torn apart in civil
strife. as the violence built into unjust social structures over many generations takes a more open form
once those structures are openly challenged. Ruling
ilites react repressively in the face of threats to their
position and seek to maintain
themselves against
militunt expressions of popular discontent. Death and
injury have become commonplace
and almost casual,
not to say banal. Nicaragua went through just such an
upheaval three years ago in ridding itself of the unjust
and repressive Somoza rigime. In El Salvador, and to
a lesser extent in some other countries of the region,
turmoil still continues.
29. What can we in the wider international
nity do in the face of this upheaval?

34. Those are all legitimate reasons for wider internation;\1 concern. Our hope is that in expressing that
concern here, as we must, we shall be able to do so
in ways that will help and not hinder the solution we
want to see. that is, pence. justice and full respect
for human rights and for international law throughout
the region.
35. It is, of course, not difficult to state that general
aim: it is easy enough too to set out the general principles that should be followed by all concerned: they
are to be found in the Charter and in other documents
elaborated over the years as the basic rules for rel;ltions between States.
36. One such principle, for example, is that of selfdetermination.
Every people is entitled to decide fol
itself its own political system, and it should be free
to work out its own pattern of economic, social and
cultural development.

commu-

30. It is. of course, as in all such cases, primarily a
matter for the peoples of the region to work out their
own destinies. But turmoil and potential conflict in
any region today, especially if they involve not only
in-justice and loss of life but friction and increased tension between the major Powers, must be a matter of
concern to all members of Ihe international
community. Such events simply cannot be seen now as of
concern only to the countries of the region or to the
major world Powers themselves.

37. Another principle is that every State should bc
free to conduct its own affairs, with due respect. of
course. for the rights of its neighbours. It should be
free from the threat or use of force of from any attempt
at subversion from outside.
3S+ Yet another principle is that States should deal
with each other on a basis of sovereign equality. They
may differ in size and importance, but the sovereignty
of each must be fully respected, and no State should
he sul,iected by others to coercive pressure or to
attempts at domination.

31. There are obvious reasons for that. In the first
place. we are now at a stage in world affairs where the
international
community
as a whole should show a
legitimate concern to see basic rights upheld and
greater justice achieved in societies that have suffered
under oppressive oligarchic rule for many generations
and where today in some cases an appalling toll of
death and injury takes place. A people like the people of Nicaragua deserves sympathy and understanding
in its effort to reconstruct after the ravages of Somoza.

39. But citn wc go beyond that statement of genel-al
principles, which all concerned have said they accept.
to suggest 21 practical way forward towards a settlement? 1 should like to think that we could, and I should
like to think too that such suggestions as we make
here, and any outcome of the Council’s consideration
of the issue. will be acceptable and helpful both to
Nicarngun and to the United States.

32. In the second place, there is a real danger of
hostilities and international
conflict between neighhouring countries in the region. It is understandable
that those who have successfully challenged repressive and despotic rule in their own countries should
show sympathy for those of like mind who face similar
opponents in neighbouring countries. But if sympathy,
moral support and encouragement
for greater justice
should go beyond that and become active and militant intervention,
then there would be a serious danger of hostilities between the States involved.

40.

We are all aware that relations

between Nic-

alaguu and the United States have been growing more

tense for some time now. But, to judge from what
has been said here and elsewhere in public statements.
one may hope that this does not derive from any fundamental hostility between the two countries. Nor is
it inevitable that tension between them should continue to rise. Quite the contrary: In the period immediately after the overthrow of Somoza the relations
between the two countries had begun to develop well,
and the United States gave significant support at that
stage to Nicaragua’s effort to restore its shattered
economy. The question now is: How can the recent
deterioration
of relations be halted, and the more
constructive
relationship of two years ago be restored? The obvious answer has to be by negotiations
-whether
direct or through the help of a wilt@,
mediator. and the primary aim of this Council, or
indeed of any other international effort to resolve the

33. Third. and more serious still, is the fact that
larger global tensions and rivalries are already being
superimposed
on the existing regional instability,
The dangers would be very great indeed if the already
complex and difficult regional issues were now to
become part of a global confrontation
between the
major Powers,
4

crisis. should be to encourage the parties in every way
possible to get such negotiations under way.
Jl. There is already some basis for such an effort.
We are well aware that the two opening statements
in the present debate on Thursday last expressed
fundamentally different perceptions as to the cause of
the present quarrel. But it was also striking that they
htid one mqjor point in common-the
strong emphasis
by each side on its will to solve the problems at issue
through negotiation. This willingness indeed seemed
to extend not only to direct negotiations and to the
immediate points at issue but to other countries of the
region and to the general situation in the area as a
whole.
42. Such a will to negotiate on both sides is. regrettably, a rare enough feature of debates .in this Council. Where it does exist, the Council must surely try
to build on this fact. We must support negotiations:
and we must give every encouragement to countries
uf the region, such as Mexico, that have been working
in recent weeks to get negotiations under way. In
this way-and contrary to criticisms sometimes made
of our Organization-we
shall be using the Council
and the United Nations as it should be used: as an
instrument to ease tensions and reduce the danger of
conflict between States.
43. Over recent weeks, the efforts of the Government of Mexico have been channelled very much in
that direction. Proposals made publicly by Mexico
envisage three main points: the threat or use of force
should be ruled out: there should be a balanced reduction of military forces in the area. involving also an
end to the training and activities of paramilitary groups
outside Nicaragua and a willingness by Nicaragua
itself to halt its own military build-up; and there should
be a system of non-aggression pacts, both between
Nicaragua and the United States and also within the
region generally, There is much here in those Mexican proposals of interest which those directly involved could consider and explore further.
44. For our part, I should like to encourage here
warmly, on behalf of my delegation, these efforts
to mediate and to start a dialogue undertaken by the
President of Mexico, Mr. L6pez Portillo, and by
Foreign Minister Castatieda. Recent reports about the
prospects have alternated between optjmism
and
pessimism. But with all our heart we wish success to
every such attempt to start a real dialogue between
two countries that should not be enemies.
45. On the United States side, too, there are already
proposals by Secretary of State Haig which deserve
study by all concerned: and there are proposals and
il will to negotiate on the Nicaraguan side. as was
stressed at the outset of this debate by Commandel
Ortega. Furthermore.
several other speakers in the
debate have already put forward interesting proposals
--all directed towards dialogue, negotiation and peace-

ful settlement of the problems of the region. For
example. Panama. a country of the region and a member of the Council. envisages a system of agreements
to reduce tensions between the States of the region:
a guarantee by every Central American country to
maintain
a democratic.
pluralistic
and multi-party
system upholding human rights. and a regional summit conference in Panama to develop these ideas
further. These stem to us-as, if I may say so. a country outside the region-to
he very constructive ideas
which deserve to be explored further when discussions get under way. Proposals wet-c also made here
by the representative of Honduras. urging steps towards regional disarmament.
These too should be
taken into account, along with all the other useful
ideas which have emerged.
46. There is another point to consider. Since many
of the problems of the Central American region derive
from long-established economic and social conditions
that require reform and redress, then economic assistance to the countries of the region should also be part
of any overall settlement. The plan announced by
President Reagan some weeks ago for economic
assistance to the Caribbean region. including Central
America, contained much of interest. If taken togethel
with the efforts of other major countries in the hemisphere, such as Mexico, Venezuela and Canada, it
could be built on and developed to good effect, with
the ultimate aim of creating an atmosphere of cooperation involving the major economic Powers of the
hemisphere, I would add that the Heads of State and
Government of the IO member States of the European
Community. to which Ireland belongs, at their meeting
at the European Council at Brussels yes,terday. decided
to intensify their own and the Community’s
economic
assistance to the countries of the region.
47. Clearly. therefore. if a real will to negotiate
exists there W-Z very many elements already nvailable which could be drawn on for a peaceful settlement. This could cover both the points at issue between Nicaragua and the United States and. more
ambitiously,
the general problems of the region. With
careful handling here. restraint by iill concerned and,
most importantly,
the help of willing mediators, we
may hope to see such a serious dialogue get under
woy. We offer it our full support and encouragement.
48. That. then, is the approach which Ireland takes
to the difficult issue we are now faced with ils a mcmher of the Council. 1 may summarize our view in ~C)I.II.
points.
49. First, we believe that the present turmoil in
Central America must be a cause of legitimate concern to the whole international
community,
because
it involves basic human rights issues and tragic loss of
life. because it could lead to wider regional conflict
and because it has already increased tension between
the m:\jor Powers.

50. Secondly, we want the Council in its approach
to the issue now before it to try to be helpful to both
parties. As I said, they should not be enemies. The
Co’uncil should th:erefore direct its efforts at all times
to easing present tensions, reducing the danger of
conflict and restoring the much more constructive
and friendly relationship between Nicaragua and the
United States which had existed for a time as Nicaragua began the major task of reconstruction
and
development
of its whole society after the Somoza
regime was overthrown.
That would. of course,
presuppose as an absolute condition a willingness by
all concerned to show full respect for international
law and for the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

57. We further believe it essential to the fundamental solution of the instability in the region to promote economic development to attain social justice.
Accordingly. in order to achieve long-term stability
in the Central American region, it is indispensable
scrupulously to respect the principle of non-intervcntion and to promote economic development for the
realization of social justice.
58. My Government therefore hopes that the Stittes
concerned will conduct patient dialogues based on
the principles of non-intervention
and peaceful settlement of disputes, with a view to rebuilding the friendly
relations among them. At the same time, we welcome
international co-operation for assisting national efforts
for the acceleration of economic development itad
the achievement of social justice in the countries of
the region, such as the Caribbean Basin Initiative,
which has been promoted jointly by the United States,
Canada, Mexico, Venezuela and other countries.

51. Thirdly,
we beli-eve that this effort to restore
frienclly relations requires dialogue and negotiation
between the two countries and that this in turn requires
a measure of restraint and understanding on each side
in this Council and elsewhere. I want to express
Ireland’s full support for all constructive and serious
efforts to get such a dialague under way.

59, Regarding the question of current relations between the United States and Nicaragua, it is our
understanding that efforts are being made to resume
the dialogue between the two countries, as is evidenced by Secretary of State Haig’s recent announcement of the fact that the United States Government
had earlier transmitted to Nicaragua its proposals fat
improving the bilateral relationship. Further, we note
with appreciation the initiatives of Mexico and the
offers by other third countries to use their good offices.
My Government urges that, in order to make the
dialogue truly meaningful and fruitful, the United
States and Nicaragua should undertake frank and
exhaustive discussions on all issues of mutual concern.

52. Fourthly,
we would ideally like to see-and
I do not think it either utopian or presumptuous for a
State outside the area to hope for this-a real detente
involving all the countries of the region, including
those which have hitherto been excluded from such
discussions. This could come through a major negotiation covering political and economic issues and
providing eventually for a reduction of and limits on
armaments,
restraint and co-operation
in regional
relations, respect for human rights and pluralism and
acceptance of these concepts in all of the countries
involved.

60. We believe it desirable that efforts to resolve
the issues under discussion be made first through
bilateral talks between the two States concerned or.
if necessary, through discussions among countries in
the region or in such regional organizations as the
Organization of American States (OAS).

53. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Madam
President,
I should like first of all to compliment
you on the
manner in which you have been carrying out your responsibilities
as President this month. It is indeed
fortunate that a person with your experience and
ability has been guiding the work of the Council at a
time when it has been called upon to deal with troublesome questions,

61. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda):
Madam President
it gives me great pleasure to convey to you, on behalf
of the delegation of Uganda, our warmest congratulntions on your election to the presidency for the month
of March. At a time when the Council is confronted
with many challenges, we are fortunate to have il
person of your ability and distinction at the helm.
I salute you also as the representative of a country with
which Uganda has very cordial and fruitful relations.

54. I should like also to express my gratitude to Sir
Anthony Parsons, who so skilfully presided over the
work of the Council during the month of February.
55. The Government
of Japan has been following
closely the recent developments
in Central America,
and my delegation
has listened attentively
to the
statements made by the previous speakers,

62. I take this opportunity to express our sincere
gratitude to the representative of the United Kingdom,
Sir Anthony Parsons, who guided the work of the
Council during the month of February with the political wisdom and diplomatic skill for which we have
come to respect and admire him so much.

56. My Government
believes that the instability
prevailing in Central American
States should be
resolved by the people of each State themselves. Outside intervention must be avoided. since it may aggravate the situation and hamper the process ofthe healthy
development of each nation.

63. My delegation listened very carefully and with
great interest to the statement made on 25 March he6

fore the Council by Commander Daniel Ortega Saavcdra, Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction
of Nicaragua [2.?35th mwti/z,gj.

71. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.

64. We in Uganda have some understanding of the
predicament
of the people of Nicaragua. In 1979
Uganda, like Nicaragua, emerged from the grips of a
particularly brutal and traumatic Fascist dictatorship.
We know how harrowing the legacy of such an experience can be and how daunting the subsequent task
of national reconstruction and rehabilitation.
We therefore understand the desire of the people of Nicaragua
to have a period of peace and stability, a breathing
space in which they can devote their attention and
energies to the urgent task of rebuilding a shattered
society. Nothing should be done to make this colossal
task even more difficult.

72. Mr. MASHAIRE
(Zimbabwe): Before I proceed,
Madam President, allow me to extend my delegation’s
sincere congratulations
to you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the current month.
In our opinion, your tenure of this office could not
have come at a more appropriate time. As the representative to the United Nations of one of the superPowers whose prime function in this body is the
maintenance of international
peace and security by
safeguarding the adherence of the international community to the spirit and letter of the Charter of the
United Nations, your judicious handling of the serious
issue before the Council will contribute in a large measure towards reinforcing the world’s commitment
to
the provisions of the Charter that deal specifically with
the duties incumbent upon the Security Council.

65.
the

The delegation of Uganda is concerned about
deteriorating
situation in Central America and
the Caribbean, a situation that poses a danger to international peace and security. The Council has a positive and preventive role to play in this situation, to
ease tension and to prevent conflicts.

73. The tension prevailing in certain parts of Central
America and the Caribbean is a subject on which
various Governments
and the Movement
of NonAligned Countries have expressed great concern.
As a result, the need to adhere to the principles of the
non-use of force or threat of force and non-intervention
rind non-interference
in the internal affairs of States,.
to the principles of respect for the political independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States
in the region and the right of all States of the region
to be free from interference or external pressure of
any kind, has been reiterated on many occasions and
in many forums.

66. First, the Council must underline the obligation
of all States to respect the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and in particular the principle
of non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. the
principle of self-determination
for all peoples and the
principle of respect for the territorial integrity and
political independence of all States.
67. Secondly, the Council must reaffirm the right of
the peoples of Central America and the Caribbean to
determine their own destinies without outside interference. No attempt should be made to impose a particular social system or political preference on the
peoples of Central America and the Caribbean. They
are able and ready to make their own choices.

74. Respect for the principles I have just cited implies due deference to a number of other elements.
First, it implies the right of nations to exist in accordance with their beliefs, their aspirations and their own
form of government, This, in fact. means the right to
exist in accordance with their freely chosen social,
economic
and palitical
policies and organization.
And that, in turn, demands of other nations that
their foreign policies respect such choices and that
those po1icie.s must be conducted in the spirit of such
respect.

68. Thirdly, the Council should take this opportunity
to encourage all the parties concerned along the path
of negotiations and peace. In this connection, my delegation has followed with great interest over the last
few weeks certain initiatives aimed at reducing tension in the region of Central America and the Caribbean.

75. The people oY Nicaragua, inspired by the spirit
of the heroic August0 Sandino, succeeded, after long
struggle and awesome sacrifice. in breaking the chains
of the brutal and inhuman system of dictatorship in
July 1979, The people of Nicaragua had hoped that
their victory over oppression and exploitation would
open the way to peace and progress. However, instead
of opening the way to peace and progress, their struggle and victory has now almost been turned into a
worse nightmare by a number of external factors.
A month before their final victory in July 1979, the
United States Secretary of State, Cyrus Vance, advanced the proposal that an OAS “peace-keeping
force” intervene in Nicaragua against the imminent
Sandinista victory over Somoza. That clearly demon*

69. We are especially impressed by the Mexican initintive, the outline of which was formally announced
before the Council on 26 March [2S37th rnr~fin~g]. We
believe that the Mexican proposals constitute a very
useful framework for negotiated peace in the region.
We accordingly appeal to all parties concerned to
support these initiatives in order to give peace a
c hunce.
70. I take this opportunity to express to our brothers
and sisters in Central America and the Caribbean the
solidarity of the Government and people of Uganda
in their struggle for social justice and dignity. We share
in their hopes and aspirations,
7

strated that the Sandinistu movement.
representing
the aspirations of the people of that strife-torn country. had nlready been labeled an enemy even before
the attainment of statehood. Suffice it to say that hnd
that action been implemented,
it would have left the
proud. war-weary people of Nicaragua with no option
but to die in defence of their motherland.
since the
indomitable
spirit that had sustained them and had
won for them their humanity and dignity could nevel
have been suppressed. It was out of that realizntion
that an effective and meaningful dialogue between
the Sandinista Government and the Carter Administration. aimed at rend.justing and improving relations
between the two countries. became possible.
76. It is indeed regrettable that that dialogue and that
tolerance of the Sandinista Government
have not
been maintained by the new Administration
in Washington. Apart from lhe evidence supplied by Commander Daniel Ortegn Snilvedr>i. the Co-ordinator of
the Governing Juntcl of National Reconstruction
of
Nic;iri\gu:l. in his statement in the Council on 25 March
[2.Wth
111octin,cJ1. there have been other reports
delding with the examination of various options for use
in Nic>~r:~gui~. among them one providing for A blockade or an invasion for which appropriations
of several
millions are reported to have been made. Those reports
have not been denied by senior officials in Washington,
nor has the intent-namely.
the destabilization
01
destruction
of the Nicaraguan
Government-been
refuted. Evidence ostensibly showing the extent of the
Nicaraguan menace has also been produced. evidence
that includes aerittl reconnaissance photos to prove
that the Nicaraguan military forces are being expanded.
Needless to say. the taking of those photographs
constituted a flagrant act of aggression, since such
flights hod knowingly violated the ilerial space of LI
trovercign State. It is also worth noting that the evidence cited with regard to Nicaragun’s
involvement
in the civil witr in El Salvador and its interference in
the internal affairs of its neighbours hns not been
proven. In addition. the evidence that has been produced has not been convincing. and its oqjectivity and
validity have been questioned by the press and by
numerous bjdies and GwernmentS.
77. t:vidence has been produced of the training of
Somozist counter-revolutionaries
in various places
in the region and elsewhere for the purpose of waging
subversive activities aimed at inciting civil unrest in
the country and undermining
the credibility
ilnd Control of the Sandinistu Government.
Recently. serious
acts of sabotage have been carried out in Nicaragua.
On the other hand, the Nicaraguan
Government,
demonstrating its commitment
to maintnining
II conscious policy of non-alignment,
has on nrimerous
occasions restated its willingness to enter into nonaggression nnd mutual security pacts with its neighbot~rs on the basis of the policy of non-intervention
and
mutual respect. To that end. Nicnragua has suggested
the formation of :\joint control of the common borders
with Honduras and Costa Rica for the purpose of

impeding the irregulnr activities of elements which
might be hostile to the three Governments. These are
not typical gestures of a Government bent on data.
hitizing its neighbour-s.
78. Even at these meetings of the Council, NicaK\gua has restated its willingness to maintain friendly
relations with the United States-for example. through
the initiation
of talks on tiny mi\tter of mutual concern and importance.
particularly
talks oriented
towards a negotiated solution of conflicts and the
development of regional economic co-operlltion.
79. The Centrill American and Ciiribbeiln
boilingpot needs to be handled carefully. and its hot contents
must not be allowed to spill over through errors of
omission or commission, The fire must be put out
through a combination
of respect for thu Charter.
correct economic measures to redress the social and
economic imbalances and a more meaningful
and
constructive dialogue. Above all, political will must
prevail. To that end we urge the countries of the region
to give maximum attention to the proposals made by
President Ldpez Portillo aimed at a far-reaching solution to the turbulence in Central America.
80. Madam President, my delegation asked for YOUI.
permission to participate in the discussion on this item
because we wanted in this way to register our concern
at the deteriorating
situation in Central America.
Having listened to the statement made earlier this
month by Commander Daniel Ortega. we also wanted
to express Zimbabwe’s solidarity with his Government
and the people of Nici\r;\gu;\.
8 I. The people of Nicaragua have won a lot of sympathy in many countries, including my own. by theil
courageous struggle to overthrow the Somoza dictatorship. They made great sacrifices to achieve thnt
victory. The circumstances that caused the people of
Nici\r:\gu;t to make those grent sacrifices were similar
to our own. Their present struggle for economic
reconstruction
illOIlg
SOCiiilist
lines
is also similar. to
our own. But, unlike the people of Nicnrngua. the
people of Zimbabwe enjoy very good relations with the
United States, whose assistance in our economic
reconstruction
is greatly appreciated by all Zimbahwci\ns. We should like the United States to treat the
people of Nicaragua in the same spirit of gene!-osity.
The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him
to take ;I place at the Council table and to mnke ;I
statement.

82.

BUR WIN
(Libyan
Arab Jamahiriyn):
83. Mr.
Madam President, in keeping with the practice of this
esteemed body, I congratulate you on your becoming
President of the Council for this month.
84. I should illso like to convey my appreciation
to your predecessor, the representative of the United

Kingdom, for the efforts he exerted while presiding
over the Council last month.

policeman
orders.

85. 1 should like to thank the Council for giving me
this opportunity to address it on this important issue.

92, The United States Administration
does not learn
from the lessons that history offers. In spite of the
defeat of the United States in Vet Nam, it is still
contemplating
the possibility of a direct military intervention in El Salvador. In spite of the futility of its
political and military support for the Fascist rkgimes
to enable them to continue to oppress and intimidate
their peoples and to serve United States interests-as
happened in the case of the Somoza r&me,
which
collapsed totally-it
continues its support for the
present regime in El Salvador, notwithstanding
the
fact that that rkgime is facing a revolution by the people. Thus the United States Administration
stands
against the will of peoples and their right to adopt the
political, economic and social systems of their choice.

86. The Council is meeting to discuss an extremely
grave question-namely,
the threats and dangers that
ii certain area of the world is facing nowadays. In
Particular,
these threats are aimed at a small nonaligned country whose peaceful people struggled for
many years and made great sacrifices until they were
finally able to get rid of a repressive dictatorial regime
and set up thr: political and economic system of thei
choice.

87. Nicaragua was certainly right when it requested
the Council to convene in order to look into those
threats directed at its security and stability. There is
no one among the representatives present at this
meeting who has not heard or read in the media
the various statements made by American officials
expressing hostility towards Nicaragua. I do not think
anybody can deny that the United States Administration is utilizing all available means in order to destabilize Nicaragua
with a view to toppling its Government.
88. We have seen pictures of some United States
central
intelligence
Agency agents. followers of
S~moza, receiving their training in a camp in the
United States. Such training is obviously a violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and United States
law,
particularly
the Neutrality Act, which prohibits
the launching of acts of aggression against other coun.tries from United States territories.
89. The United
States Administration
has also
published some pictures it says are of military installations in Nicaragua. Such pictures make it clear to
world opinion that the United States Government has
violated Nicaragua’s airspace in order to spy on it.
We have also read in the American press that the
United
States National Security Council has approved a sum of $19 million to promote dcstabilizing
covert actions in Nicaragua.
90. This evidence irrefutably testifies to the aggressive intentions against Nicaragua and indicates that
American military intervention in Central America is
imminent.
91. The Reagan Administration’s
policies in Central
America, as in most areas of the world, are prompted
by arrogance and obsession with the madness of power.
It does not believe that there are non-aligned COWtries, and it sees the world as divided into two categories: into countries which are either stooges or
enemies of the United States. Those small countries
which desire to live in peace have no choice but to
submit to the will of the United States Administration.
which has arrogated to itself the right to act as the

of the entire world, and ta carry out its

The policies of the United States Government
in Central America are no different from its policies
in the Arab region and southern Africa. In each of
these areas, it provides the Fascist and racist regimes
with all the military and material aid they need in
order to repress innocent citizens and prevent them
from expressing their opinions or exercising their
rights.
93.

94. The United States Administration
also takes a
hostile attitude towards every country that opposes
its policies. The manifestations of such hostility, however, pass through various stages. At the beginning.
they take the form of verbal threats, media campaigns
and political intervention:
then they rise in intensity
and assume the shape of economic sanctions: and
finally, they culminate in military provocations and
plots to destabilize and overthrow nationalist Governments.
95. The problems for the Reagan Government
in
Central America result from the fact that it has still
not become aware of the necessity for change in some
of the countries of the region in response to the ambitions and aspirations of their peoples. The United
States Government
wishes to perpetuate its hegemony over those countries and its domination of their
peoples. Therefore, the United States Government
is one of the obstacles to stability in the area, especially since so far it has demonstrated no encouraging
response to the efforts exerted by some countries,
especially Mexico, to seek a political solution to the
problem of El Salvador and relations between the
countries of the region,
96. President Reagan, in his State of the Union
message on 26 January 1982, suggested solving problems “by pursuing peace at the negotiating table”.
But in this case, the United States Government has
rejected the idea of negotiation.
97. The United States Administration
speaks about
human rights. But on what terms? The answer the

Reagan Administration
is offering is that as long as
the rCgimes and the rulers serve United States interests they are exempted from criticism and punishment
by the United States Government, even if they are not
.elected and are perpetrating acts of repression, brutality, atrocity and terrorism. But if they want to be
independent and non-aligned and they refuse to be
tools in the hands of the United States, then they
will be considered human rights violators, terrorists
and tyrants, in accordance with the American description.
98:’ As a non-aligned
country, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya expresses its solidarity with the people
of Nicaragua and all the other peoples of Central
America in their endeavours to ensure a better future
and stands by them in their struggle to maintain their
independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
in the face of the threats directed at them.

NOTES
I General
1 General
’ General
’ General

99. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, while encouraging
every initiative to find a peaceful solution to the prob-

Litho in United Nations. New York

lems of Central America through dialogue and cooperation between the States concerned and without
any foreign pressure, calls on the Council fully to
assume its responsibilities
to ensure international
peace and security and to adopt all necessary measures that can help Nicaragua maintain its independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity and, as
Mr. Daniel Ortega, the Sandinist leader, demanded,
put an end to “the policy of aggressions, threats,
interventions,
covert operations and invasions against
f’Nicaragua1 and the region . , .” [ikid., IXWLI. 741.

00300

Assembly
Assembly
Assembly
Assembly

resolution
resolution
resolution
resolution

2625 (XXV),
annex.
36/101.
2734 (XXV).
36/103, annex.

88-609R9---0cloher

1989~-2.050
