S/2020/1052

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 October 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 28 October 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit herewith the fifty-eighth report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 16 April to
15 October 2020, which I received from the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see annex).
I should be grateful if you could bring the report to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

20-13918 (E)

041120

*2013918*

S/2020/1052

Annex
Letter dated 21 October 2020 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
accordance with annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I transmit herewith the fifty -eighth report of
the High Representative. I would kindly request that the report be distributed to the
members of the Council for their consideration.
This is my twenty-fourth regular report to the Secretary-General since assuming
the post of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and European U nion
Special Representative on 26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from
16 April to 15 October 2020.
Should you or any member of the Security Council require any information
beyond what is provided in the report, or have any questions reg arding its contents, I
should be pleased to provide you with that information.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina

2/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

Fifty-eighth report of the High Representative for Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
Summary
The present report covers the period from 16 April to 15 October 2020. More
than six months have passed since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where it has, as elsewhere, become the “new
normal”. The authorities in the country have abandoned wholesale lockdown measures
and pivoted towards efforts to shore up the economy while also preparing for the local
elections to be held on 15 November 2020, coping with virus outbreaks on an ad hoc
basis. The pandemic revealed long-standing problems in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
which certain politicians pursued their divisive political agendas at the expense of a
unified fight to contain the spread of the virus and its impact on the economy. The
crisis again exposes the country’s enormous dependence on international assistance,
which highlights the failure of certain nationalist political elites to focus on policies
and issues that truly matter to the citizens of the country. In short, the current crisis
revealed that the focus by some politicians on making Bosnia and Herzegovina and
one of its entities (the Federation) dysfunctional has resulted in the country’s increased
economic and material dependence on the international community and contributed to
financial, health-related and other vulnerabilities that will have a negative impact on
the population.
In October, as part of its 2020 enlargement package and economic investment
plan for the Western Balkans, according to which Bosnia and Herzegovina is eligible
for European Union assistance, the European Commission delivered its report on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Commission assessed that the country still had work to
accomplish in terms of its ability to meet the obligations of European Union
membership, with limited progress in most key reform areas. For the political leaders
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, who unanimously continue to publicly express support for
the country’s membership in the European Union, this assessment s hould serve as a
call to action for them to set aside their differences and enact the reforms necessary to
move forward.
On 7 May, the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina
announced that the local elections for 2020 would be held on 4 Oc tober. However, left
without the necessary funding for their preparatory activities owing to the
dissatisfaction of two political parties, the Republika Srpska -based/Serb-majority
Union of Independent Social Democrats and the Federation-based/Croat-majority Croat
Democratic Union (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), with the election and composition
of the Central Election Commission, the Commission was forced to postpone the date
to 15 November. During the process of organizing the elections, the Commission has
faced numerous politically motivated obstructions by some institutions and/or their
principals. It is certain that the COVID-19 pandemic will add an additional layer of
difficulty to the holding of the elections. Despite all these challenges, the Commission
has been successful in preparing for the elections and trying to reduce risks of election
fraud. We support the Commission’s efforts in this regard.
There was movement on at least one key outstanding issue. In June, the leader of
the Bosniak-majority Party for Democratic Action, Bakir Izetbegović, and the leader
of HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dragan Čović, signed an agreement to amend the
Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina to enable the holding of local elections in
Mostar for the first time since 2008. This landmark achievement after so many years
could not have been accomplished without the involvement of the international
community. Elections in Mostar will be held on 20 December.
20-13918

3/36

S/2020/1052

With the twenty-fifth anniversary of the signing of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace approaching, it is to be hoped that the political parties
campaigning in the local elections would use the opportunity to reflect not on the
wartime past but on the ensuing 25 years of peace, and offer forward -looking platforms
to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unfortunately, we have not seen enough
positive developments. The impending political campaign period – which has not even
officially begun – is already again characterized by divisive, negative rhetoric that
deepens existing divisions and makes reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
increasingly difficult. In this backward-looking political environment, other issues,
such as gender equality, are completely sidelined, which is unacceptable for a country
aspiring to membership in the European Union.
I am particularly concerned by relations among the political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which are increasingly antagonistic and unproductive. Among other
issues, there are continued threats of secession, blockages at the State and Federation
levels and too much inflexibility on certain positions, none of which contributes to
moving the country forward or improving the lives of its citizens.
Highly divergent positions also impede the country’s ability to effectively cope
with the security and humanitarian aspects of the increasing inflow of refugees and
migrants who enter the country attempting to transit to the European Union. While the
Federation in general hosts the largest number of refugees and migrants, the Republika
Srpska continues to refuse the establishment of reception centres on its territory and
has also actively transported individuals they identify as refugees or migrants to the
inter-entity boundary line. The State-level authorities seek the means to return those
who have arrived irregularly while still continuing to uphold their obligations under
international and national law.
As Bosnia and Herzegovina moves through another election cycle, I must also
once again note that the results of the general elections held in October 2018 have still
not been fully implemented. A new Federation Government has not been appointed for
more than two years, and the Federation Government from the previous mandate is
still sitting, along with the previous Federation President and Vice-Presidents; the
same is true for governments in the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton and Canton 10. In
addition, the Federation President continues to block the appointment of judges to fill
the vacancies on the Federation Constitutional Court.
Election matters will remain a concern after the upcoming local elections as
disputes between political parties continue to prevent the implementation of important
decisions of the European Court of Human Rights and the Constitu tional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is long overdue. These issues, along with the
recommendations of the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Group of States agains t
Corruption, will continue to dominate discussions between political parties before the
next general elections. They will require compromise on matters that highlight the fact
that the parties in power have different and often incompatible understandings of the
existing Bosnia and Herzegovina constitutional framework, including decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Now more than ever, at a time when Bosnia and Herzegovina is confronting a
global pandemic while trying to preserve and strengthen its economy, the authorities
must live up to their commitments to building a peaceful and viable State that is
irreversibly on course for Euro-Atlantic integration.

4/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

I am duty-bound to report that, a quarter of a century since the signing of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, there are still some very negative political
tendencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina that potentially pose serious risks to peace and
stability. After a decade of positive reintegration, the dynamic in the countr y has
shifted and political forces are attempting to roll back reforms and progress. As a
result, and because they rely on power-sharing structures that provide opportunities to
block work and decision-making in key institutions, the State and Federation l evels,
in particular, are in many aspects dysfunctional. Unfortunately, the current policies
have a tendency to abuse positive processes, such as European Union integration, to
achieve political goals. Meanwhile, political leaders skilfully manipulate diff erences
within the international community, including on such issues as the Office of the High
Representative’s role and presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the presence of
international judges, in accordance with the General Framework Agreement for Pea ce,
in the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, both of which are institutions
that have legal powers to remedy moves that could endanger peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and/or moves that endanger the constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
While the unity of the international community is crucial to positively influencing
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, such influence is increasingly difficult to
achieve in the shifting global and regional political environment. Now, more than ever,
it is time to call on the political leaders with a single voice to put aside their differences
and focus on uniting to face the common challenges of this moment, in the interests
of, as is written in the General Framework Agreement for Peace, “an enduring peace
and stability”.

20-13918

5/36

S/2020/1052

I. Introduction
1.
This is my twenty-fourth regular report submitted since assuming the post of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2009. It contains a narrative
description of progress made towards goals outlined in previous reports, information
on factual developments, relevant citations and my impartial assessment of the degree
of implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in key areas within
my responsibility to uphold the civilian aspects of the Agreement.
2.
I continue to focus on fulfilling my mandate in accordance with annex 10 to the
General Framework Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions. To that
end, I have continued to encourage the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to make
progress on the five objectives and two conditions necessary for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative, which presupposes full compliance with the
Agreement. The authorities must remain focused on full compliance or else risk
encouraging further rollback of the reforms enacted to implement the Agreement. My
office also fully supports the European Union integration aspirations of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as reflected in the adopted decisions of the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

II. Political update
A.

General political environment
3.
Despite some promising developments, numerous problems still exist in the
political environment in the country.
4.
Despite having announced that the local elections for 2020 were to be held on
4 October for 143 units of local self-government (municipalities, cities and the Brčko
District), two weeks after the announcement, the Central Election Commission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was forced to postpone the date to 15 November, as it was
left without the necessary funding for preparatory activities – despite a clear obligation
by the State to provide part of the funds for the conduct of local elections within
15 days of the announcement of elections – due to political wrangling among the
State-level authorities over the 2020 State budget. Continued political machinations
over the budget, and issues related to the dissatisfaction of the Republika Srpska based party Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), and even more so of
the Croat Democratic Union (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), with appointments to
the Central Election Commission, resulted in the State budget not being adopted until
29 July, which the Commission warned was the latest date the budget could be
adopted to enable the Commission to carry out all activities necessary to organize the
elections for the date as scheduled.
5.
The delay in the adoption of the budget was coordinated by HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina and SNSD as part of their effort to demand changes in the composition
of the Central Election Commission. In March, the Party for Democrati c Action
(SDA), along with the Federation-based party Democratic Front (DF), the Republika
Srpska-based Serb Democratic Party (SDS) and the Party of Democratic Progress,
secured votes in the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives to appoint two
new members of the Central Election Commission from the ranks of Serbs and
reappoint two members from the ranks of Bosniaks. Representatives from HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the bloc led by SNSD walked out of the session prior to
the vote, accusing SDA of betraying their political coalition and using opposition
parties from the Republika Srpska to secure control over the Commission. The
representatives alleged a violation of the procedure for replacing members of the

6/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

Commission prescribed by the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 20 May,
the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives adopted the decision on the
appointment of Željko Bakalar as a Croat member of the Commission, replacing
member Stjepan Mikić, whose mandate had expired. Mr. Bakalar was proposed by
DF and strongly opposed by HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose representatives
called his appointment illegal. Several cases concerning the legality of the election of
the Commission were initiated before the State Court of Bosnia and Herz egovina and
are still pending resolution.
6.
On 28 April, I sent a letter to the President of the Central Election Commission
expressing my support to the newly elected members and I also called on all
authorities to assist the Commission in discharging its legal responsibilities. Both
HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and SNSD continued their verbal assaults on the
composition of the Commission throughout the period, frequently referring to the
institution as illegitimate. In this regard, I recall the communiqué of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council dated 3 June 2020, in which the Steering
Board (minus the Russian Federation) supported the work of the Commission as “an
independent body whose work is derived from the BiH Election Law”. I urge t he
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to support the Central Election Commission and
abide by its decisions.
7.
The local elections will, of course, take place under the circumstances of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. This has forced the political parties that
will compete in the elections to rethink their campaign activities, with many opting
for increased presence on social media and door-to-door canvassing rather than large
gatherings that had been the norm in previous elections. It remains to be seen how the
campaigns will actually play out, bearing in mind that the campaign period does not
officially begin until 30 days before the elections, on 16 October. There are also
practical concerns to consider in terms of voting during a pandemic, and to that end
the Central Election Commission has sent instructions on the conduct of elections to
the local authorities outlining the necessary measures, and has requested them to
provide personal protective equipment. To date, however, a number of loca l
authorities have not responded with regard to whether they can fulfil the conditions
and provide the necessary equipment.
8.
I must express my grave concern over some of the rhetoric already heard from
political parties prior to the official start of the election campaign period, which I
regret to note includes at least one instance of a political party using ethnic slurs and
stereotypes in a promotional video. At the time of writing, the Central Election
Commission had reviewed the video in question and annulled the party’s certification
for the local elections because of the use of language that could provoke or incite
violence or spread hatred. I have expressed my support for the Commission’s
determination to sanction violations of the Election Law.
9.
In addition to the agreement signed in June by the leaders of SDA and HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina to enable the holding of elections in Mostar, which also
considered amending the statute of the city of Mostar, the leaders signed a second
agreement on principles for amending the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in which they committed to the implementation of relevant court decisions concerning
the elimination of inequality and discrimination in the electoral process, and agreed
to secure the legitimate political representation of constituent peoples and citizens
across all administrative and political levels in the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples and the Federation
House of Peoples. The agreement specified that the two parties would agree on
necessary changes within the next six months – by 17 December – and secure their
adoption in the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the end of
2021.
20-13918

7/36

S/2020/1052

10. This agreement was problematic from the beginning, owing to the two parties’
competing visions of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State and divergent interpretations
of its Constitution, whereby their respective concepts of “legitimate representation”
are completely different. In this context, HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina favours an
ethnic model in which each constituent set of peoples elects its own representatives,
and SDA favours a model in which “legitimate representation” extends to “others”
and to citizens. As a result, each party has a different int erpretation of what they
actually agreed to. In addition, HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina maintains the position
that political conditions for the adoption of amendments to the Constitution do not
exist, which limits the discussion on implementing the agreement solely to the
adoption of amendments to the Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
11. Moreover, the very concept of “legitimate representation” is difficult to
reconcile with the implementation of Sejdić and Finci and other similar cases of the
European Court of Human Rights. In this regard, at its 1383rd meeting, from
29 September to 1 October, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe
adopted a decision concerning the execution of the judgment of the Court in Sejdić
and Finci in which they reiterated their concern that the authorities and political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina had not yet achieved consensus on the content of
the required amendments to the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina despite
repeated calls by the Committee of Ministers, and recalled that the retention of the
present discriminatory election system constituted a clear violation of the
requirements of the European Convention on Human Rights and a manifest breach of
the unconditional obligation by Bosnia and Herzegov ina under article 46 of the
Convention, and thus also of its undertakings as a member State of the Council of
Europe.
12. By September, the differences between HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and SDA
became clear. Božo Ljubić (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina), President of the Main
Council of the Croat People’s Assembly (HNS) – an umbrella organization of Croat
parties dominated by HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina – warned that any attempt to
block changes to the Election Law would legitimize Croat demands for the concept
of territorial autonomy, a reference to the long-time desire of HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina for a third, Croat-majority entity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. SDA leader
Bakir Izetbegović countered that there would be no third entity and added his view
that legitimate representation entailed the right to proportional representation and to
defend a vital national interest.
13. Following a subsequent meeting between Mr. Izetbegović and the leader of HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dragan Čović, each introduced new ulti matums.
Mr. Izetbegović stated there would be no further talks on changes to the Election Law
until the appointment of a new Federation Government and the appointments of
judges to the vacancies in the Federation Constitutional Court. Mr. Čović countered
that there would be no new Federation Government before an agreement on changes
to the Election Law, adding that the two agreements signed in June – one enabling the
holding of local elections in Mostar and the other on the principles for amending the
Election Law – were inseparable, and if there was no agreement on amending the
Election Law by 17 December, neither agreement was valid. It remains to be seen
whether this was meant as a threat to the Mostar elections scheduled for 20 December.
14. Two weeks prior to the completion of the present report, Mr. Čović addressed a
letter to the international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he held
SDA entirely responsible for the lack of progress in reaching an agreement on the
Election Law, warning that Croats would not tolerate unconstitutional solutions, and
called on the international community to assist in finding a compromise solution.
Subsequently, Mr. Izetbegović recalled that the June agreement sought to implement
not only decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina but also
8/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

decisions of the European Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić and Finci and Zornić
cases, which were difficult to reconcile with the ethnic model that HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina advocated.
15. These disputes show how far the parties are from the required compromise
needed to undertake such complex electoral reforms, which, to a great extent, is
caused by the fact that the parties in power have different and often incompatible
understandings of the constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
highlights, as I have underlined many times, the need for a strong and independent
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina that is able to resolve such
constitutional disputes. A functioning Constitutional Court is of vital strategic
importance for the long-term self-sustainability of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and it is within this context that the international community should
continue to fully support the Constitutional Court and all its members, particularly its
international (European) judges, who are too often subject to political and media
attacks by Republika Srpska political leaders.
16. In July, as an end to the latest round of persistent negative rhetoric on the
presence of international judges in the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the House of Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina rejected the
proposal submitted by HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and SNSD in February of a law
on the appointment of judges of the Constitutional Court, which was intended to
immediately terminate the mandates of the three international judges and replace them
with domestic judges. As noted in my previous report (S/2020/345, para. 85), this
proposal is incompatible with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. While I
recognize that there will come a time in the future when the Constitutional Court is
comprised entirely of domestic judges, it is my assessment that the country has a very
long way to go before that should happen. In any case, political leaders and above all,
citizens, demand “more Europe” and more European values. Therefore, the existing
international (European) judges are the heralds of things to come and to welcome.
Their presence is highly beneficial.
17. I firmly believe that no real progress will be made and no long -term stability
will be achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina without strengthening the rule of law.
The rule of law is a fundamental value on which most democratic countries are
founded. It is also a basic principle contained in the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which establishes that Bosnia and Herzegovina “shall be a democratic
state, which shall operate under the rule of law”. However, the lac k of the rule of law
remains a fundamental problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina that needs to be addressed
urgently, in particular by strengthening judicial independence and standards and
fighting organized crime and corruption, which is widespread, systemic and an
obstacle to the faster development of Bosnia and Herzegovina into a true European
country.
18. Relations within the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina are also worrisome,
as the members are increasingly at odds with each other. SNSD President and member
of the Presidency Milorad Dodik frequently invoked the principle of vital entity
interest over decisions he claimed were harmful to the interests of the Republika
Srpska, and promised to do the same in the second round of voting over the sensitive
issue of the recognition of Kosovo independence by Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the
first-round vote in mid-September, Bosniak member and current Chair of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Šefik Džaferović (SDA), and Croat member
and President of DF, Željko Komšić, outvoted Mr. Dodik in favour of recognition.
The atmosphere of that session was not improved by Mr. Dodik’s request for a minute
of silence as a mark of respect for former Republika Srpska official Momčilo
Krajišnik, convicted by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia for
crimes against humanity, who had passed away a few days earlier. The request was
20-13918

9/36

S/2020/1052

rejected. The Presidency did not hold a regular session again until 15 October, when
it took no decision on the recognition of Kosovo, as Mr. Komšić, as its initial
proponent, withdrew his proposal and then – following Mr. Dodik’s disagreement
with the procedural manoeuvre and his insistence on a vote on the proposal –
Mr. Komšić and Mr. Džaferović completely refrained from voting, and Mr. Dodik
voted against. Mr. Dodik has repeatedly linked the status of Kosovo to the status of
the Republika Srpska, warning that if Kosovo independence is recognized – even by
Serbia – the Republika Srpska would declare independence.
19. Meanwhile, the Republika Srpska authorities are persistent in their calls to
revert to the so-called “original Dayton”, wrongly asserting that any constitutional
responsibility not expressly listed in the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
belonging to the State in article 3 (1) of the Constitution belong to the entities, and
that the only Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions that should exist are those explicitly
mentioned in the its Constitution.
20. Moreover, the Republika Srpska authorities have frequently ca lled for the
adoption of a new Republika Srpska Constitution, which would eliminate the
Republika Srpska Council of Peoples, an institution specifically designed for the
protection of the vital national interests of the constituent peoples of the Republika
Srpska. In June, the President of the Republika Srpska, Željka Cvijanović,
complained that the Republika Srpska Council of Peoples was “created to be a
potential problem”. 1
21. Mr. Dodik, the de facto leader of the Republika Srpska, has on several occasions
attempted to draw the President of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, into the internal political
issues of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In August, he led a delegation from Republika
Srpska to meet with Mr. Vučić in Belgrade to discuss Republika Srpska complaints
over what it claimed were unjust interventions in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
constitutional order by the High Representative and the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ahead of the meeting, the Republika Srpska authorities
reportedly sent a document comprising conclusions and accompanying reports on
those issues that had been adopted by the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska
in November 2019 and February of 2020. Commendably, Mr. Vučić reiterated the
commitment of Serbia to the General Framework Agreement for Peace.
22. The authorities at all levels continue to disregard or reject final and binding
decisions of the judiciary, including, for example, in the Federation with regard to
decisions of the Federation Constitutional Court requiring a number of cantons to
harmonize their constitutions with the Federation Constitution to ensure, among other
things, the full equality of Serbs as a constituent people, and, in the Republika Srpska,
judgments of both the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina concerning the registration of defence property.
23. While the flow of refugees and migrants entering the country in an attempt to
transit to the European Union decreased during the initial phase o f the COVID-19
pandemic, it has returned to the pre-pandemic level, and there are currently between
6,000 and 8,000 refugees and migrants in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Federation in
general, and Una-Sana Canton in particular, in the north-west of the country, host the
largest number of refugees and migrants owing to Una -Sana Canton’s proximity to
neighbouring Croatia and relative proximity to Slovenia and the Schengen area. The
Republika Srpska authorities continue to refuse to allow the establishment of
reception centres on Republika Srpska territory. The Republika Srpska has also
actively transported individuals they identify as refugees or migrants to the
inter-entity boundary line. While the State-level authorities seek the means to return
__________________
1

10/36

Statement by Ms. Cvijanović, Glas Srpske, 20 June 2020.
20-13918

S/2020/1052

those who have arrived irregularly, either to neighbouring countries (Serbia or
Montenegro) or to their countries of origin, they must nonetheless continue to uphold
their obligations under international and national law – providing access to rights,
including the right to seek asylum in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in accordance with
human rights and humanitarian standards.

B.

Decisions of the High Representative during the reporting period
24. Despite frequent challenges to the core principles of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace during the reporting period, I continued to refrain from using
my executive powers, pursuant to the policy of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which seeks to promote local ownership over international
decision-making.

C.

Five objectives and two conditions for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative

1.

Progress on objectives
25. My office continues to urge progress towards the full implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions established by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council in 2008 as essential steps towards the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. The intention of the Steering Board in establishing that
agenda was for Bosnia and Herzegovina to assume full responsibility and demonstrate
its credibility. Thus, the agenda is for the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to
deliver, but regrettably, except for recent positive trends in Brčko District, they show
no serious commitment to implementing it. Many areas covered by the agenda have
seen stagnation and even rollbacks.

2.

State and defence property
26. Following the adoption by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovi na
in February of two important decisions related to public property, as extensively
covered in my previous report (see S/2020/345), there were no substantial attempts at
implementing the relevant court decisions or achieving progress towards the
acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of State property during the
reporting period.
27. As a reminder, as established in the 2012 decision of the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the titleholder of
all State property, and the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
exclusive competence to regulate the issue of the apportionment of assets between the
State and lower levels of government. In that context, the Court specifically
underlined the constitutional principle of the legal continuity of the State, as well as
the fact that State property “reflects the statehood, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina”. Moreover, the decisions mentioned in paragraph 26
above issued by the Court in February confirmed the legal principles established by
the 2012 decision on State property and further elaborated that – pursuant to the same
constitutional principle of legal continuity – the State is the titleholder of former
“general people’s property” (i.e., socially or State-owned property), including public
goods such as agricultural land and inland waters.
28. In addition, in April and May the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina issued two decisions addressing the registration of prospective defence
property under the ownership of Bosnia and Herzegovina. As a reminder, since the

20-13918

11/36

S/2020/1052

so-called process of “direct registration of prospective defense property” started in
2015, the Public Attorney’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has submitted requests
for the registration of the country’s ownership rights of such properties to the
competent domestic institutions. In the Federation, these registration requests are
considered, and most often adopted, by the competent land registry offices of the
municipal courts, resulting in numerous successful registrations of the right of
ownership in favour of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the Republika Srpska,
the registration requests are considered by the Republika Srpska Geodetic
Administration, and are routinely rejected for various procedural and/or substantive
reasons, owing primarily to an alleged lack of valid legal basis for registration. As
previously reported, the Republika Srpska has been blocking the registration of
prospective defence property in its territory under the ownership of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for several years, despite the existing legal framework
(e.g., the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law
on Defence (2005) and relevant decisions of the Presidency), and final and binding
court decisions, such as the State Court’s 2016 decision in the case of the prospective
location at Han Pijesak in the Republika Srpska.
29. After the competent Republika Srpska institutions rejected several registration
requests, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in its decisions in April
and May, upheld the appeals submitted by the Public Attorney’s Office of Bosnia and
Herzegovina concerning the rejected registrations in two particular cases. In its
decisions, the Constitutional Court established violations of relevant rights
guaranteed by the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, annulled the disputed
decisions of the Republika Srpska courts and instructed the courts to issue new
decisions in an urgent procedure. Furthermore, in the view of the Constitutional
Court, the decision of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the size, structure
and locations of the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina was to be considered as
the decision of the competent body and thus as a valid legal basis for the requested
registration of the State’s ownership rights. In that regard, the Constitutional Court
also cited the constitutional obligation of the entities and their bodies to fully comply
with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina and with decisions of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina institutions – in this case, the Presidency.
30. The adoption of comprehensive State-level legislation on the apportionment and
management of State property, based entirely on the legal principles established by
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, represents the only acceptable
and sustainable resolution of the issue of State property. Meanwhile, as noted in
previous reports, based on numerous laws, declarations, resolutions, conclusions and
statements adopted and issued by competent Republika Srpska institutions and
authorities, this issue has become a vehicle for promoting the uni lateral policies of
the Republika Srpska aimed at undermining the fundamental principles of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and depriving the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
of its right to own and administer its property, its constitutional comp etences and
ultimately its sovereignty and territorial integrity. Addressing these very serious
issues requires the swift and proactive engagement of the international community.
3.

Brčko District
31. The COVID-19 pandemic has accentuated the importance of good governance,
infrastructure development and private sector growth reforms to reinforce Brčko
District’s resilience to challenges. The Office of the High Representative has provided
and will continue to provide expert and technical support to the Supervisor of the
Brčko District in encouraging and guiding the District to that end, including at all
stages of reforms, which will also advance the District to the stated objectives of the
Final Award. In this endeavour, the Supervisor and the Office of the High

12/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

Representative also engage with international community representatives to ensure a
targeted, coordinated and results-oriented approach.
32. The fiscalization process has been successfully completed and has proven
supportive of the common goal of the District and Bosnia and Herzegovina of fighting
tax evasion and generating revenues more efficiently. A new budget law has set the
District on a course to improve its fiscal discipline, transparency an d responsibility
in spending. The law’s key principles were applied in the adoption of the 2020 District
budget and of the law on its execution, laying the groundwork to generate funds to
help prevent the spread of COVID-19 and mitigate its economic consequences. This
was also reflected in subsequent budget rebalances. The pandemic has somewhat
delayed the by-laws required for the full application of the budget law to the 2021
budget cycle, but the drafting process has resumed, and the by -laws are expected to
be adopted in the fourth quarter of 2020.
33. Complementary good governance reforms are also on track. A law on peaceful
assembly, which protects the right of assembly in accordance with international
standards, and is the first of its kind in Bosnia and Herzegovina, was adopted on
29 July. On 14 October, a law on foundations and associations was adopted that
established transparent, equitable and merit-based support to the non-governmental
sector. The same day, a law on national minorities was adopted that regulates the
equal participation of minorities in the District in alignment with European legal
norms. An online register of public sector employees and appointees and their
holdings was launched on 20 August to further foster transparency and fiscal
discipline in the District. The register may also serve to identify and prevent conflicts
of interest, thereby complementing the efforts of the District to draft a new law on
conflict of interest that would leave no room for misinterpretation and abuse.
34. Ensuring a credible electoral process is key to re-establishing voter trust in
elected officials. As a result, the list of voters in Brčko District is being updated, the
abuse of public funds for election purposes is being curbed and the presence of
independent observers for every polling station in Brčko has been organized for the
local elections on 15 November. Following the elections, additional good governance
reforms will need to be implemented to maintain this positive trend.
35. Infrastructure development projects have been impeded by the COVID-19
pandemic, but nonetheless have been recognized as the most effective response to
mitigating its economic consequences. Preparatory activities relevant to the
modernization of Brčko Port and the reconstruction of the Brčko-Gunja Bridge are
close to completion, with construction works currently planned for the fourth quarter
of 2020. The new police building is nearly ready to house not only the District police
but also the local detachment of both the Bosnia and Herzegovina State border police
and the Service for Foreigners’ Affairs.
36. The vulnerability of the electricity supply remains a concern in Brčko District,
as the supply options are limited. In September, the District authorities launched a
tender for electricity supply for 2021, but as in previous years, the District received
only one bid and to date no arrangement has been concluded despite the promising
tone of the ongoing negotiations. This situation once again highlights the need to
diversify and strengthen the District’s energy security. The District has therefore also
undertaken steps to adopt energy legislation to create a modern and European Union compliant legal framework for the energy sector, promoting energy efficiency and
renewable energy sources, as well as investing in energy infrastructure. With regard
to such investments, the transfer by the District of ownership rights over the
electricity transmission facilities to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Electricity
Transmission Company, in accordance with the State-level law, is expected to be
completed by the end of the year. This will ensure continued investments in and the
20-13918

13/36

S/2020/1052

maintenance of key electricity transmission infrastructure and contribute to the
security of the electricity supply.
37. The dynamic achieved during the reporting period has encouraged new
infrastructure projects in Brčko District, such as expanding and improving the water
supply system. Negotiations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development on a loan agreement amounting to €6.5 million
for this purpose are expected in the fourth quarter of 2020.
38. While the steps taken by the District leadership are crucial for strengthening the
stability and sustainability of Brčko District, additional efforts are needed to ensure
that the ongoing pandemic, the local elections in November and tensions in the rest
of the country do not hinder or roll back the path of progress towards the stated
objectives of the Final Award.
4.

Fiscal sustainability
39. In accordance with its mandate, including coordination responsibilities, the
Office of the High Representative continued to follow, analyse and report on
developments and legislative actions relevant to fiscal sustainability. This included
monitoring and reporting to the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on the activities of the Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in which the Office of the High Representative is the only
representative of the international community, and the Fiscal Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The trends in both institutions continue to raise concerns over the ability
of governments at all levels, in particular the State level, to ensure the unimpeded
functioning of institutions and the discharge of their constitutional and legal
obligations.
40. The Fiscal Council did not meet during the first quarter of 2020, and only in
early April did it consider the letter of intent seeking assistance under the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) Rapid Financing Instrument in the amount of roughly
€330 million to address urgent needs arising from the COVID-19 pandemic in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Disputes between the Federation and the Republika Srpska, and
within the Federation, over the distribution of the IMF assistance delayed the
consideration of the country’s request by the IMF Executive Board, which in turn
delayed the disbursement.
41. Although the IMF Executive Board approved the request of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 20 April and disbursed the funds on 22 April, distribution within
Bosnia and Herzegovina was stalled until 2 June with regard to accounts within the
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, owing to continued disputes arising from
different interpretations of an 11 April agreement between the leaders of SNSD, SDA
and HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the State and entity prime ministers and
finance ministers, mainly related to distribution to the Federation cantons. This
created undue pressure on the Central Bank, as the country’s fiscal agent, to proceed
with the transfer of funds despite the absence of a decision on their distribution, which
the Bank successfully resisted. The disputes were resolved only on 2 June, when the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers finally adopted an outstanding decision
on the distribution of funds under the IMF Rapid Financing Instrument, compliant
with the 11 April letter of intent and the 20 April memorandum of understanding,
authorizing the Ministry of Finance and Treasury to distribute the funds as follows:
61.5 per cent to the Federation with its 10 cantons, 37.5 per cent to the Republika
Srpska and 1 per cent to Brčko District. The Office of the High Representative played
an instrumental role in providing analyses and guidance to the international
community towards resolving the problem in line with the relevant legislation and the
commitments made by the authorities.

14/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

42. Following the developments related to the IMF Rapid Financing Instrument, the
Fiscal Council did not meet again until 18 September, when it adopted – well past the
May deadline for doing so – the Global Framework of Fiscal Balance and Policies for
2021–2023, a document that serves as the basis for the preparation of State and entity
budgets in the stated time frame. According to the document, the overall budget of
the State institutions in 2021 is determined to be KM 1.027 billion, which represents
a 3.1 per cent increase over the 2020 budget. The revenues of indirect taxes, as a key
component for financing the Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions in 2021, are
projected to be 2020 levels (KM 780 million), while the remaining planned funds
would be secured from other revenues.
43. The Office of the High Representative continued to closely follow, report and
advise on developments related to the single indirect tax system, in particular in view
of developments observed during the previous reporting period, including attempts to
undermine the single indirect tax system and its State-level institutional structure, and
announcements of the potential withdrawal of the Republika Srpska from the
inter-entity agreement transferring the responsibility for indirect taxation to the State.
The Office of the High Representative attends the sessions of the Governing Board
of the Indirect Taxation Authority, allowing the Office and, by extension, its
international community partners, to be fully informed and able to react promptly as
needed.
44. The Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority finally reached a l ongawaited agreement on inter-entity debt settlement and indirect tax revenue coefficient
adjustments in late May. The Board unanimously adopted decisions settling the
outstanding inter-entity debts arising from the indirect tax revenue allocations for th e
period from 2012 to 2019. Based on the total debt settlement, the Federation owes the
Republika Srpska the amount of KM 22.5 million, and the debt, as subsequently
agreed, would be settled by the Indirect Taxation Authority from the Federation’s
share of indirect tax revenues in six instalments starting in July. It remains unclear
whether the debt settlement would result in the withdrawal of the related entity
lawsuits pending before the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Governing
Board also adopted the indirect tax revenue allocation coefficients for the second
quarter of 2020. This was the first time since 29 May 2017 that the Board had adjusted
the revenue allocation coefficients, which – pursuant to the Board’s regulations –
must be adjusted quarterly. The Board followed up on 29 June, adopting the
coefficients for the third quarter of 2020, and then again on 31 August, settling the
inter-entity debt for the first half of 2020. The debt settlement, according to which the
Federation owes the Republika Srpska KM 32.3 million, will be implemented by the
Indirect Taxation Authority from the Federation’s share of indirect tax revenues in
four equal instalments by the end of 2020.
45. The Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority also consid ered several
other issues within its competence, notifying the relevant authorities of, among other
things, the expiration of the mandate of current Director of the Indirect Taxation
Authority, Miro Džakula, on 6 June in order to initiate the procedure for his
replacement. Given the strategic importance of the Indirect Taxation Authority, the
vacancy has triggered inter-party disputes, with SDA, HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina
and SNSD each claiming the position. The situation is likely to compound the
challenges to the indirect tax system, which should not be neglected, despite the
positive developments in recent months. The Office of the High Representative will
engage with its international partners to address those challenges.
46. The Office of the High Representative also continued to closely follow other
developments related to fiscal sustainability, including the adoption status and details
of the 2020 budgets at all levels of government.

20-13918

15/36

S/2020/1052

5.

Issues related to the rule of law
47. As I stated in paragraph 17 above, I firmly believe that no real progress will be
made and no long-term stability will be achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina without
strengthening the rule of law. The rule of law is a fundamental value on which most
democratic countries are founded. It is also a basic principle contained in the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which establishes that Bosnia and
Herzegovina “shall be a democratic state, which shall operate under the rule of law”.
However, the lack of the rule of law remains a fundamental problem in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that needs to be addressed urgently, in particular through strengthening
judicial independence and fighting organized crime and corruption, which is
widespread, systemic and an obstacle to the faster development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into a true European country.
48. The High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
is the key institution in developing the concept of judicial impartiality and the rule of
law by raising standards of professionalism, transparency and efficiency in the legal
profession, must be addressed as a priority. In this regard, I will continue to support
the efforts of the European Union and the wider international community to seek
amendments to the Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council that
strengthen the integrity of judges and prosecutors and the Council itself. I would like
to thank the European Union for its efforts in this regard.
49. In the aftermath of the incident in 2019 involving the President of the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council’s inappropriate contact with a citizen who
complained of his legal case, and the dismissal of the subsequent disciplinary case
against the President with the explanation that the President cannot be subject to
disciplinary responsibility and is therefore above the law, the credibility and public
perception of the Council, mandated to appoint and discipline judges and prosecutors,
further declined. There is an urgent need to improve the standards of the Council,
primarily through changes to the Law on the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council.
The international community strongly advocates technical changes to yield a properly
functioning Council, while preserving it as a State-level body with jurisdiction
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. Amendments have been drafted, and
consultations are ongoing.
50. In August, the Office of the Disciplinary Counsel of the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council confirmed that it had opened an ex officio case against Chief
Prosecutor Gordana Tadić, stemming from media allegation s that she sought
compensation for accommodation expenses for an apartment in which she did not
reside. In such cases of potential breaches of duties by judges or prosecutors, the
Office of the Disciplinary Counsel acts as prosecutor in proceedings, which are held
before the disciplinary panels of the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council.
Ms. Tadić has denied any wrongdoing.
51. The mandate of the current Director General of the Intelligence -Security
Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has expired and a new appointment must be made.
The appointment has apparently been postponed, as the current Director General faces
scrutiny for allegedly obtaining and using false documents as evidence of the
education required for the position by law.
52. The persistent calls of the Republika Srpska authorities to reject the
applicability of Bosnia and Herzegovina-level judicial decisions in that entity
represents a continued deterioration of the entrenchment of the rule of law.
53. In the Federation, the Federation President, who, under the Federation
Constitution, is mandated to nominate, in concurrence with the two Vice -Presidents,
judges to fill the vacancies of the Federation Constitutional Court, did not meet his

16/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

obligation for two years. This failure continues to hav e direct implications on the
ability of the Federation Constitutional Court – and its vital national interest panel –
to exercise its constitutional responsibilities, as it operates with only five sitting
judges, out of nine required by the Federation Constitution.
54. The Federation legislation establishing a special prosecutor and court
department for fighting corruption and organized crime, adopted in 2014, remains
unimplemented, which is irresponsible and unacceptable.
55. In general, all processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be accelerated, but
acceleration should occur most of all with regard to rule of law reforms. Increasingly,
people are leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina not only for economic reasons but also
because of the lack of rule of law. Accordingly, of all priorities, reforms in the rule of
law field should be the highest. There should no longer be any tolerance for delays,
as with the long overdue establishment of a special prosecutor and court department
for fighting corruption and organized crime in the Federation. It is also beyond reason
that a person blacklisted by a member State of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council over suspicion of corruption be given the task of overseeing
the fight against corruption. This is precisely what the Parliamentary Assembly of
Bosnia and Herzegovina did when it appointed Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples delegate Nikola Špirić (SNSD) to the parliamentary committee for the
selection and monitoring of the work of the Agency for Pre vention of Corruption and
Coordination of the Fight against Corruption of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Mr. Špirić
was sanctioned by the Government of the United States of America in September
2018 because it had credible information on his involvement in and receipt of benefits
from public corruption.
6.

War crimes cases
56. On 24 September, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers adopted the
Revised National War Crimes Processing Strategy. The process of the adoption of the
revisions took more than two years, primarily owing to opposition from victims’
associations and SDA over concerns that so-called “category A” cases – cases for
which the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia assessed there were
sufficient grounds for prosecution – would not be processed, and that cases handled
at the entity level would not be justly administered.
57. The previous National War Crimes Processing Strategy, adopted in 2008,
envisioned the processing of the most complex cases by 2015, but this deadline was
not met. It is hoped that a new supervisory board for the Revised Strategy, which will
in the future add to its membership representatives of the Office of the Prosecutor of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, will serve
to increase the speed of prosecutorial work and the prioritization of the most serious
cases, enable the efficient transfer of cases within Bosnia and Herzegovina to allow
more cases to be processed in less time and improve regional cooperation – in
particular where category A cases are concerned. If the new deadline of 2023, as
established in the Revised Strategy, can be met for the completion or closure of these
cases, this will be a very positive achievement. I commend all efforts, while remaining
hopeful of the results.

D.

Challenges to the General Framework Agreement for Peace

1.

Challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity, competences and
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
58. During the reporting period, Republika Srpska politician s, in particular the
leader of SNSD, Milorad Dodik, continued to challenge the sovereignty and territorial

20-13918

17/36

S/2020/1052

integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, disregarding State-level competences and
undermining key State-level institutions. Mr. Dodik persistently attempted to link the
status of the Republika Srpska with the status of Kosovo, suggesting that if the
independence of Kosovo was recognized, the independence of the Republika Srpska
should be as well. 2 Regrettably, on at least one occasion he was joined by the Serbian
Minister for Defence, Aleksandar Vulin, in making such a linkage. 3
59. Mr. Dodik has also periodically revived the notion of a Republika Srpska
referendum on secession, 4 and frequently called for the unification of the Republika
Srpska with Serbia. He has also spoken repeatedly of the existence of “two Serb
States”. 5
60. Similarly, some Croat politicians still allude to a “third entity” through the
territorial reorganization of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as most recently mentioned by
Božo Ljubić, President of the Main Council of HNS. 6
61. The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council has repeatedly called
on parties to refrain from divisive action and rhetoric an d reiterated its commitment
to the territorial integrity and fundamental structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
single, sovereign State comprising two entities. The entities have no right to secede
from Bosnia and Herzegovina and only exist legally by virtue of the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
2.

Rhetoric on war crimes, glorification of war criminals
62. Nationalist leaders continue to deny war crimes, glorifying convicted war
criminals and leading divided commemorations that perpetuate the notion of group
victimhood while ignoring or downplaying empathy and compassion for the suffering
and loss of others.
63. Following the death from COVID-19 in September of SDS cofounder, former
Speaker of the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska and former member of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina Momčilo Krajišnik, whom the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia convicted in 2006 for crimes against humanity,
Mr. Dodik praised Mr. Krajišnik 7 and reportedly suggested naming a street in Banja
Luka after him. In addition, at the session of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in mid-September, Mr. Dodik requested a minute of silence as a mark of

__________________

“If Kosovo is internationally recognized, the [Republika Srpska] should have such treatment,
because it is an almost identical situation in terms of national and other circumstances.”
Statement by Mr. Dodik, N1, 23 July 2020.
3
“If those in [Bosnia and Herzegovina] are for an independent Kosovo, then I am for an
independent [Republika Srpska].” Statement by Serbian Minister for Defense Aleksandar Vulin,
RTS, 17 September 2020.
4
It is time to affirm [former President of the United States Bill] Clinton ’s idea and give Serbs the
right to choose where and in what State they want to live. This is not their State, nor do Serbs
perceive it that way. Their State is the [Republika Srpska].” Statement by Mr. Dodik,
Oslobodjenje, 27 July 2020.
5
“Today we have two States, Serbia and the [Republika Srpska], and the aspiration is to be one
State, building security and the future of the entire region, which no one can take away from us.
We want it in a peaceful and civilized way.” Statement by Mr. Dodik, Srpska Republika News
Agency, 15 September 2020.
6
“Blocking or preventing changes to the Election Law on the basis of the Constitution and
decisions of the Constitutional Court actually legitimizes the direct search for other concepts of
achieving national equality. One of those concepts is certainly on the concept of territorial
autonomy.” Statement by Mr. Ljubić, Dnevni Avaz, 7 September 2020.
7
“Momčilo Krajišnik will remain inscribed in special letters in the history of our Republic and our
people in Republika Srpska, who lost their sincere and true patriotism with his departure.”
Statement by Mr. Dodik, Kurir, 15 September 2020.
2

18/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

respect for Mr. Krajišnik, a convicted war criminal. This is against all European
standards and standards of humanity.
64. A quarter of a century after the cessation of hostilities, senior political figures
and certain segments of society are increasingly challenging the rulings of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Court of Justice
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Such attitudes
greatly hinder the prospects of lasting reconciliation in the country.

III. State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
A.

Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
65. The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina maintained its regular and protocol
activities throughout the reporting period, receiving dignitaries, ambassadors and
delegations. The Presidency held 7 regular sessions and 30 extraordinary sessions,
focusing on the COVID-19 pandemic, the migrant crisis, European Union integration
and regional cooperation. However, Presidency members continue to act unilaterally
on numerous issues that lack political consensus in Bosnia and Herz egovina.
66. Much of the Presidency’s work focused on efforts to mitigate the pandemic,
assuming a coordinating role between institutions, while also tasking the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Council of Ministers to work with the Brčko District and entity
governments on future measures. In its capacity as commander-in-chief, the
Presidency instructed the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina to assist civilian
bodies in preventing the spread of COVID-19.
67. In late April, the Presidency formally adopted a conclusion that launched the
implementation of 14 key priorities identified in the European Commission’s opinion
on the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina for membership in the European Union,
and reaffirmed the country’s commitment to European Union members hip as a
strategic foreign policy goal and priority. The Presidency established an ad hoc
political working group comprising the members of the Presidency and all members
of the collegiums of the Council of Ministers, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Representatives and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples. The Presidency
also tasked the Chair of the Council of Ministers to develop an action plan for the
implementation of the 14 priorities and to report monthly on its implementation.
68. The Presidency has several times requested the Council of Ministers to produce
a comprehensive plan for resolving the migrant crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
underlining the primary goals of preventing illegal entry into Bosnia and Herzegovina
and reducing the number of migrants residing in the country. The Presidency urged
the Council of Ministers to enhance the capabilities of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
border police and accelerate the conclusion of readmission agreements with migrants’
countries of origin. In late August, the Presidency requested the Council of Ministers
and relevant institutions to relocate migrants from urban centres to designated
facilities, and requested the Council to allocate KM 5 million to enhance capacities
in managing the crisis.
69. On 26 June, the Presidency adopted the proposed 2020 Law on the Budget of
Bosnia and Herzegovina Institutions and International Obligations, submitting it to
the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina under urgent procedure,
which the Parliamentary Assembly did not support, instead considering it under
regular procedure.
70. The Presidency discussed the “mini-Schengen” initiative launched by Albania,
North Macedonia and Serbia in October 2019 to improve regional economic

20-13918

19/36

S/2020/1052

cooperation and the flow of goods, and enable border crossings with identity cards.
The Presidency tasked the Council of Ministers to prepare an analysis of the initiative
as a reference document for a potential decision by the Presidency on whether Bosnia
and Herzegovina would join the initiative.
71. Member of the Presidency Mr. Dodik invoked vital entity interest over several
decisions adopted by the other two members, including: the approval of the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the Ministry of Security of Bosn ia and
Herzegovina and the United States Department of Homeland Security on cooperation
in the exchange of travel information; a statement approving the signing of an
agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina participation in the Program for International
Student Assessment testing; and a statement approving the signing of an agreement
on the participation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the 2021 Progress in International
Reading Literacy Study. Most recently, Mr. Dodik invoked vital entity interest over a
decision supporting the conclusion of a memorandum of cooperation between the
Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the International
Foundation for Electoral Systems on electoral monitoring. In each case, the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska supported the vital entity interest motions, and the
affected decisions did not enter into force.

B.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
72. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers met regularly during the
reporting period, holding 13 regular and 19 urgent or extraordinary sessions, albeit
with limited legislative output.
73. The Council of Ministers adopted only two new laws and one amendment to
existing legislation. Of the “new” laws, one was the 2020 Law on the Budget of
Bosnia and Herzegovina Institutions and International Obligations, which was
adopted on 18 June after considerable delay. In an attempt to explain the poor
legislative output to the public, the Chair of the Council of Ministers, Zoran Tegeltija
(SNSD), stated that in the absence of political consensus on many issues, there was
no point in proposing legislation destined to fail.
74. The Council of Ministers devoted much of its work to measures related to
COVID-19 that were within its competency, such as defining instructions for
procedures during a pandemic, approving loan agreements with international
financial institutions and deciding on the opening and closing of airports and other
border crossing points. In September, after banning the entry of non -citizens, apart
from exceptional cases, since the start of the pandemic, the Council opened the Bosnia
and Herzegovina borders to foreign citizens who could provide a negative COVID -19
test no more than 48 hours old. The Council subsequently approved an agreement on
the acquisition of an eventual COVID-19 vaccine with the Gavi Alliance (formerly
the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations).
75. Although the Council of Ministers formally kept track of the migrant crisis in
the country through the adoption of monthly statistical reports, the overall response
has been inadequate, with the public perception that the jurisdictions where migrants
are accommodated – mainly Una-Sana Canton in the Federation – have been left to
fend for themselves.
76. On 30 June, the Council of Ministers adopted a decision on temporary financing
for the period from July to September 2020, which ended when the Parliamentary
Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina completed the adoption of the 2020 State
budget on 29 July.

20/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

77. Although several appointments to key Bosnia and Herzegovina institutions,
including the directors of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Intelligence -Security Agency
and the Indirect Taxation Authority, remained deadlocked as a result of political
calculations, the Council of Ministers did make other important appointments. In July,
the Council confirmed the appointments of new directors of the State Investigation
and Protection Agency (SIPA), the Communications Regulatory Agency (CRA), the
Agency for Education and Professional Training and the Official Gazette of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as members of various other bodies and managerial boards.
78. In June, the Minister for Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Fahrudin
Radončić (Union for a Better Future of Bosnia and Herz egovina (SBB)), tendered his
irrevocable resignation from his position, citing irreconcilable differences with SDA
over the issue of illegal migration, among other things. In April, Mr. Radončić became
embroiled in a scandal after he proposed the forcible repatriation of migrants in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to their home countries and criticized the Embassy of
Pakistan in Bosnia and Herzegovina for not cooperating in such efforts to return its
citizens, ultimately suggesting that the Ambassador of Pakistan be declared persona
non grata in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Mr. Radončić’s replacement as Minister for
Security, Selmo Cikotić (SDA), was confirmed in July.

C.

Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina
79. The Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued to meet
while respecting social distancing and other pandemic-related measures, and executed
its protocol duties, with delegates participating in international forums online and the
leadership of both houses meeting with domestic and international dignitaries.
However, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives did not meet from
11 March to 28 April, and the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples did not meet
from 14 February to 28 May. The House of Representatives amended its rules of
procedure to allow for sessions to be conducted online, but never put the amendments
into practice, while the House of Peoples, as a much smaller body, took no similar
steps.
80. In all, the House of Representatives held six regular and five urgent sessions,
while the House of Peoples held six regular and three urgent sessions. Only two new
laws were adopted, as well as five amendments to existing laws, with both houses
rejecting a cumulative 30 legislative proposals.
81. Among the most notable proposals rejected was the controversial law on the
selection of judges to the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina previously
elected by the President of the European Court of Human Rights, proposed by SNSD
and HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina with the aim of eliminating the presence of
international (European) judges on the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Legal
Committee of the House of Representatives had issued a second negative opinion on
the law, which the House of Representatives adopted on 7 July, thereby rejecting the
proposal.
82. Following a lengthy delay in the submission of the 2020 State budget to the
Parliamentary Assembly, and after five sessions of the House of Representatives and
four sessions of the House of Peoples, and a harmonization process between the two
houses, the budget was finally adopted on 29 July. This was the latest date for
adoption to enable the Central Election Commission to carry out preparatory activities
in time for the local elections in November. Earlier, through consecutive sessions of
the House of Representatives and the House of Peoples on 7 and 8 July, respectively,
the Parliamentary Assembly adopted the long-awaited amendments to the Bosnia and

20-13918

21/36

S/2020/1052

Herzegovina Election Law to enable the holding of elec tions in the city of Mostar for
the first time since 2008.
83. On 15 May, the House of Representatives approved the appointment of
contested candidates for the Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister for Human Rights and
Refugees (Democratic People’s Alliance) and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Deputy
Minister for Security (Socialist Party of Republika Srpska), finally filling the
remaining vacancies in the Council of Ministers, which had been outstanding since
December of 2019. On 20 May, the House of Representatives adopted the decision on
the appointment of Željko Bakalar as a Croat member of the Central Election
Commission, to replace member Stjepan Mikić, whose mandate had expired.
Mr. Bakalar was proposed by DF and strongly opposed by HDZ Bosnia and
Herzegovina, whose representatives called his appointment illegal. On 23 July,
following the resignation of Mr. Radončić (SBB), the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Minister for Security, in June, the House of Representatives confirmed the
appointment of his replacement, Selmo Cikotić (SDA), despite opposition from HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose representatives claimed a court proceeding was
pending against Mr. Cikotić for alleged war crimes against Croats.
84. In May, after considerable delay, the House of Representatives ad h oc
investigative commission for determining the state of affairs in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina judicial institutions was established, and began its work. The
commission met regularly, holding public hearings with representatives of the
judiciary, as well as with experts in the judicial field and journalists.

IV. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
85. With the results of the 2018 general elections still pending full implementation,
as a new Federation Government has not yet been appointed, the Govern ment from
the mandate for the period 2014–2018, comprising ministers from SDA, HDZ Bosnia
and Herzegovina and SBB, continued to work in a technical capacity. The current
number of ministers is 14, reduced from 16, owing to the departure of the former
Minister for Education (SDA) in early 2020 for an ambassadorship and the death in
July of the former Minister for Veterans Affairs (SDA) from COVID -19. The
Government held 22 regular and 17 extraordinary sessions during the reporting
period.
86. In late May, acting on the order of the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, SIPA arrested the Federation Prime Minister, Fadil Novalić (SDA), the
Head of the Federation Civil Protection Administration, Fahrudin Solak (SDA), and
Srebrena Malina (Silver Raspberry) company director Fikret Hodžić for suspicion of
involvement in the criminal acts of document forgery, money-laundering and
accepting bribes with regard to the Federation’s KM 10.5 million procurement of
respirators from China. The purchase of the respirators had become a scandal, as the
company that procured them had no experience in medical procurement, and medical
experts with the Federation Crisis Headquarters had deemed the respirators unusable
for COVID-19 cases. Several months later, the Institute of Metrology of Bosnia and
Herzegovina assessed the respirators as being of high quality and suitable for COVID-19
treatment.
87. After initial questioning, the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina requested the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina to order 30 days
of detention for all three suspects to prevent tampering with evidence and influencing
witnesses, which the State Court rejected, ordering the suspects’ release with
restrictive measures. SDA condemned the arrests as an attempted coup d’état.
Subsequently, in the Federation House of Representatives, five parties – opposition
22/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

parties, including the Social Democratic Party, Naša Stranka, SDA and the
Independent Bloc, along with ruling coalition partner SBB – unsuccessfully initiated
a proposal calling for Mr. Novalić’s resignation.
88. In mid-April, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federation
Government adopted a measure to rebalance the 2020 Federation budget to allow for
the redirection of resources to implement the Law on Mitigating Negative Economic
Consequences it had adopted during the previous reporting period. The Federation
Parliament subsequently adopted the measure to rebalance the budget and endorsed
the Law. In a session in late September, the Government adopted a decision that
provided an additional KM 100 million to businesses affected by the pandemic, with
the largest portion going to the tourism sector. On 29 May, the Government lifted the
state of disaster it had declared at the start of the pandemic.
89. Both houses of the Federation Parliament met infrequently, with the Federation
House of Representatives holding only four regular and t wo extraordinary sessions
and the Federation House of Peoples holding just two regular and two extraordinary
sessions. Legislative output remained poor, with six new laws and seven amendments
to existing laws adopted.
90. In July, the Federation House of Representatives rejected a vote of no
confidence in the Federation Government that had been initiated in May by opposition
parties, whose representatives claimed there was no control over numerous
procedures and no trust in the current composition of the G overnment, as shown by
the numerous lawsuits against individuals in the Government and its poor
management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
91. The collegiums of both houses of the Federation Parliament remained
incomplete. Since its inaugural session following the 2018 general elections, the
Federation House of Peoples has not appointed the Deputy Speaker from the Serb
peoples, largely due to the political divide within the Serb caucus, which only
managed to finally appoint its leadership in June of 2020. The Ser b caucus should
propose the Deputy Speaker candidate, which it still has not done. The lack of a
Deputy Speaker from the Serb peoples hinders the Serb caucus from accessing the
full range of protection mechanisms. In the Federation House of Representatives , a
reshuffling in the parliamentary majority in July of 2019 necessitated the
reappointment of the House of Representatives collegium. There as well, the Deputy
Speaker from the Serb peoples has not been proposed.

A.

Vital national interest panel of the Federation Constitutional
Court remains non-functional
92. As previously reported, the Federation Constitutional Court currently operates
with only five of the nine required judges, requiring all five judges to be present to
create a quorum and decisions to be reached by consensus. The Court’s vital national
interest panel is left with only four sitting judges and is unable to convene. In
accordance with the Federation Constitution, the panel is composed of seven
members, two from each constituent people and one from the group of others. With
three members missing – one from each constituent people – there is no quorum. The
inability of the panel to function and take decisions directly affects decision -making
in cantonal assemblies and in the Federation House of Peoples. There are currently
several cases pending before the panel.
93. In 2019, the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council adopted the final list of
candidates to replace three of the four retired judges on the Federation Constitutional
Court. The Council submitted the list to the Federation President and two Vice -

20-13918

23/36

S/2020/1052

Presidents, who should have finalized the appointments, but have failed to do so,
primarily owing to the inaction of the Federation President, Marinko Čavara (HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina), despite appeals from the President of the Federation
Constitutional Court and the international community. In September, SDA President
Bakir Izetbegović accused HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina of blocking the appointment
of judges and called for the appointments to be completed prior to the local elections
in November.

B.

Failure to adopt law on forestry
94. During the reporting period, the Federation Parliament failed to adopt a
Federation law on forestry, which the Federation has been lacking since 2009, despite
the Federation Government’s proposal of the law in July 2019. Adoption of the law is
not only crucial to the development of the forestry sector but is also a legal obligation
pursuant to a ruling of the Federation Constitutional Court, which in 2009 determined
that the existing Law violated the right of municipalities to local self -government and
tasked the Federation Parliament with harmonizing the Law with relevant local
self-government legislation within six months. In late 2009, absent any action by the
Federation Parliament, the Federation Government attempted to address the issue
through a decree, but in March 2010 the Federation Constitutional Court determined
that the Government had neither the constitutional nor the legal basis to regulate the
field of forestry by decree, and instructed the legislative bodies to regulate forestry
through legislation within six months, which still has not yet been done. The failure
of the Federation to meet its obligations arising fro m the decisions of the Federation
Constitutional Court is clearly problematic from the rule of law perspective.
Moreover, given that forests cover as much as 58 per cent of Federation territory, and
that in an attempt to cope with the legal vacuum, all can tons except HerzegovinaNeretva Canton proceeded with their own regulation of the sector, it is clear that the
absence of forestry legislation and supervision at the Federation level has wider
implications, further highlighting the urgency of addressing th is obligation.

C.

Failure to appoint members of the Securities Commission
95. In the context of the pandemic and its negative economic impact, a significant
source of potential revenues has also been blocked owing to the non -functioning of
the Federation Securities Commission, which is responsible for regulating capital
markets in the Federation. The Commission has functioned with only three of its five
members since 2018, owing to the failure of both the Federation President to appoint
and the Federation Parliament to confirm the appointments of two members whose
terms of office has expired. Since November of 2019, owing to the retirement of one
of the three remaining members, the Commission has had no quorum for decision making, thereby preventing investments and increases in capital of joint stock
companies in the Federation. In August, the Federation Government proposed
amendments to the Law on the Securities Commission, which would enable the
Federation President, with the consent of the Federation Vice-Presidents, to appoint
members of the Commission. The proposed amendments remain pending before the
Federation Parliament. Absent a prompt resolution of the issue, the capital market in
the Federation, and by extension the overall economy, may face se rious problems.

D.

Agreement on elections in Mostar
96. On 17 June in Mostar, following facilitation efforts of the international
community and lengthy negotiations, the leaders of SDA and HDZ Bosnia and

24/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

Herzegovina signed two political agreements, the first on holding elections in Mostar
and reforming the city’s statute, and the second on principles for amending the
Election Law of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
97. The agreement on elections in Mostar and the reform of the statute of the city
defines the electoral rules for the direct election of the 35 Mostar City Councillors,
and the subsequent election by the City Council of the Mayor, the Chief Adviser and
the City Council President and Deputy Presidents. The agreement includes two
annexes, one with the relevant amendments to the Election Law of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which was submitted to the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the other with the text of the future statute of the city of Mostar, to
be adopted at the first session of the Mostar City Council following the elections. The
second agreement on principles for amendments to the Election Law specifies that
SDA and HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina shall agree on necessary changes within six
months and secure their adoption in the Parliamentary Assembly by the end of 2021.
98. The Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the
amendments to the Election Law concerning the electoral rules for Mostar in early
July. On 23 July, the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina
scheduled elections for the city of Mostar on 20 December, rather than concurrently
with the local elections on 15 November, owing to the Election Law requirement that
the announcement of the 2020 local elections must be made 150 days prior to the
holding of an election. Most of the parties gathered under HNS publicly rejected the
date and requested that the Mostar elections be held concurrently with the 2020 local
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 15 November. HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina
leader Mr. Čović addressed a letter to the international community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina expressing his disapproval of the date. International community
representatives uniformly replied that the decisions of the Central Election
Commission were to be respected.
99. By August, SDA and HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina announced that they would
gather coalitions of “pro-Bosnian” and “all-Croat” parties, respectively, seeking to
frame the Mostar elections as a contest of ethnic interests. The President of SNSD,
Mr. Dodik, and the President of SDS, Mirko Šarović, signed an agreement on the joint
participation of their parties in the Mostar elections under the slogan “Stay Here –
Together for Our Mostar”. In September, Mr. Dodik met with Serb representatives in
Mostar and urged them to support the joint list of candidates, stating that if Serbs had
legitimate representatives in the Mostar City Council, they could be a decisive factor
in the post-election distribution of power.

E.

Constitutional equality of Serbs in the Federation cantons
100. The decision of the High Representative in 2002 enacting amendments to the
Federation Constitution within the wider implementation of the decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the equality of constituent
peoples determined that all three constituent peoples were equal in the Federation,
that the official languages of the Federation were Bosnian, Croatian and Serbian and
that the official scripts were Latin and Cyrillic. The cantons remain obliged to
harmonize their constitutions with the Federation Constitution. In 2018, the
Federation Constitutional Court determined that several provisions of the
constitutions of Posavina, Herzegovina-Neretva and West Herzegovina cantons did
not conform with the Federation Constitution in that regard and ordered their
assemblies to amend them accordingly, which West Herzegovina has partially done
but Posavina and Herzegovina-Neretva have not at all.

20-13918

25/36

S/2020/1052

101. I have continued to urge those cantons to harmonize their constitutions with the
Federation Constitution and provide for the constitutional equality of all three
constituent peoples.

V. Republika Srpska
102. SNSD continued to lead the Republika Srpska ruling coalition with its coalition
partners from the previous mandate. The Republika Srpska Government has met
regularly throughout the pandemic, under the Prime Minister, Radovan Višković
(SNSD), holding 26 sessions in total during the reporting period. The National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska held three regular and four special sessions,
adopting 14 new laws and 15 sets of amendments to existing laws.
103. The SNSD-led Republika Srpska authorities have persistently called for
rollbacks in previous reforms and a restoration of the so -called “original Dayton”,
while intensifying its rhetoric against the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
European Union and threatening to block reforms and other accession -related
activities necessary for Bosnia and Herzegovina to move forward on its Euro -Atlantic
path.
104. While initial actions of the Republika Srpska authorities, in particular the local
authorities in Banja Luka, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic were generally
viewed as prompt and efficient, subsequent media reports alleged various
procurement-related scandals.
105. On 17 April, the President of the Republika Srpska, Željka Cvijanović (SNSD),
repealed the Decree on Prohibition of Causing Panic and Disorder During the State
of Emergency, which she had introduced earlier in April, proh ibiting the spreading of
“fake news” or allegations that caused panic or undermined public peace and order or
interfered with the execution of orders and measures. The decree raised concerns
when several prominent opposition figures were fined or summoned before the police
immediately after its promulgation. With the repeal, the Republika Srpska Ministry
of Interior announced that it would withdraw all charges filed against individuals and
legal entities pertaining to the decree and return any fines paid. M s. Cvijanović had
issued the decree along with several others during the state of emergency declared by
the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska on 28 March in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, under which legislative authority was temporarily transf erred
from the Parliament of the Republika Srpska to the President. The National Assembly
lifted the state of emergency on 21 May.
106. Addressing the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska on 20 May,
President of SNSD and member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina Milorad
Dodik claimed that the Republika Srpska Ministry of Interior had been wiretapping
Republika Srpska opposition representatives and informing him of their discussions, 8
even citing detailed summaries of such discussions. Republika Srpska Minister for
Interior Dragan Lukač (SNSD) subsequently claimed that Mr. Dodik’s comments
were a political joke. Nonetheless, on 21 May Transparency International Bosnia and
Herzegovina announced that it had filed a criminal complaint against Mr. Dodik with
the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina for unauthorized
eavesdropping.
__________________
8

26/36

“There is no government that doesn’t spy on the opposition. I have listened to the recordings. I
am entitled to listen. Do you want me to bring you some recordings so you can hear what they
are saying about you?” Statement by Mr. Dodik at a session of the National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska, 20 May 2020.
20-13918

S/2020/1052

107. In July, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted new rules of
procedure, reducing the time given to representatives to debate an agenda it em, while
the length of speaking time for the Republika Srpska President, the Republika Srpska
Prime Minister and the Republika Srpska member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina remained unlimited. The changes also abolished the requirement to
maintain a quorum during debate, allowing representatives to attend sessions only to
vote. While the ruling majority justified the changes as improving the efficiency of
the National Assembly, opposition representatives condemned the changes as an
attack on democratic principles and freedom of speech. In practice, the new rules have
limited debate within the legislative body.
108. The Republika Srpska authorities continued to restrict civil freedoms, in
particular the freedom of assembly, seemingly arbitrarily banning gatherings in the
main square of Banja Luka. This was viewed as an attempt to decrease the visibility
of “Justice for David” activists in their continued protests over the mysterious death
in March 2018 of college student David Dragičević, claiming a police conspiracy.
Late in 2019, some of the activists formed a political party, Movement for Justice,
which has been certified for the 2020 local elections and was fielding candidates for
the Banja Luka City Assembly.

A.

Prime Minister of Republika Srpska subject of a war
crimes investigation
109. In September, in response to media inquiries, the Office of the Prosecutor of
Bosnia and Herzegovina confirmed the existence of an ongoing investigation of war
crimes involving several individuals, including the Prime Minister of the Republika
Srpska, Mr. Višković, adding that it had no additional information to provide on the
issue. The confirmation followed the publication by a Sarajevo -based news portal of
portions of testimony before the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina from 2017
by a protected witness who claimed that, in July 1995, Mr. Višković, in his capacity
at the time as Assistant Commander of the General Staff for Traffic of the Republika
Srpska police, participated in the transport of captured Bosniaks and later relocated
their bodies from mass graves in the Srebrenica area. Subsequently, the Srebrenica Potočari Memorial Centre submitted a criminal report against Mr. Višković, accusing
him of taking part in the Srebrenica genocide and attem pting to conceal evidence.
110. On the same day the Office of the Prosecutor confirmed the existence of an
investigation, the Director of the Republika Srpska Centre for Research of War, War
Crimes and Search for Missing Persons, Milorad Kojić, announced that the Centre
would publish the names of all witnesses who gave false statements. Subsequently,
Republika Srpska public broadcaster Radio Television of the Republika Srpska
(RTRS) and other media outlets published the name of the protected witness,
prompting the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of the Prosecutor
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to announce moves to protect the witness and to initiate
criminal proceedings against those who disclosed the identity of the witness.

B.

Srebrenica
111. On 11 July, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide was
commemorated at the Srebrenica-Potočari Memorial Centre. Owing to the COVID-19
pandemic, the anniversary was observed in a different format than in previous years,
with significantly reduced attendance. World leaders, diplomats and other figures who
had originally planned to attend in person instead sent video messages that were
broadcast during the commemoration, condemning the Srebrenica genocide and

20-13918

27/36

S/2020/1052

expressing sympathies for the victims and their families. I did the same in my video
statement broadcast during the commemoration.
112. Unfortunately, genocide denial has become a common occurrence in statements
by Republika Srpska political representatives, despite the f acts of the genocide having
been established by two international tribunals as well as by domestic courts. Bosniak
political representatives have opposed such denials and attempts at historical
revisionism and relativism. In May, the Srebrenica-Potočari Memorial Centre
published a report on genocide denial and joined victims’ associations and political
representatives in calling for the adoption of a State-level law that would criminalize
genocide denial and, failing that, called on me to impose such a law.
113. The need to address the issue, whether through legislation or other means, is
pertinent, bearing in mind the repeal in August 2018 of the Republika Srpska
Government’s report on Srebrenica of 2004, in which the Republika Srpska had
officially acknowledged the involvement of its military and police forces in the July
1995 events in Srebrenica, and the pending publication of a new Republika Srpska
Government report on Srebrenica, which is anticipated to be a further attempt to
revise history and relativize the suffering of people.
114. On 21 September, the International Day of Peace, the Mayor of Srebrenica,
Mladen Grujičić, unveiled a peace monument in a ceremony boycotted by Bosniak
representatives, who initially supported the project but stepped back from it, citing
the Mayor’s refusal to acknowledge the genocide in Srebrenica.

C.

Non-cooperation with the High Representative
115. The Republika Srpska Government continues to deny my office access to
official information and documents as required under article IX of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and annex 10 to the Agreement, which obliges all
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the High
Representative. Repeated calls by the Steering Board of the Peace Implement ation
Council, reminding the authorities of the Republika Srpska of their obligations in this
regard, have so far had no impact.

VI. Public security and law enforcement, including
intelligence reform
116. The practice of improper political interference in operational policing has not
diminished during the reporting period.
117. The Posavina Canton authorities failed to insert a required provision in the
relevant police law required by the letter of the President of the Security Council of
2007 on police denied certification by the former United Nations International Police
Task Force, despite earlier, repeated assurances from the canton authorities.
118. The Herzegovina-Neretva Canton authorities have not yet appointed a new
independent board, police commissioner, public complaints bureau or police board.
The canton has not had a duly appointed police commissioner since October 2018,
nor a functioning independent board since March 2017.
119. The mandate of the Independent Board of Bosnia and Herzegovin a expired in
March 2018, and the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet
appointed a new board.

28/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

120. In July, the Tuzla Canton judicial authorities confirmed an indictment against
Tuzla Canton Minister for Interior, Sulejman Brkić, for abuse of office and authority,
and in October, the Tuzla Cantonal Assembly removed the Minister from his position.
121. Problematic appointments and dismissals of police managers continued to be
leading indicators of improper political interference in operational policing.
122. In May, Tuzla Canton authorities appointed Safet Ibrahimović as its police
director, despite widely available reports showing eligibility problems related to
mandatory retirement rules. In June, Bosnian-Podrinje Canton authorities dismissed
the police commissioner despite the concerns of my office and the Embassy of the
United States over adherence to the principles of transparency and accountability. In
July, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers appointed Darko Ćulum as the
Director of SIPA. During the previous reporting period, the Independent Board of
Bosnia and Herzegovina sent to the Council of Ministers official documentation
showing problems with the eligibility of Mr. Ćulum for the post related to mandatory
retirement rules. The Federation Government has not yet appointed a director of the
Federation police, even though the Federation Independent Board completed the
selection process for this position in April 2019.
123. In September, the directors of SIPA, the border police and the Directorate for
Police Coordination jointly submitted to the Ministry of Security of Bosnia and
Herzegovina an agreed draft law on police officials of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
representing the culmination of more than two years of facilitation by my office, and
marking a new milestone in police independence and coordination for the State -level
police.
124. In another positive development, in June, the Sarajevo Cantonal Assembly
unanimously adopted the Sarajevo Initiative, which calls for the far-reaching reform
of the public security arrangement in Sarajevo Canton by eliminating the Sarajevo
Canton Ministry of Interior and leaving in place the Sarajevo Canton Police
Administration.
125. In September, the Sarajevo Cantonal Assembly adopted amendments to police
legislation, after substantial improper political interference, unlocking provisions for,
inter alia, the urgent recruitment of new cadets.
126. The Council of Ministers has not yet appointed the next Director General of the
Intelligence-Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The mandate of the current
Director General expired in November 2019.

VII. Economy
A.

Economic trends
127. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the Bosnia and Herzegovina economy,
with serious and potentially long-lasting consequences. International organizations,
including international financial institutions, and bilateral donors have provided
support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in mitigating the health and economic
consequences of the pandemic, complementing measures undertaken by the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities. Regrettably, party disputes and political calculations as
well as a lack of focus on reforms that could strengthen the country’s economic,
social, financial and fiscal stability have often countered the effectiveness of
stabilization efforts.
128. In its report in September 2020 on macroeconomic indicators f or the period from
January to May 2020, the Council of Ministers Directorate for Economic Planning

20-13918

29/36

S/2020/1052

warned of a significant decline in the gross domestic product of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, potentially steeper than that of the 2009 global financial crisis.
International financial institutions have also revised their initial 2020 economic
growth projections for Bosnia and Herzegovina downward: IMF projects a 5 per cent
decline, while the World Bank estimates the decline at 1.9 per cent, and possibly to
3.2 per cent if the pandemic persists.
129. The revised growth projections are based on the observed slowdown in
economic activity and the expected continuation of negative trends. In the first five
months of 2020, industrial production decreased by 8.8 per cent. Foreign direct
investments in the first quarter of 2020 amounted to KM 243.2 million, a 3.4 per cent
decrease from the same period last year. Foreign trade exchange in the first seven
months of 2020 declined by 16.3 per cent overall, with declining rates for exports and
imports estimated at 14.8 and 17.3 per cent, respectively.
130. After years of modest but steady improvements, unemployment and
employment reverted to negative levels. At the end of July, the number of persons
registered as unemployed was 426,252, which is an increase of 19,143, or 4.7 per
cent, from the same period in 2019, while the number of those employed decreased
by 17,096, or 2 per cent, to 804,028. The administrative unemployment rate has risen
to 34.4 per cent. In parallel, the number of pensioners continued to increase, to a total
of 692,700.
131. Data from May shows that the average net salary of KM 940 and the average
pension of KM 409 remain significantly below the average price of the basket of
goods of KM 1,996 for a family of four, suggesting that even those with steady
incomes struggle to make ends meet. This is particularly the case for those pensioners
who receive the lowest pension payments.
132. The economic situation and its discouraging outlook are likely to accelerate the
already worrisome population outflow. The latest Eurostat data shows that the number
of work permits issued to citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the past two years
totalled 125,137.
133. Under the circumstances, the affirmation in August of the credit rating of Bosnia
and Herzegovina by both S&P Global Ratings (B with a stable outlook) and Moody’s
(B3 with a stable outlook) is a positive.
134. Although the commercial banking sector recorded a 38.7 per cent decline in
profits in the first half of 2020 compared with the same period in 2019, it is assessed
as generally stable and liquid. Continued stability is strongly underpinned by the
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which nonetheless faces sustained
challenges to its independence, responsibilities and unimpeded functioning. Those
included renewed calls, mainly by member of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina Milorad Dodik and SNSD officials, for the release of the Central Bank’s
mandatory and foreign currency reserves – which, if pursued, would pose a serious
risk to the financial and overall macroeconomic stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina –
and for the reshuffling of the Governing Council of the Central Bank by the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 30 April in a manner that pos es a risk to
decision-making by this body and thus to the unimpeded functioning of the Bank
itself.
135. The Governing Council of the Central Bank currently functions at its full
capacity. It had not done so for a lengthy period, owing to the decision of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina in June 2019, in response to Mr. Dodik’s
proposal, to remove two Council members, and the lack of requisite support within
the Presidency for the appointment of their proposed successors. However, the
ongoing legal challenges initiated by the members of the Council who were removed
30/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

may potentially affect the quorum for work of this body. Moreover, a politically
motivated reshuffling is at odds with the endeavour to preserve the political
independence of the Central Bank. A six-year term for Council members, as provided
by law, represents the clear intention of the Bosnia and Herzegovina legislative bodies
to avoid overlap with the mandate of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
appointments along party lines, thereby providing additional assurances of the Bank’s
independence from the Federation, the Republika Srpska, any public agency and any
other authority.

B.

Fiscal issues
136. For the first time since the 2009 global financial crisis, the Indirect Taxation
Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina recorded a decrease in indirect tax revenues,
which comprise the majority of budget revenues for all levels of government and are
essential to maintaining fiscal stability. Collected revenues in the first eight months
of 2020 dropped by 10 per cent from the corresponding period in 2019, with the most
drastic decline of 31 per cent recorded in May. The shortage was somewhat offset by
domestic borrowing and the €330 million provided under the IMF Rapid Financing
Instrument, which ensured uninterrupted debt servicing and monthly payments. Fiscal
stability should be further reinforced by the European Union macro -financial
assistance of €250 million, which the European Union designated for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to help alleviate the economic consequences of the pandemic.
Regrettably, Bosnia and Herzegovina has not yet drawn on the much -needed
assistance, as negotiations on the memorandum of understanding between the
European Union and Bosnia and Herzegovina appear to be burdened by the internal
politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina and are still ongoing. A new arrangement with
IMF is also anticipated, with initial negotiations planned for October. The
arrangements should assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in easing fiscal pressures and
refocusing on reforms to address identified weaknesses and strengthen its resilience.
137. Particular attention must be paid to strengthening the Bosnia and Herzegovina
indirect taxation system as the backbone of fiscal stability, as well as to ensure the
unimpeded functioning of State-level institutions and the discharge of their
constitutional and legal obligations through improved reliability and adequacy of
financing. The developments related to the adoption of the State-level budget for 2020
highlight the need for action to this end.
138. As in previous years, the 2020 State budget was held hostage to party politics.
The dissatisfaction of SNSD, and more so of HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
appointments to the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
subsequent attempts to obstruct the Commission’s efforts to proceed with
preparations for the 2020 local elections pending the outcome of the legal challen ges
against the appointments before the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, were
among the reasons for delaying the budget adoption. The delay affected the
Commission’s ability, and that of other State institutions, to function smoothly and
fully meet their constitutional and legal obligations, while also putting at risk the
holding of the elections, which are crucial in order for citizens in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to exercise their guaranteed rights under the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
139. Temporary financing was in force throughout the first half of the year, as the
draft budget was submitted to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers only
on 24 March, three months after the budget adoption deadline and three weeks after
the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Bosnia and Herzegovina, only to be
returned by the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 6 April with a request for
adjustments reflective of the pandemic. The 31 May deadline set by the Presidency

20-13918

31/36

S/2020/1052

was not met, as the Bosnia and Herzegovina Minister for Finance and Treasury stalled
the budget for what he claimed were technical reasons until 18 June, when the Council
of Ministers adopted it and forwarded it to the Presidency. The budget adopted by the
Presidency on 26 June was considered by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in July and, after further political manoeuvres orchestrated primarily by
HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina with the aim of delaying the adoption, was finally
approved on 29 July.
140. The adopted budget totals KM 1.8 billion, 1 per cent higher than the total of the
2019 budget. Of this amount, the financing of State institutions is set at
KM 996 million (a 3 per cent increase), while the reminder (KM 807.5 million) is
intended to service foreign debt (a 2 per cent decrease). Despite the modest increase,
the adopted budget is insufficient to meet the needs of the State institutions. Only 16
of 75 State budget users will benefit from the increase, in the total amount of
KM 18.2 million, while the others will stay at approximately the same level as in the
past eight years, or even face a decrease, despite increased obligations and new
realities, including the pandemic and the steady flow of migrants into the country.
141. While the restricted budgeting of the State institutions is formally justified by
the need to generate savings to mitigate the economic consequences of the pandemic
in the total amount of KM 41.9 million, which paradoxically exceeds the amount of
the budget increase, it must be noted that the State budget is the only budget that
generated such savings. All other levels of government benefitted from domestic and
international borrowing, lessening their need for such restrictions. Moreover, several
State institutions directly involved in providing assistance during the pandemic – such
as the Bosnia and Herzegovina armed forces – have seen their budgets cut. Such
developments only serve to weaken the State and do not improve its functionality.
Hence, ensuring the reliability and adequacy of the financing of the State institutions
remains an outstanding objective.
142. The Federation maintained budget stability during the reporting period. Its
consolidated budget execution report for the period from January to June note d a
positive cumulative financial result of KM 254.3 million for all levels of government
in the Federation, down to the municipal level.
143. In April, the Federation Parliament adopted a rebalanced budget for 2020 in the
amount of KM 5.5 billion, an increase of 11 per cent over the original adopted budget
for 2020. The rebalancing of the budget was carried out in order to implement the
Law on Mitigating Negative Economic Consequences (of the COVID -19 pandemic),
adopted by the Federation Government during the previous reporting period. New
transfers foreseen therein include KM 500 million for an economic stabilization fund,
KM 20 million for a guarantee fund to be set up within the Federation Development
Bank, KM 200 million (as a grant) from the IMF Rapid Financing Instrument to the
cantons, and KM 21 million to the lower levels of government to cover the costs of
quarantines and protective equipment.
144. In May, the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska adopted a measure to
rebalance the 2020 Republika Srpska budget at KM 3.613 billion, a 5.5 per cent
increase over the original budget. Public revenues will decrease by 8 per cent
(KM 240 million), while Republika Srpska borrowing in 2020 more than doubled,
increasing from KM 315 million to KM 678 million. Instead of a budget surplus of
KM 20 million, the rebalanced budget foresees a deficit of KM 412 million. From
January to June, the Republika Srpska deficit amounted to KM 297 million, which
was covered entirely by new borrowing, primarily the IMF Rapid Financing
Instrument.
145. As for expenditures, the rebalanced budget envisages a KM 151 million grant
to the Compensation Fund of the Republika Srpska, supporting the economy in
32/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

mitigating the negative impact of the pandemic. Republika Srpska health -care sector
spending will be increased by 29 per cent, from KM 213.5 million to KM 274 million.
The cost savings on non-essential spending is planned at KM 41 million.
146. In July, the Republika Srpska Government adopted a budget framework
document for the period 2021–2023 that outlined the midterm strategy on budget
planning, projecting a budget deficit in 2021 and 2022 of KM 265 million and
KM 125 million, respectively, while anticipating a budget surplus of KM 7 million
only in 2023.
147. The Republika Srpska banking sector is stable, solvent and liquid. In June, the
Republika Srpska Banking Agency extended interim measures under which
commercial banks could introduce a moratorium on loan repayments, allowing two
additional months from the end of the state of emergency in the Republika Srpska.
148. Due to the pandemic, the Republika Srpska Government revised its economic
growth projection from a decline of 3 per cent to a decline of 5 per cent in 2020. From
January to June, industrial production declined by 9 per cent compared with the same
period in 2019, and foreign trade declined by 10.5 per cent.

C.

International obligations and other sectoral developments
149. In November, the Ministerial Council of the Energy Community will consider
reintroducing measures against Bosnia and Herzegovina for its serious and persistent
breach of obligations under the Energy Community Treaty, primarily stemming from
entity disputes over the scope of regulation of the gas sector at the State level, and
corresponding State-level legislation. The absence of State-level gas sector regulation
also contributes to inter-entity disputes that may pose a risk to the uninterrupted gas
supply in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
150. The unilateral decision of the Republika Srpska to withhold its contribution to
the Public Railways Corporation of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2016 and 2017 has
triggered similar measures by the Federation. Specifically, the Federation, after
performing an audit of the Corporation’s financial operations, requested from the
Corporation compensation in an amount equal to one Federation annual contribution
based on the difference in the amounts contributed thus far by the entities.
Consequently, the Federation has also refused to include any funds to finance the
Corporation in its 2020 budget. The Public Railways Corporation is the only State level corporation established under annex 9 to the General Framework Agreement for
Peace; one of the purposes of its establishment is to coordinate investments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina railway infrastructure. The 12 March conclusion of the Republika
Srpska Government calling on the Ministry of Transport and Communications of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federation Ministry of Transport to reconsider the
Agreement on the Establishment of a Joint Public Railway Corporation as Part of the
Transportation Corporation, together with its inadequate financing, endangers the
existence of the Corporation, although it is the only mechanism for a harmonized
approach to the reconstruction of railways routes which would benefit the railway
companies of both entities, all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the economy.
151. In June, the Shareholders Assembly of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Electricity
Transmission Company – composed of the prime ministers of the Federation and the
Republika Srpska – unanimously approved investments in 23 facilities, each worth
more than €1 million. The investments are part of the company’s investment plan for
2020 worth KM 174 million, and their approval repre sents a significant step towards
unblocking investments halted for more than two years. At the same time, disputes
within the Federation and between the Federation and the Republika Srpska with
regard to the appointment of the company’s management bodies affect its functioning.

20-13918

33/36

S/2020/1052

The mandates of the management and the management board expired more than two
years ago, and there seems to be no support for the appointment of their successors.
This affects decision-making procedures and poses a risk to electricity transmission
and consequently the electricity supply in Bosnia and Herzegovina, providing a
pretext for challenges to the company, which was established by the Law Establishing
the Electricity Transmission Company adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2004, following the agreement of 2 June 2003 of the
entities on the establishment of a transmission company and independent system
operator, concluded on the basis of article III (5) (b) of the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

VIII. Return of refugees and displaced persons
152. The realization of the right of refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes of origin remains central to the fulfilment of annex 7 to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. It requires authorities at all levels to create in their territories
the political, economic and social conditions conducive to the voluntary return and
harmonious reintegration of refugees and displaced persons, without preference for
any particular group.
153. At the start of September, Bosniak returnee parents in the village of Liplje, in
the Republika Srpska municipality of Zvornik, prevented their children from
attending school, as the school authorities continued to deny the name of their
language as “Bosnian” and instead referred to the “language of the Bosniak people”.
In May 2016, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina concluded “that all
the constituent peoples as well as Others not declaring themselves so have the
constitutional right to name the language they speak as they wish and that only such
interpretation and application in practice is in conformity with the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina”. The parents insisted that the Republika Srpska authorities
respect the Court’s decision, while the Republika Srpska authorities cited the
Constitution of the Republika Srpska as avoiding the names of official languages.
However, the policy – which is in force throughout the Republika Srpska – is
inconsistent, as the languages of Serb and Croat pupils are referred to as “Serbian”
and “Croatian”, respectively. This is not only another case of the Republika Srpska
authorities refusing to respect decisions of the Constitutional Court, it is a policy that
clearly discriminates against Bosniaks and is counter to the requirements in annex 7
to the General Framework Agreement for Peace that authorities at all levels establish
conditions conducive to sustainable return.
154. In mid-October, the parents reached an agreement with the Republika Srpska
Ministry of Education by which the parents would return the children to classes and
the Ministry would provide documentation of their reasoning in deciding not to
designate the children’s language as “Bosnian”, which the parents intend to use to
pursue legal action against the Ministry. This is only a temporary solution.

IX. Media developments
155. The media landscape in Bosnia and Herzegovina is burdened by political
influence, biased reporting, poor implementation of media legislation and
non-transparent ownership and financing.
156. During the reporting period, the free media helpline of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Union of Journalists registered 30 cases of violations of the rights of
journalists, including three death threats. A majority of cases we re characterized as
political pressure and verbal threats.
34/36

20-13918

S/2020/1052

157. On 24 April, the Council of the Communications Regulatory Agency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina appointed Draško Milinović, previously the General Director of the
Republika Srpska public broadcaster RTRS, as the new General Director of the
Agency, which was confirmed by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers
on 23 July. The appointment was viewed as an agreed arrangement among the
coalition partners at the State level in deciding which party controls which institution.
In protest over the appointment, on 27 April the Chair of the Council of the Agency,
Plamenko Čustović, submitted his resignation, stating that his fellow Council
members had been influenced and did not vote according to their consciences.
According to Mr. Čustović, Mr. Milinović could not lead the Communications
Regulatory Agency owing to the numerous breaches of Agency rules and regulations
committed by RTRS under his leadership. Specifically, the Agency had imposed 19
fines against RTRS totalling KM 246,000, and it had fined Mr. Milinović himself a
total of KM 15,000 for various violations of Agency regulations and decisions.
158. In addition, the process to establish a digital platform to offer broadcast
television providers the possibility of digital broadcasts has been halted as a result of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Communications Regulatory Agency authorized the
commercial operator Multiplex Service BH to postpone its launch date until
30 November.
159. On 26 April, the Communications Regulatory Agency issued a new five-year
licence to the Public Broadcasting System, which includes Bosnian -Herzegovinian
Radio Television (BHRT), Radio Television of Bosnia and Herzegovina (RTFBiH),
and RTRS. The licence acknowledges the possibility of the interim usage of digital
frequencies for Public Broadcasting System members in cases in which their analog
output interferes with the digital output of other licensed television broadcasters. The
three public broadcasters in Bosnia and Herzegovina, although part of the System
pursuant to relevant legislation, remain heavily divided and no longer make any joint
decisions.

X. European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
160. The European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR),
with its continued executive mandate, has a vital role in supporting the efforts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to maintain a safe and secure environment. This assists the
Office of the High Representative and other international organizations in fulfilling
their respective mandates. The presence of EUFOR on the ground, including its
liaison and observation teams, remains an important contributor to stability and
security. I welcome the reaffirmation of the Council of the European Union on
12 October of the readiness of the European Union to continue the executive mandate
of EUFOR under renewed Security Council authorization.

XI. Future of the Office of the High Representative
161. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, on 2 and 3 June the political directors of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council met for the first time not in
person, but by video link, in order to review the progress in implementing the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, and again underlined their unequivocal
commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and their full support to the High Representative in ensuring respect for the
Agreement and carrying out the mandate under annex 10 thereto and relevant Security
Council resolutions. The political directors emphasized the need for local authorities
and institutions to complete the five objectives and two conditions that must be
20-13918

35/36

S/2020/1052

fulfilled prior to the closure of the Office of the High Representative (“5 plus 2”
agenda). The next meeting of the Steering Board is planned for 1 and 2 December
2020.
162. Fundamentally, policy considerations regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina must
be the basis for assessing the resource requirements of the Office of the High
Representative. As the present report demonstrates, there is still considerable work to
be done to move the country forward. My office has worked diligently to streamline
operations. At its peak in 2002, the budget of the Office of the High Representative
was €25 million, with a staff of about 700, compared with the current €5.3 million
budget and only 89 staff.
163. During my tenure as mandate holder alone, the budget has decreased by 53 per
cent and the staff by over 58 per cent. However, while the organization has faced
substantial reductions to staff and funding, tasks have largely remained the same. As
the budget decreases over time, it becomes exponentially more difficult to further
reduce costs without cutting essential expertise and capacity. Given all the challenges,
the Office of the High Representative must retain the effective capacity to mitigate
risks to stability and encourage irreversible progress. Staff reductions pose a greater
risk for the organization, which relies on its human capital, institutional memory,
expertise and long-standing contact networks. The diminishing of financial resources
only exacerbates the issue.
164. A robust and effective Office of the High Representative is required, coupled
with the necessary political and financial support. Without the appropriate level of
resources, the capacity to fulfil mandated responsibilities is restricted. This would be
counterproductive to the end goal established by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, as well as a key condition for the path of Bosnia and
Herzegovina towards European Union integration cited in the opinion of the European
Commission on the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina for membership in the
European Union, issued in 2019.

XII. Reporting schedule
165. The present report is submitted in keeping with the practice of submitting
regular reports for onward transmission to the Security Council, as required by
Council resolution 1031 (1995). I would be pleased to provide additional information
at any time, should the Secretary-General or any member of the Council require it.
The next regular report to the Secretary-General is scheduled for April 2021.

36/36

20-13918
