S/2005/66*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 February 2005
English
Original: French

Letter dated 2 February 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I have the honour to transmit herewith the
report on the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

* Reissued for technical reasons.

05-23070* (E) 140205

*0523070*

S/2005/66

Annex
[Original: English]

Letter dated 26 January 2005 from the Secretary-General and
High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy
of the European Union to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of
12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the activities of the
European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina covering the six months
from 1 July to 31 December 2004.
I would be grateful if you would transmit this report to the President of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2005/66

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative of the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, covering the period from 1 July to 31 December 2004
Introduction
The European Union Police Mission (EUPM) is the first operation undertaken
under the European Security and Defence Policy. It was initiated as a follow-on
mission to the United Nations International Police Task Force (IPTF) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
This report is the fourth update by the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
to the Security Council on the activities of the Mission and covers the period from
1 July to 31 December 2004.1

Methodology and staffing
Methodology
The four strategic priorities of the Mission are: institution and capacitybuilding at management level; to combat organized crime and corruption; to develop
financial viability and sustainability; and to promote police independence and
accountability. The methodology of the Mission continues to be the development
and implementation of seven core programmes with the emphasis being on
addressing the key areas of expertise and method necessary to raise policing in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to best European standards, free from inappropriate
political interference. The programmes are developed in partnership with the
Mission’s local police counterparts, other international stakeholders and bilateral
donors. The Mission remains committed to the principle of local ownership
facilitated through the local Police Steering Board, which consists of representatives
from all elements of the local police services, mentored by EUPM. The Steering
Board is the final arbiter on the design and introduction of the numerous projects
which make up the core programmes.
Staffing
As at 31 December 2004, EUPM numbered 862 personnel of whom 472 were
seconded police officers, 61 international civilians and 329 national staff from
Bosnia and Herzegovina. All but one of 25 European Union member States
participate in the Mission (420 police officers) together with nine non-EU
contributing States (52 police officers).

__________________
1 For the first three updates, see S/2003/732 of 21 July 2003, S/2004/106 of 11 February 2004 and

S/2004/709 of 3 September 2004.

3

S/2005/66

Achievements during the reporting period
In terms of the strategic priorities the Mission has made solid progress in the
last six months. The seven core programmes have progressed well and are
continuing to drive improvements in all areas. Some key achievements are described
below.
1.

Institution and capacity-building
Ministry of Security
The Ministry of Security has responsibility for the political oversight and
direction of the state-level police agencies. During the past six months the Ministry
has progressed from the start-up phase by recruiting more staff and establishing
internal departments covering all their areas of responsibility. The Minister of
Security has now taken over the chairmanship of the Ministerial Consultative
Meeting on Police Matters (originally established by IPTF), through which he
coordinates and oversees the political aspects of all the state-level police agencies.
In the past six months a series of important new laws have been drafted and
adopted, particularly a law that creates and regulates a new Immigration Service, an
updated law governing the working of the State Border Service and a law on police
officials. An expanded team of EUPM advisers has been created to provide support
and give expert advice on police matters.
State Investigation and Protection Agency
Considerable progress has been made in setting up the State Investigation
Protection Agency, which is pivotal in the fight against major and organized crime.
The Agency is now established in temporary accommodation in Sarajevo and
planning is ongoing to secure permanent facilities. The legal framework and books
of rules by which the Agency operates have been established, and a headquarters
and two regional offices are set up; a total of 279 police officers have been recruited
to date. Most of the heads of the various departments are appointed and the Criminal
Investigation Department has already begun conducting investigations. Considerable
support for the Agency has been provided by international donors in terms of both
equipment and training. An Interface Cell for Criminal Intelligence has been set up
as the conduit and focal point for the input of intelligence from international
stakeholders. This is appraised and fed to the Agency and, where appropriate, a
return flow of intelligence is facilitated to stakeholders.
The Interface Cell for Criminal Intelligence is entirely staffed by EUPM
officers, who will later hand over the running of the cell to local police counterparts
in the State Investigation Protection Agency. The establishment of an effective
system to handle and stimulate the flow of intelligence is a crucial step in the fight
against major and organized crime.
State Border Service
The European Union Police Mission has given advice at all stages leading up
to the introduction of new laws on surveillance of the State border and the State
Border Service, which bring together and update the legislation underpinning the
Agency and its work. The Structure, including command, rank and organizational

4

S/2005/66

aspects are brought into line with the other state-level agencies and the procedures
and powers given to police officers on the border are now clearer and more
effective. The Mission has helped to secure management training for senior officers
and is mentoring them in how to apply their new knowledge appropriately. Their
management culture is now changing, and there is more delegation of authority,
increased transparency in decision-making and greater analysis in the planning and
conduct of operations.
Interpol
In Sarajevo, after close cooperation with EUPM advisers, Interpol has
developed into a fully equipped and functioning national office, with trained staff
and good contacts with both the Interpol General Secretariat in Lyon and with
partners in the region. Technical agreements between Interpol Sarajevo and the
entity and state-level law enforcement agencies have been drawn up, allowing these
police forces direct access to the Interpol database.
Police education
All aspects of police education were brought together under a separate
programme in May 2004 and an agreement has now been reached on the creation of
a Bosnia and Herzegovina-wide training system. The first level of training applies to
new recruits for the lower ranks and a project has been launched to fully harmonize
the curriculum for all three training schools in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
International Criminal Investigation Training Assistance Programme and EC
CARDS have agreed to provide instruction for local police trainers, to enable them
to teach both specialists and senior managers. These developments are a significant
step towards ensuring sustainability and harmonization of police education.
2.

Fight against organized crime and corruption
Many of the key issues in the fight against organized crime and corruption,
such as the development of the State Investigation Protection Agency and the other
state-level agencies, have already been discussed under institution and capacitybuilding. In addition some technical developments also make a major impact. Two
important successes have been developments in:
National intelligence model
A nationwide national intelligence system has been introduced and in the last
six months a great deal of effort has been put into making it effective and to ensure
that it operates across all entities and police agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This has been a delicate issue, as there has been a lack of trust between some police
officers in different locations. Officers are now submitting information, intelligence
meetings are being held on a regular basis in all areas and the intelligence flow is
beginning to work effectively both between locations and from the public security
centres and cantons up to the entity ministries and up again to the state-level
agencies. The effective gathering and use of criminal intelligence is recognized as
one of the decisive tools in any modern police force.

5

S/2005/66

Forensic Science Service
An agreement has been reached through the Ministerial Consultative Meeting
and the Police Steering Board for a rationalization and expansion of the forensic
capabilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This would bring the laboratories in the two
entities under one administration, overseen by the Ministry of Security. Regional
offices will provide support in routine matters and crime scene managers will be
given further training.
3.

Financial viability and sustainability of the local police
Police budgets
To help achieve financial viability and sustainability of the local police, the
European Union Police Mission has made progress in developing the local capacity
regarding salary scales, budget planning for organizational units, revising
maintenance costs of premises, rationalization of the use of police equipment,
control over inventories and payrolls, and general budget implementation and
management. Staff at the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika
Srpska Ministries of the Interior were trained in handling budgets at a local level, in
particular in matching operational planning and budget management. Progress in
this area will enable the public security centres in the Republika Srpska and the
police administration in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of the
Interior to operate using improved fiscal methodology next year.

4.

The development of police independence and accountability
Project Implementation Boards
The importance of developing local ownership is recognized in this priority.
EUPM has understood the importance of developing a hierarchy of local decisionmaking, from the political level down to the local police unit. The re-establishment
of the Ministerial Consultative Meeting on Police Matters (discussed under the
heading of the Ministry of Security above) represents a part of this process at the
political level, as does the Police Steering Board, which was set up by the Mission
in 2003 to represent the level of Police Commissioner/Director of Police. EUPM
advised on the creation of Project Implementation Boards, which have now been
established throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Boards are responsible for
developing the work of the projects at the local level and involve both the local
police and EUPM advisers. This is an essential step forward, in that the
responsibility for implementation is delegated to the level where police services are
delivered, which in turn maximizes the principle of local ownership.
Senior Management Board
Previously, some long-standing legal issues arising from an apparent conflict
of different laws and regulations governing the functioning of the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of the Interior held up progress in several
important areas of work within the Ministry, particularly with regard to the
operational independence of the Director of Police, the work of the Internal Control
Union and the budget. In response to this issue EUPM initiated the creation of a
Senior Management Board, chaired by the EUPM Deputy Police Head of Mission.

6

S/2005/66

The Senior Management Board recommended appropriate legal changes which
resulted in the removal of the legal impasse to progress within the Ministry. The
Senior Management Board has accomplished its goals and has now been disbanded.

Other key contributions of the Mission
Police Restructuring Commission
The High Representative/European Union Special Representative, Lord
Ashdown, established a Police Restructuring Commission, chaired by Wilfried
Martins, the former Prime Minister of Belgium, early in July. This came about as a
consequence of the priority to proceed with structural police reform, given to Bosnia
and Herzegovina by the European Commission, after the failure of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to reach an agreement on accession to the European Union. The High
Representative/Special Representative made it clear that, owing to the failure of the
Republika Srpska authorities and the Republika Srpska Ministry of the Interior in
particular, to arrest persons indicted for war crimes and the failure of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to join the NATO Partnership for Peace, the Commission would be
tasked to produce recommendations to establish a single and effective police
structure for the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union Police Mission is fully engaged in the restructuring
process as the police Head of Mission serves as a full member of the Police
Restructuring Commission. Furthermore, the Mission has seconded personnel to the
Commission’s secretariat. The Mission also set up a Police Restructuring Working
Group to represent the views of EUPM to the Commission and to provide technical
expertise. EUPM has made very significant contributions to the development of the
final report of the Police Restructuring Commission, which has now been submitted
to Lord Ashdown. The implementation of changes to the police structure in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will need the support of international police experts.
Cooperation with the European Union and other international
community agencies
The work of the Mission involves close cooperation with international
partners, particularly the High Representative/European Union Special
Representative, Lord Ashdown, who has given strong support to the Mission. Close
cooperation has been maintained with OSCE, UNHCR, the International Criminal
Investigation Training Assistance Programme and others.
The EU presence has been strengthened with the arrival in Bosnia and
Herzegovina of the EU military force, EUFOR, which replaced SFOR in December
2004. EUPM has decentralized its liaison functions, so as to improve coordination
locally, while the preparatory work prior to the arrival of EUFOR eased the process
of transition. Cooperation with both EUFOR and other international organizations
has been good.

7

S/2005/66

Assessment and look ahead
The past six months has seen further significant progress towards achieving
the strategic priorities of the Mission, through the development and implementation
of seven core programmes. Measurable and telling progress has been made, notably
in the strengthening of state-level law enforcement agencies and in relation to the
furtherance of the principles of sustainability and local ownership. The
aforementioned EUPM achievements have been made in parallel with the work of
the Police Restructuring Commission. Moreover, the EUPM methodology and
programmatic approach and achievements are fully reconcilable with the work and
probable recommendations of the Police Restructuring Commission in respect to
changes to policing in Bosnia and Herzegovina at state and regional levels.
As the Mission enters the last year of the mandate, it is well placed, in
partnership with the local authorities, to complete its prime directive, which is to
leave in place sustainable and effective policing arrangements in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in line with the best European practices. This will be achieved in
collaboration with the implementation of the recommendations of the Police
Restructuring Commission, where EUPM perceives a key mission role. The
implementation of those recommendations is likely to take several years and
continue after the mandate of EUPM has ended. Consideration will need to be given
as to how best to support this work.

8
