S/PV.8337

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8337th meeting

Thursday, 30 August 2018, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Allen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Lie Cheng
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Albanai
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2018/771)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27180 (E)
*1827180*

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador Vieira and
Ms. Tavares Pinto.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

As the third meeting of the Council this morning and
with so many briefers, I would like to remind Council
members that they are encouraged to speak for no longer
than five minutes, as set out in document S/2017/507,
and encourage our briefers also to be concise.

The situation in Guinea Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2018/771)

I now give the floor to Mr. Viegas Filho.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Guinea-Bissau to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau, and I request the Protocol Officer to
escort him to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, was escorted to a seat
at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. José
Viegas Filho, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau; His Excellency
Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil
to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares Pinto,
spokesperson for the Economic Community of West
African States Women, Peace and Security Network.
Ms. Tavares Pinto is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Bissau.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/771, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by Mr. José
Viegas Filho, Ambassador Mr. Anatolio Ndong Mba,
2/24

30/08/2018

Mr. Filho: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/771) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I
am honoured to brief the Council for the first time since
I assumed office, on 28 May.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau, with whom I am honoured to share
this platform. I commend his initiative to travel to
New York to personally apprise the Council of his
Government’s efforts at this crucial phase in the
country’s transition, with legislative elections foreseen
in the very near future.
I would also like to welcome your initiative,
Mr. President, to invite the voice of civil society and
of women of Guinea-Bissau to this meeting, through
Ms. Elisa Tavares Pinto. Her perspectives and insights
will, no doubt, further enrich the Council’s deliberations.
As the Secretary-General’s report is before
members, I will limit my statement to recent political
developments and the activities of UNIOGBIS. I will
then be ready to answer any questions Council members
may have in the private consultations.
Since my arrival in Guinea-Bissau, the political
and security situation has remained relatively calm.
Authorities and political actors have focused on
preparations for the legislative elections scheduled for
18 November. I have actively used my good offices
with national and international partners to support the
full implementation of the 2016 Conakry Agreement,
with special emphasis on the ongoing preparations
for the elections. I have prioritized engaging national
stakeholders on the electoral process and met regularly
with the President of the Republic and the Prime
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Minister to stress that respect for the existing legal
framework and the electoral calendar is indispensable
for sustained stability. I also routinely convened and led
meetings of the group of five international partners in
Guinea-Bissau, working to maintain our unified stance
on the need for the timely holding of elections and to
urge the Prime Minister to adopt a coordinated approach
with national authorities and international partners.
At the regional and international levels, I visited
Lomé in June to meet with the Presidents of Guinea and
Togo, in their capacities as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Mediator for GuineaBissau and then Chairperson of the ECOWAS Authority
of Heads of State and Government, respectively, to
exchange views on the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and advocate for financial and material
support from the subregion for the upcoming elections.
In July, I attended the Conference of the Heads
of State and Government of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) in Cabo
Verde to discuss the persisting technical and financial
challenges confronting the electoral process, and to
appeal for technical and financial support for GuineaBissau. To those ends, I held bilateral meetings with
the Presidents of Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau and
Mozambique, as well as the Prime Minister of Cabo
Verde and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal.
Later in July, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads
of State and Government discussed the situation in
Guinea-Bissau during its fifty-third ordinary session.
The summit, inter alia, approved funds that contributed
to filling the gap in the electoral budget, and called
for legislative elections to be held on 18 November,
as scheduled. I intend to continue my engagement
with relevant national and international actors as
preparations for the elections enter the final stages.
While key provisions of the Conakry Agreement
have been implemented, a national dialogue round table
for the adoption of a stability pact is yet to be held. The
Government has launched related consultations with
political parties represented in the National Assembly
and intends to broaden consultations to include civil
society so as to have the pact adopted in early October,
before the start of the election campaign. UNIOGBIS
will continue to work closely with the Government and
to strengthen civil society engagement in the process.
We are, however, conscious that the holding of timely
and credible elections is of paramount importance at

S/PV. 8337

this juncture. This is a basic short-term goal that must be
accomplished to usher in the new political dispensation
for further reforms and consolidation.
Preparations for the legislative elections continue
to face difficulties. The Government set a 30-day time
frame for voter registration, starting on 23 August, in
spite of disagreements voiced by some political parties,
since the law stipulates a 90-day period for the process.
Moreover, the arrival of biometric kits for the process
has been delayed. The Government of Guinea-Bissau is
working closely with Nigeria, Cabo Verde and TimorLeste to expedite the arrival of the kits.
I am pleased to report that a funding gap in the
budget for the elections may have been closed following
pledges by several international partners, including
Italy, Japan and the United States, as well as ECOWAS,
the European Union and the Monetary and Economic
Union of West Africa. UNIOGBIS will persevere in
its efforts to support the Government in the urgent
materialization of such pledges. In that regard, I
welcome the recent disbursement of $500,000 by
ECOWAS to the electoral basket fund.
Steps are also being taken towards ensuring that
elections are conducted peacefully. In that context, and
in response to a request from the Government, ECOWAS
intends to reinforce the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau ahead of both the legislative elections in 2018
and the presidential election in 2019. UNIOGBIS will
continue to provide the necessary and possible support
to efforts to ensure a peaceful and secure environment
for the entire electoral process.
UNIOGBIS continues to work closely with the
ad hoc commission of the National Assembly on
the review of the Constitution and has made efforts
towards enhancing civil society participation in
upcoming consultations. In August, the Mission
provided technical and financial support for a retreat
with the members of the commission to initiate the
review of the draft constitution, which the commission
intends to submit for consideration by the newly elected
National Assembly.
Concerning the fight against drug trafficking and
organized crime, UNIOGBIS, in coordination with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, has
reinforced its support to national authorities, including
through the co-location of specialized personnel
from within the mission’s existing supports with law
enforcement agencies in Bissau and the regions. Partly

18-271803/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

as a result, national authorities have continued to seize
illegal drugs transiting through the international airport
in Bissau, the Transnational Crime Unit has resumed
operations, and cross-border controls have been
strengthened. In response to a Government request,
UNIOGBIS is also providing technical assistance for
the development of a national action plan to combat
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime.
Problems, however, are persistent and much has yet
to be done until the situation can be considered to be
under control.
A significant development relating to gender
equality and women’s empowerment was the adoption,
on 2 August, of a gender parity quota law setting
a minimum of 36 per cent for women’s participation
in the lists of candidates for legislative and local
Government elections, as well as for appointments to
key decision-making positions. The draft is expected
to be promulgated into law by the President before
the November elections. UNIOGBIS will continue to
support the process.

30/08/2018

the Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by my friend
the Ambassador of Brazil. I would like also to convey
my gratitude to the Security Council for its close
monitoring of the situation and continued commitment
to promoting peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. I
will be ready to answer members’ questions.
The President: I thank Mr. Filho for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ndong Mba.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Before I begin my briefing, allow me
to warmly welcome His Excellency Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes and His Excellency Mr. João Ribeiro
Butiam Có, Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and Communities. Their presence at this
meeting is clear proof of the considerable interest in the
new dynamic promoted by the authorities in GuineaBuissau to bring the country back to a state of peace,
stability and respect for constitutional order.

It is my impression that the recent political
developments in Guinea-Bissau offer a possibility for a
more favourable appreciation of the country’s situation.
It seems now more likely than a few weeks ago that
legislative elections will take place as scheduled on
18 November. The consolidation of long-term stability
remains contingent on the successful holding of
legislative elections and on how the country manages the
reform process. Far-reaching reforms remain imperative
to prevent a future relapse into political and institutional
instability. I therefore urge international partners to
maintain and increase their political, technical and
financial support to help national institutions during
and beyond the legislative and presidential elections.
I also welcome the continued engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission in helping sustain attention
to, and funding for, peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

I have the honour to inform the members of
the Security Council, in my capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau, of
my visit to Bissau and Conakry from 25 to 29 June. It
was the second visit to Guinea-Bissau by the Sanctions
Committee Chair, the most recent visit having been
undertaken by my predecessor, Ambassador Rosselli
of Uruguay, in mid-June 2017. The purpose of my visit
was to gain first-hand information on the effective
implementation of the sanctions measures imposed
under resolution 2048 (2012) and to discuss progress in
the restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
I was accompanied on my visit by a representative of
the Secretariat. Representatives of the local Embassies
of China, Côte d’Ivoire, the Russian Federation and
the United Kingdom joined me and participated in the
meetings I held in Bissau and Conakry.

In conclusion, I would like to commend ECOWAS
for its effective and continued engagement in GuineaBissau in a sustained manner in playing a critical
role in helping national stakeholders find the path
to lasting peace and stability. I also express my
sincere appreciation to all bilateral and multilateral
partners, especially the African Union, the CPLP and
the European Union, together with ECOWAS, for
their continued partnership and commitment to the
consolidation of peace in Guinea-Bissau. I also salute
the contribution of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of

During our discussions, I emphasized the
importance of continuing the dialogue and engagement
with the many national and international stakeholders
with the aim of seeking a way out of the political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau and finding a lasting solution.
I also stressed that the international community should
continue to support Guinea-Bissau, especially in
the light of the upcoming legislative and presidential
elections and related technical and financial issues, and
that it should take concrete measures to create a stable
political environment.

4/24

18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

I emphasized that the Security Council continues
to attach importance to the situation in Guinea-Bissau
and that the overall objective of the sanctions regime
was not to punish, pressure or change the leadership,
but rather to contribute to the establishment of stability
in the country and support positive change in the
subregion. There is still some confusion about the scope
of the travel-ban restrictions, and I made sure to explain
the procedures to the authorities during my visit.
While the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
generally stable and shows encouraging progress,
the political uncertainty in the light of the upcoming
elections threatens to undermine the calm in the
country. To date, the constitutional order does not seem
to be directly threatened, but the uncertainty over the
division of power between the President and the Prime
Minister continues to be the basis of political disputes.
In addition, the political leaders still have to draft
and implement important reforms, particularly in the
security and justice sectors.
International and regional efforts and initiatives
to find a lasting solution to the political crisis seem to
have been effective so far. However, the international
community should continue to monitor the situation in
the country closely, also taking into account that some
key elements of the road map for peace envisaged in
the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of the
Economic Community of West African States Roadmap
for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in GuineaBissau still need to be implemented.
The security situation is stable given that no
incident of significant violence has been recorded,
the army does not interfere in politics and, in general,
human rights are respected. However, there is still
great concern over the activities related to transnational
crime and illicit trafficking. The feeling and the view
of most of the interlocutors was that the sanctions had
been effective in deterring possible disruptive elements.
However, many interlocutors continue to demand that
sanctions be imposed against politicians responsible for
the political crisis, which is still perceived as an issue
that has not yet been fully resolved.
I took note of the initiatives undertaken by the
Security Council, the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
ECOWAS Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Alpha
Condé, President of the Republic of Guinea, the

S/PV. 8337

European Union, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the international
community with a view to supporting and encouraging
Guinea-Bissau in overcoming the political stalemate.
The visit reflects the positive momentum for
cooperation between the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) and the Government
of Guinea-Bissau, which should be maintained and
improved. I also noted that the political actors and civil
society were keen to discuss and to put forward their
views to the Committee, which leads me to believe that
an ongoing dialogue between the Committee and the
Council and the Bissau-Guineans is necessary.
On 16 July, I reported to the Committee and
provided recommendations. In particular, I focused
my attention on the need for a timely revision of
the sanctions list, taking into account the current
circumstances, the developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the views expressed by the relevant interlocutors
interviewed during my visit.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau and Guinea-Conakry for their warm
welcome and for the fruitful meetings held, as well as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. José Viegas Filho, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator and Resident Representative of the United
Nations Development Programme, Ms. Séraphine
Wakana, and her team for the excellent support provided
during my visit.
The President: I thank Ambassador Ndong Mba
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Vieira.
Mr. Vieira: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the invitation to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Since my most recent briefing to the Security
Council, on 16 May (see S/PV.8261), I have made a trip
to Guinea-Bissau and Portugal, from 24 to 27 July, in
my capacity as Chair of the configuration. That mission
was undertaken to obtain first-hand accounts on the
implementation of all the provisions of the Conakry
Agreement and, most important, the organization of the
legislative elections.

18-271805/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

During my visit to Bissau, I consulted extensively
with a broad range of stakeholders, including the
President of the Republic, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the Prime Minister — Mr. Aristides
Gomes — the President of the Supreme Court, several
ministers and members of all political parties represented
in the National Assembly, as well as some parties not
represented in Parliament. I also held meetings with the
President of the National Electoral Commission and
with representatives of the international community
and of the United Nations. In addition, I took part in
meetings with civil society representatives of GuineaBissau.
In Lisbon, on 27 July, I met with the DirectorGeneral of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), Ms. Georgina de Mello, when we
discussed the role of the Community in supporting
Guinea-Bissau and in helping to find a solution to the
political situation.
My mission affirmed that there has been tangible
progress in the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and in the process of return to normal
political life, as compared to the same period last year,
when I first visited the country. There is a renewed sense
of optimism with regard to a definitive solution to the
protracted crisis, and the upcoming elections are seen
as a window of opportunity to that end. The Conakry
Agreement remains a fundamental point of reference
for most political actors; all the stakeholders consulted
stressed the need to expedite its implementation.
Among the achievements that I witnessed, allow
me to underline the following important developments
that took place in the past months: the appointment of
a consensual Prime Minister and the formation of an
inclusive Government; the approval of a Government
programme and of the national budget; and the
reopening of the National Assembly.
With respect to the electoral process, during my
visit the Government of Guinea-Bissau reaffirmed its
intention to hold legislative elections on 18 November.
All members of the national authorities whom I met
manifested their support for respecting that established
date. The holding of elections is also considered by
political actors a crucial exercise for the country to
return to stability. The election builds on the positive
political developments in the past months and the
opening of space for political dialogue, as well as the
provisions of the Constitution of Guinea-Bissau. Many
6/24

30/08/2018

of my interlocutors also stated that any postponement
of the election would prolong the crisis and would be
frustrating for the population, the political actors and
the international community.
Let me also state that I heard no support for
deferring the November election in favour of joint
presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019. The
President of Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. José
Mario Vaz, received me for a meeting and expressed his
full support for my mission in Bissau. On that occasion,
he outlined to me his three current priorities for the
country: first, the holding of legislative elections on
18 November; secondly, the reform of the security
sector, including the establishment of a pension
fund for the military; and, thirdly, combating drug
trafficking and organized crime — a point that was
recently included in the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS) by the Security Council.
During my visit, I reaffirmed to all my
interlocutors that I have indeed noticed progress in
the political situation of the country. I also underlined
the importance of holding elections on 18 November
as a conclusion to the transition towards stability in
accordance with national solutions and in full respect
of the Constitution.
It is important to mention that, while stakeholders
stressed the importance of holding legislative elections
on the established date, there remain significant
financial, logistical and coordination challenges for
that to happen. In terms of election preparations, I held
substantive discussions with the Minister of Territorial
Administration and with senior representatives of the
Technical Office for Electoral Processes Support and
of the National Electoral Commission, who reported
advances in the preparation for the elections but were
concerned about their slow progress. In that regard, it
was noted that some progress had been made on electoral
cartography and the preparations for the election budget,
although funds were slow to materialize. There remain
important technical challenges to address, particularly
on the voter registration update, awareness-raising and
compliance with the legal electoral process.
Although there is general appreciation of the
United Nations and United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) support to the electoral process, I
was made aware of several areas where differences in
approach exist that need to be resolved urgently. Allow
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

me to highlight four important challenges that were
mentioned during my visit: first, managing the limited
time available to organize the November elections in line
with the Constitution; secondly, the process of updating
the voter-registration list in such little time — the
process was scheduled to start on 23 August and should
last for one month — thirdly, the lack of proper
coordination between and among Government entities
and UNDP on election-preparation logistics, especially
the procurement and sourcing of sufficient voterregistration kits and the conduct of the voter-registration
exercise itself — for example, I was informed that the
Government has started its own bidding process for
the registration kits, in parallel with the UNDP efforts,
and that the Government has sought bilateral assistance
to obtain the election kits from international partners;
and, fourthly, the financial questions. The budget for
the elections was assessed by UNDP at $7.7 million,
of which the Government of Guinea-Bissau contributed
$2 million. Additional contributions have reduced the
funding gap to $1.2 million. As mentioned earlier today
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
José Viegas Filho, that gap may have been closed
following pledges by several international partners.
However, I was informed in Bissau that none of the
contributions pledged are likely to be disbursed before
September, which means that there is an urgent need to
cover the costs of the voter-registration operation, if it
is to start now.
On 23 August, Prime Minister Gomes held a
ceremony in Guinea-Bissau to launch the update of
the voter-registration list. However, according to my
information, the country has so far received all of the
equipment necessary to conduct the process. Allow
me to add that the President of the Supreme Court
informed me that, although the organization of the
November elections in the compressed period should be
done by political agreement, there is a risk that, if such
consensus is lost, the legitimacy of the whole process
could be called into question. The situation could also
worsen if the current Government were to be dismissed.
I must stress that, ultimately, the organization of the
elections is contingent upon the willingness of key
political actors to engage in mutual cooperation.
In my meeting with Prime Minister Gomes, whom
I would like to thank for welcoming me and supporting
my visit, he highlighted the importance of avoiding
the recurring situation witnessed in Guinea-Bissau.
As mentioned by many other interlocutors, generally

S/PV. 8337

peaceful elections are followed by political problems.
The Prime Minister expressed his strong commitment
to facilitating a stability pact. I was informed that the
Government already has a draft framework document
that could form the basis for a comprehensive pact. Some
of my interlocutors also underscored the importance of
enabling civil society and other actors to submit their
contributions to the pact.
With regard to reconciliation, the organizing
commission for a national conference presented me with
its report — “In the Name of Peace” — with the findings
and recommendations of consultations conducted with
more than 3,000 Bissau-Guineans on the causes of
conflict and instability in the country. Representatives
of the Women’s Council stated that their organization
had evolved from the former women’s facilitation
group and was currently engaged in monitoring the
preparations for the upcoming legislative elections
and advocating the adoption of a gender quota law.
Following my visit, we received positive news that,
on 2 August, the National Assembly passed a gender
parity, or quotas law, mandating a minimum of 36 per
cent women candidates in the legislative and local
Government elections.
The military continues to maintain its distance
from the political crisis and to respect constitutional
order, while the police force continues their efforts
to maintain public order and respect human rights.
Those are commitments we should encourage to be
maintained. Stakeholders acknowledged the key role
that the Econopmic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB)
continues to play in that context and urged ECOMIB
and UNIOGBIS to continue providing support during
the electoral cycles. There is also support for the need
to reform the defence and security sectors and for
continued UNIOGBIS and international community
assistance to monitor and provide technical assistance
in the post-election period.
Before concluding, allow me to make some
comments on the importance of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). Over the years, the PBF has assumed a strategic
position in Guinea-Bissau. Currently, UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team are implementing PBF
projects with a combined budget of $7 million, which
are mutually reinforcing to political engagement. In that
regard, allow me to underline that two important civil
society initiatives, whose representatives I met with
in Bissau — the Women’s Council and the organizing

18-271807/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

commission for the national conference — are both
beneficiaries of the PBF.
I convened a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration on 13 August to present my report to
the PBC, at which we also received updates from a
number of briefers, including Mr. José Viegas Filho,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNIOGBIS. On that occasion, Ambassador
Tijjani Muhammad-Bande of Nigeria, in his capacity
as Chairperson of ECOWAS, also made some remarks
about its most recent summit, held in Lomé on
31 July. Ambassador José Luis Fialho Rocha of Cabo
Verde, as pro tempore President of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, informed us about the
recent decisions taken during the CPLP summit held
in Santa Maria, Cabo Verde, last July. He underlined
that the Heads of State and Government expressed their
support for the ongoing electoral process in GuineaBissau and the holding of legislative elections on
18 November, as well as their readiness to contribute
materially to its realization. They also called for the
solidarity of the international community to ensure
the timely implementation of the contributions already
announced. On that occasion, we also briefly discussed
the visit of the mission of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to Guinea-Bissau on
27 and 28 July, under the chairmanship of Togo.
Following the discussions that took place on
13 August, I would like to make the following
recommendations. I welcome the visit to Guinea-Bissau
by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
I would also like to take note of the final communiqué
of the fifty-third ordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government, held in
Lomé on 31 July, and take note of its conclusions and
recommendations, especially its urging of respect for
the date of 18 November for the holding of legislative
elections. I also take note of the decision to lift the
sanctions imposed by ECOWAS on certain political
actors in Guinea-Bissau. I take note of the decisions
regarding the country that were approved by the CPLP
summit in Santa Maria. I would like to welcome the
approval of the gender quota law and the discussions on
an inclusive stability pact.
The Guinea-Bissau configuration of the PBC will
continue to focus on the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement and the preparations for the November
elections. We will work with all international partners
to that end. ECOMIB and UNIOGBIS have an
8/24

30/08/2018

important role to play in these crucial Guinea-Bissau
electoral cycles. We will continue to work closely with
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Filho
to ensure that the upcoming legislative elections are
held according to the constitutional framework and
in a credible and fair manner. It is necessary to once
again reiterate the importance of holding the upcoming
elections on the date set, as a conclusion to the transition
towards stability. In that regard, we will continue
to be active in mobilizing the resources required
for the elections to take place as scheduled. We will
also support the United Nations and the international
community, in consultation with the Government,
in considering ways to strengthen State institutions,
especially the justice system. I would like to reaffirm
that Guinea-Bissau remains an important example of a
sustaining peace approach that offers useful lessons on
global partnerships for peacebuilding.
Finally, allow me to inform members of the Council
that tomorrow I will host a high-level meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration with Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes, upon his request. That will be an
opportunity for the Prime Minister to have a direct and
interactive dialogue with members of the PBC.
The President: I thank Ambassador Vieira for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tavares Pinto.
Ms. Tavares Pinto (spoke in French): It is a great
honour and pleasure for me to be here today with the
Security Council to represent the Women, Peace and
Security Network of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in Guinea-Bissau. I am
particularly honoured to speak at a meeting with my
compatriot and Prime Minister, Mr. Aristides Gomes,
as well as the representatives of Guinea-Bissau to the
United Nations.
Allow me to speak as a citizen and a woman leader
in Guinea-Bissau. I thank the speakers who preceded
me. I would like to focus my statement on aspects that
are specific to women and the role they play in civil
society in Guinea-Bissau.
The participation of women and girls is an integral
part of the development goals in the particular context
of Guinea-Bissau. The historic aspirations and the
progress achieved in recent years are especially
deserving of recognition in terms of the participation
of women. Throughout the history of the country,
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

women have shown their clear ability to be politically
involved, build peace and defend their rights, especially
in terms of economic and social development and
social cohesion. However, the recurring political and
governmental instability have posed an obstacle to the
adoption and implementation of necessary and urgent
public policies, which have kept women from fully
enjoying their rights, especially their civil, political,
economic and social rights.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile.
The socioeconomic conditions are increasingly
challenging and are exacerbated by instability, which
in turn is having a significant cumulative impact
on young people, who are facing an increasing lack
of education and employment opportunities and are
subjected to the risks of clandestine migration and drug
trafficking. Above all, that has an impact on women and
girls, who are fighting on a daily basis to support their
households and families during such difficult times in
an environment that has deteriorated socially, culturally
and in terms of intercommunal social cohesion.
My organization continues to play a very important
role through the activism of its women members to ease
the tensions of the conflict and promote peace in our
country. Our objective is to coordinate and optimize
women’s role and initiatives in prevention, post-conflict
rebuilding and the promotion of human rights. We are
a regional network that also works to promote gender
equality, good governance and democracy. It is made
up of a variety of women’s organizations fighting for a
definitive, lasting peace within our communities while
achieving the agenda set out in resolution 1325 (2000).
In 2014, in coordination with civil society and the
country’s electoral institutions, along with the support
of the United Nations system, we actively contributed
to the national electoral process by establishing
elections monitoring cells to resolve any conflict
situations during elections. It was a platform made up
of women’s organizations that worked towards avoiding
and resolving any problems on the ground during the
presidential elections with the use of an early-warning
system. The unit was made up of 200 women and youth
monitors throughout the country, as well 45 other young
people who monitored violence and sent real-time
text messages on the situation. The groups worked to
simultaneously harmonize mediation efforts in order to
avoid tensions before, during, and after elections once
the results were published. Awareness-raising and civic
education campaigns on electoral processes were also

S/PV. 8337

carried out to complement those efforts. The results
achieved were satisfactory. There was equal access
for all candidates to State media, while effective and
qualitative involvement by civil society encouraging
all parties to work in a climate of trust, solidarity and
security led to elections that were deemed to be free,
fair and transparent. The role of women was thus shown
to be key in the elections. But those efforts did not come
to an end in 2014, nor are they limited to the domain of
elections.
In all of the political and institutional crises
of the country, our organization has encouraged
various dialogue initiatives. We participated in the
establishment of a group of women facilitators for
dialogue among parties in conflict, which made a major
contribution in overcoming the 2017 crisis. That group
led to the creation of the national women’s council of
Guinea-Bissau — a broad and inclusive group that is
fully representative of the political, religious, ethnic
and territorial diversity throughout the different
communities of the country and the diaspora.
For the first time we can today say that civil
society — with the essential and decisive support of
women and the recognition of the United Nations
and ongoing support, especially from the Embassy of
Canada — has been able to come together with the
political parties in conflict, religious organizations,
universities, youth organizations and traditional leaders
to reflect on and discuss the quest for a solution to the
political crisis. The stakeholders decided to create an
alliance of civil society organizations in order to follow
up on the political dialogue to break out of the impasse
in which the Government is stuck. That platform made
it possible for us to make a series of recommendations,
which are the basis for a draft political and social
stability pact. The process is under way. We hope that
the pact will be signed by all stakeholders within a new
social and cultural development framework as the basis
of a new social contract.
At the same time, given the upcoming holding of
elections scheduled for 18 November, drawing on our
experience in 2014, and moving forward the electoral
process, a platform of women and young people was
chosen for moving forward the electoral process with
the financial support of the Peacebuilding Fund and the
technical support of the United Nations. The process
will facilitate registering voters, a civic education
campaign, media coverage, the electoral campaign and

18-271809/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

monitoring possible outbreaks of violence during the
electoral process, as well as on election day.
Lastly, I would like to cite as a positive example
concerning women, as we are all fully committed
together to dialogue with other actors and partners, the
recent adoption by the legislature of a gender parity
bill to ensure that 36 per cent quota of women on the
ballot. That was one of the outcomes achieved through
the struggle and the advocacy of the political platform
of women that will lead to considerably positive change
for Guinea-Bissau, once full and viable stability has
been achieved and sustainably ensured.
With a view towards ensuring a more effective
partnership between the United Nations and GuineaBissau, the goal of which is to build a reconciled, fair and
just society, we propose the following recommendations.
The United Nations system in Guinea-Bissau should
prioritize work geared towards achieving political
stabilization by encouraging inclusive national
dialogue that will allow for the adoption, monitoring
and implementation of a national stability pact. The
United Nations system should be more present on the
front line to further to give incentive to partnerships
so that international assistance can be more effective in
implementing national policies. Cooperation networks
linking women’s and women’s youth organizations,
with the goal of encouraging and bolstering the civic
and political participation of those organizations, must
continue to be supported, as well as establishing and
energizing a women’s monitoring body to assess and
publish data on their progress so as to achieve gender
equality through partnerships with national research
institutions and the latter’s international counterparts.
The President: I thank Ms. Tavares Pinto for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the presence among us of His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau, and thanks Mr. José Viegas Filho,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS); His Excellency
Mr. Anatolio Ndong Mba, Permanent Representative
of Equatorial Guinea, in his capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau;
10/24

30/08/2018

and His Excellency Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their excellent
briefings. My delegation would also like to express to
Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares Pinto, as a representative of
Bissau-Guinean civil society, its interest in everything
that she has said during our exchange.
Recent developments in the sociopolitical situation
in Guinea-Bissau, especially since the positive progress
noted in the wake of the extraordinary session of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), on 14 April in Lomé, give reason for
hope in the process of exiting the country’s crisis.
The appointment of a consensus Prime Minister,
the establishment of an inclusive Government, the
resumption of National Assembly activities and setting
the date for legislative elections on 18 November
are all achievements that need to be consolidated
through both the sustained support of the international
community and the firm political will of the BissauGuinean political actors. With a view to helping end
the political impasse in Guinea-Bissau, the Security
Council ,via the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018)
on 28 February, conferred upon UNOGBIS three
priority support tasks, namely, the full implementation
of the Conakry Agreement, the holding of legislative
elections and the review of the country’s Constitution.
In the light of the report (S/2018/771) of the SecretaryGeneral on the status of the implementation of those
priorities, my delegation would like to make the
following observations.
With regard to the full implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, the Secretary-General’s report
clearly outlines the measures to be taken by national
stakeholders so as to move forward the implementation
of the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry Agreement.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the various parties
to pool their efforts so as to achieve the signing of the
stability pact, which remains an important step towards
bringing about peace in the country. My delegation
firmly encourages national stakeholders to pursue
consultations and focus on the benefits of achieving the
other aspects of the Agreement. We urge UNOGBIS
to continue the use of its good offices and to provide
technical support to further engage other organizations,
as well as civil society, in the process of ending the
crisis. In that regard, my country echoes the SecretaryGeneral’s encouragement to ECOWAS to continue its
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

work towards maintaining a constructive dialogue
among national actors.
Along those lines, my delegation welcomes the
ECOWAS decision to lift the sanctions imposed on
certain Bissau-Guinean political actors following
the holding of the fifty third ordinary session of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government on 31 July
in Lomé. That decision will undoubtedly contribute to
de-escalating the local political environment, thereby
enhancing conditions for a constructive dialogue among
stakeholders. Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms the central role
of the Conakry Agreement, which remains to this day
the consensual framework of reference for achieving
a lasting solution to the political stalemate in GuineaBissau.
With regard to the holding of the legislative
elections, it seems crucial to take all the necessary steps
to achieve the organization of free, peaceful and credible
polls. As the Secretary-General’s report emphasizes,
the legislative and presidential elections remain at the
core of the country’s political life. In that connection,
they must be held in accordance with the Constitution
and national laws and norms. Despite delays involving
practical aspects of the elections, national actors,
supported by the international community, are working
on completing technical preparations for the legislative
elections to prevent any chance of postponement.
Accordingly, Côte d’Ivoire commends the perfectly
coordinated work done on the ground by the group of
five international partners — the Security Council,
the United Nations, ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union — particularly with regard to
mustering financial resources, which is a real source
of concern. To that end, my delegation is pleased
to note the contributions of ECOWAS and the West
African Economic and Monetary Union of $2 million
and $1 million, respectively, which will help to fill the
financial gap in the electoral assistance project. Côte
d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity to urge
countries and organizations to fulfil their pledges.
The review of the Constitution, the third
priority entrusted to the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office, remains an important pillar
insofar as it will enable the establishment of a new
political order that will promote the consolidation of
peace in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, my delegation
encourages UNIOGBIS to take whatever measures it

S/PV. 8337

deems necessary to provide effective support to the
Guinea-Bissau authorities in implementing an inclusive
institutional framework that will lay the foundations
for a country that is at peace and firmly on the path
to development.
The fight against transnational crime, in particular
drug-trafficking and money-laundering, represents a
major challenge for the authorities of Guinea-Bissau. In
this regard, and pursuant to the provisions of resolution
2404 (2018), the joint measures taken by UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) in this area should be continued and
intensified with a view to suppressing drug-trafficking
rings and those who long for a return to instability in a
country that has already suffered too much. We welcome
the fact that President José Mário Vaz and the national
authorities as a whole are resolutely committed to this
path, having requesting the support of UNODC and
UNIOGBIS in designing and implementing a national
plan to combat transnational organized crime. We also
welcome the efforts of the country’s political class to
adopt a law establishing a 36 per cent quota for women
in legislative and local elections and the creation in
April 2018 of a Guinea-Bissau council of women.
The major changes afoot in Guinea-Bissau call for
adapting international organizations and structures on
the ground so that their action can be more effective.
That is why my country awaits with great interest
the conclusions of the assessment mission conducted
in this regard, as well as proposals for restructuring
UNIOGBIS. Nonetheless, we must bear in mind that
any significant positive developments in Guinea-Bissau
during this time still depend on the proper organization
and conduct of elections, whose results will determine
the nature and scope of the change to be made. Cote
d’Ivoire commends the action taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and would
like to assure him of our full support in this important
task. We also take this opportunity to recall the
paramount importance of ensuring that Bissau-Guinean
stakeholders take firm ownership of the process for
emerging from crisis and prioritize the greater good of
the country and its people.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in the
next few days Cote d’Ivoire intends to submit a draft
press statement on the situation in Guinea-Bissau to the
Security Council.

18-2718011/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the briefers for their comprehensive statements. I also
welcome the presence in the Chamber today of Prime
Minister Aristides Gomes of Guinea-Bissau, and thank
him for making the journey to New York to participate
in our work, which is a very positive signal.
I have five brief comments. First, France welcomes
the positive developments in recent months in GuineaBissau, including the appointment of Mr. Aristides
Gomes as a consensus Prime Minister in a first
important step towards the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, which we continue to believe is
the only way to bring the country out of its long political
and institutional crisis. I would also like to welcome the
central role played by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and more generally by the
group of five international partners — ECOWAS, the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, the European Union and the United
Nations — in achieving those results. It will be crucial
to ensure that Guinea-Bissau continues to benefit from
strong regional and international support in the months
and years to come, and that is a particular responsibility
of the Security Council.
Secondly, while encouraging progress has been
made over recent months, we expect to see further
significant measures over the next few weeks — first
and foremost, the holding of elections in November in
accordance with the announced schedule. In our view
that will be a significant test of the genuine will of
the various stakeholders to make progress towards the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement. We
expect the Guinea-Bissau authorities to fully engage in
the technical preparations for the elections, including
voter registration, for which the necessary resources
must be made available as soon as possible and the
funds allocated for it in the national budget disbursed
without delay.
Thirdly, the international community must play its
full part in supporting the upcoming electoral process,
whether through the provision of financial aid by leading
donors or technical assistance by the United Nations
Development Programme and the European Union. We
have equally high expectations of the Guinea-Bissau
authorities. The proper holding of the forthcoming
elections is also a prerequisite for any potential lifting
of sanctions. In that regard I want to welcome the
position of non-interference in political affairs taken by
the military authorities in Guinea-Bissau.
12/24

30/08/2018

Fourthly, in the medium term, lasting peace and
stability in Guinea-Bissau will be re-established
through progress in other areas, such as the review
of the Constitution, which should enable the BissauGuinean institutional system to avoid the impasses we
have seen in recent months. Those areas also include
the fight against organized crime, particularly drugtrafficking — which will not only require resolute
commitment from the Guinea-Bissau authorities but also
sustained support from the international community,
especially the various United Nations actors on the
ground — as well as security sector reform, without
which there can be no long-term stability in the country,
as recent history has shown.
My fifth and last point is that France fully supports
the strategic review of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau that has begun
under the leadership of former Special Representative
Mr. João Honwana. We hope the process will be
guided by an unrestricted and objective evaluation of
the situation and the needs on the ground independent
of the positions that the various stakeholders have
expressed on the issue in the past few months. We
view this as a useful opportunity to reflect on how
to strengthen the scope of the good-offices role of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
improve coordination among the various international
community actors on the ground and provide the most
effective possible technical support, which GuineaBissau needs more than ever.
It is still too early to say whether Guinea-Bissau is
safely on the path to long-term stability. The next few
months, and the legislative elections of November in
particular, will supply more answers to our questions
in that regard. The supportive role played by the region
and, more broadly, by the international community and
the Security Council, is all the more important in this
decisive period.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to welcome
the presence here with us today of Prime Minister
Aristide Gomes of Guinea-Bissau. We would also
like to congratulate Mr. José Viegas Filho, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), on his appointment to
this important role. We wish him every success in his
work and thank him for his briefing.
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We have listened carefully to the information shared
with us today by Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning GuineaBissau, Ambassador Mauro Vieira, Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and Ms. Tavares Pinto.
We note the significant progress that has been
made in helping Guinea-Bissau to emerge from its
political crisis following the decision by President
José Mário Vaz to appoint a new Prime Minister and
form a consensus Government. We encourage all the
political forces in the country, despite their ongoing
disagreements, to work with the Cabinet to achieve a
sustainable settlement.
We support the work of the country’s leaders
to prepare for the elections planned for November.
We are pleased that the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau is making a
significant contribution to supporting the electoral
processes, including by mobilizing means from
international partners. We support the mission’s
intention to facilitate constitutional reform, as noted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/771), and
dialogue should begin on that as soon as possible. In
that regard, the time between the parliamentary and
presidential elections would be very suitable. We
continue to believe that this measure is critical from the
point of view of resolving the issues around the GuineaBissau Constitution and ensuring the prevention of a
relapse into political turbulence there.
We are grateful to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for promoting a political
settlement in Guinea-Bissau. We note the decision
of ECOWAS to remove the sanctions it imposed on
Bissau-Guineans in February, which we think is a very
timely step. However, we believe that any arrangements
for the country’s future should be based on the desires
of its own citizens, without pressure or the imposition
of ready-made solutions from outside. Only through
a response to its genuine national interests can they
play a positive role in the work of helping the country
emerge from its long-standing crisis.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would first like to thank Special Representative
Viegas Filho, Ambassadors Vieira and Ndong Mba and
Ms. Tavares Pinto for their insightful briefings on the
recent developments in Guinea-Bissau. I would also

S/PV. 8337

like to take this opportunity to welcome Prime Minister
Gomes to today’s important meeting.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to
underscore the following three points. The first is the
importance of the full implementation of the Conakry
Agreement, particularly regarding the holding of
legislative elections on 18 November and the signing
of a stability pact. The second is the importance of the
inclusion of women in political processes, as highlighted
by Ms. Tavares Pinto, and the third is the importance of
the continued engagement of the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB).
Let me start by reiterating that the full implementation
of the Conakry Agreement and the six-point road map
is the only way forward in Guinea-Bissau. As so many
people highlighted yesterday, prevention should be our
priority, and implementing and abiding by agreements
like this one are important steps towards sustainable
peace in Guinea-Bissau. We commend the efforts of
the newly formed Government to organize legislative
elections and reiterate the necessity of organizing free,
fair, credible and inclusive elections on 18 November.
While we recognize the positive steps taken in Bissau,
we are not there yet.
A draft of the stability pact, which will be the
foundation of the national round-table dialogue, has
been circulated among political stakeholders. An
inclusive stability pact is crucial for Guinea-Bissau,
laying the foundation for collaboration among the
various actors and paving the way for equally important
constitutional reform. We therefore urge all the relevant
stakeholders to finalize it as soon as possible and before
the legislative elections in November.
As stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000) and
the sustaining peace agenda, the role of women in
peacebuilding cannot be overestimated. As Ms. Tavares
Pinto indicated, women have played an extremely
important part in breaking through the political
impasse in Guinea-Bissau. I also want to reiterate the
importance of women’s continued engagement both
in the upcoming elections and in the country’s future
political life. In that regard, we want to welcome the
establishment of the Bissau-Guinean Council of Women
and to request that the Government of Guinea-Bissau,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the other international actors on the
ground — the African Union, the Economic Community

18-2718013/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

of West African States (ECOWAS), the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the European
Union — continue to collaborate with that new body to
ensure women’s full and equal participation in GuineaBissau.
Lastly, I would like to highlight the important
role that ECOWAS has played in Guinea-Bissau,
especially through the presence of ECOMIB, which
is essential to Guinea-Bissau’s stability, and while
expressing our appreciation we also express the hope
that ECOWAS extends its mandate at least until the end
of the presidential elections. A longer-term extension
of its mandate will give the Bissau-Guinean population
security and help to ensure the holding of elections, both
in November of this year and in 2019, when presidential
elections are scheduled.
Guinea-Bissau is at an important crossroads in its
history. Its stability depends largely on the organization
of free, fair, credible and inclusive legislative elections
on 18 November. They are the next step in resolving
the country’s lingering political impasse. It is the
Council’s responsibility to continue to support GuineaBissau at this important time, and we look forward to
its continued active engagement.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank all
the briefers for their remarks today. We also welcome
Prime Minister Gomes and express our appreciation for
his ongoing efforts to foster unity in the Government
and prepare for critical elections in November.
The United States is pleased to note the welcome
political progress in Guinea-Bissau since April. We
commend the political leaders for taking much-needed
and long-delayed steps aimed at breaking through a
nearly three-year stalemate to get the Government
moving again for the well-being of the people of GuineaBissau, and encourage them to continue to implement
the Conakry Agreement and pursue critical reforms.
Next on Guinea-Bissau’s political horizon, we
look forward to successful voter registration and free,
fair and transparent legislative elections in November.
We encourage the international community and
Guinea-Bissau’s partners in the region to support the
Government’s efforts to prepare for and execute these
elections. We also commend the generous contributions
of the Economic Community of West African States to
that effort and express our gratitude for its continued
leadership as a mediator.
14/24

30/08/2018

Even with this welcome progress and upcoming
elections, the Security Council must remain vigilant,
since the consensus agreements that helped to ease
the political crisis remain fragile. The United States
shares the Secretary-General’s concerns about the
continued threat that drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime pose to Guinea-Bissau and the broader
subregion. We welcome the support of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) for the Government’s reactivation of
the transnational crime unit and encourage UNODC to
continue to build its capacity in the country.
We also salute the efforts of civil society and
concerned citizens to encourage transparency in
governance and a culture of respect for human rights
in the country. We are encouraged by the ongoing
expanding efforts of the Bissau-Guinean Council
of Women, in particular its drive for inclusion in the
development of the stability pact called for in the
Conakry Agreement.
Only a few months remain before critical elections
that could solidify the political progress made so far
this year. The steps taken to fix the wrongs of so
many wasted months of gridlock have been bold and
important, but the road to enduring success is long. We
will continue to work with the Government as it emerges
from this frustrating stall and strives to achieve security
and opportunity for all of its country’s citizens.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by acknowledging the presence of Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes here today. Sweden has a longstanding relationship with the people of Guinea-Bissau
dating back even before its independence. It is in that
spirit of close partnership that we are now engaging in
support for Guinea-Bissau in the Council.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing. The mission has
a crucial role to play in the coordination of international
efforts in support of Guinea-Bissau, not least now in
support of the preparations for elections. I also thank
the Ambassador Mauro Vieira of Brazil, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We appreciate the opportunity to draw
on the Peacebuilding Commission’s strategic advice on
Guinea-Bissau.
As has been highlighted today, Guinea-Bissau has
seen a number of positive developments over the past
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

few months. We once again welcome the consensus
appointment of a Prime Minister, the formation of
an inclusive Government and the reopening of the
National Assembly. The recent approvals of the new
Government programme and national budget are also
positive steps. We welcome the military’s neutrality and
its posture of non-interference in the political process,
and we stress the importance of its continued neutrality
moving forward.
The sense of optimism that Ambassador Vieira
alluded to in his briefing is encouraging. The elections
on 18 November will be a crucial step towards building
trust and stability. The ongoing challenges must now
be addressed to ensure credible and timely elections
within the agreed time frame. We stress the importance
of ensuring women and men’s equal participation in the
upcoming elections both as voters and candidates, and
we welcome the adoption of a gender quota law. We
encourage the country’s leadership to follow up the law
with targeted efforts to include women’s participation
in the political processes at all levels. In that regard,
I also welcome the briefing by Ms. Tavares Pinto
this morning.
The six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement
must be implemented in full. In that regard we take note
of the draft framework document for the stability pact
that has been developed by the Government. For the
pact to be credible and sustainable, we underscore the
importance of ensuring that it is underpinned by an
inclusive and consultative process.
Guinea-Bissau now needs concerted and coherent
international support for the electoral process. It will
be important to make full use of the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
preparing for the elections. We commend the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States,
which has played an essential role on behalf of the
region in finding a solution to the political crisis, and
we encourage its continued engagement, especially in
the electoral process.
As is often discussed in the Peacebuilding
Commission, for a sustainable peace to be truly
consolidated, it is always important to address the root
causes, including by focusing on constitutional reform,
reconciliation, strengthening the rule of law through
strong and inclusive institutions, assuring equal access
to economic opportunities and respecting, protecting
and ensuring human rights. Such reforms will be

S/PV. 8337

critical drivers of peace. The international community,
in close partnership with the region, should now step
up its efforts to support Guinea-Bissau on its path to
sustainable peace and development.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau, to the Council today, and to thank our
briefers, Special Representative Filho, Ambassadors
Vieira and Ndong Mba and Ms. Tavares Pinto, for their
valuable remarks.
More than three months ago, in mid-May, we
commended the encouraging progress achieved towards
a solution to the country’s political and institutional
stalemate (see S/PV.8261). The appointment of an
inclusive Government, the reopening of the National
Assembly, the election of the President of the National
Electoral Commission and the announcement of
legislative elections for November sparked optimism
about the prospects for a new degree of resolve and
normalization. Against that backdrop, the reported
delays and lack of concrete measures taken to prepare
for the legislative elections raise concern. The timely
and credible conduct of the legislative and presidential
elections represents a crucial step towards the
resumption of peacebuilding and an important element
of the Conakry Agreement. I would also like to express
our concern about the lack of a substantial review of
the Constitution and electoral law. However, we are
hopeful about the possibility of progress with the
recent announcement of the stability pact consultation,
focusing on security reforms and the judiciary.
We therefore call on the Guinea-Bissau authorities
to provide firm political direction and assume the
leadership of the electoral process, and to step up
the required technical preparation and empower the
electoral management bodies to implement appropriate
efforts to ensure timely and credible elections. Avoiding
a new impasse over post-electoral power-sharing will
be essential to ensuring stability in the long term.
We commend the adoption of a new law
introducing a minimum 36 per cent quota for women’s
representation in elections and appointments to the
National Assembly and local governing bodies. We
also welcome the creation of the Bissau-Guinean
Council of Women, which aims to promote women’s
participation in national peacebuilding, reconciliation
and political processes. Those measures can help to
lay the foundations for a more equal, participatory and

18-2718015/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

modern society capable of facing its new challenges in
development, modernization and growth.
However, we remain concerned about the fact that
drug-trafficking and transnational organized crime
still represent a serious threat to peace and stability
in Guinea-Bissau, the subregion and beyond. In that
regard, we call on the country’s political leaders
and State institutions to take meaningful steps, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other relevant agencies, to prevent
and reduce these issues, which could cripple political
progress and development for years to come.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau,
we share the view of the Chair of the Committee that
any deliberations about the existing sanctions should
not interfere with the present electoral process.
Last but not least, I would like to express our
full support to Mr. José Viegas Filho, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the staff of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations country team for
their dedication.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I commend Special
Representative Filho, Ambassador Ndong Mba and
Ambassador Vieira for their insightful briefings on
the most recent developments in Guinea-Bissau and
their tireless efforts to bring peace and stability to the
country. I thank Ms. Tavares Pinto for highlighting
the role of civil-society organizations and women’s
groups in facilitating a dialogue between the main
political actors. I also warmly welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Gomes at this meeting. We endorse the
Secretary-General’s semi-annual report (S/2018/771)
and would like to follow up with some observations.
We welcome the encouraging steps taken by
all parties to end the protracted political stalemate
in Guinea-Bissau, including the approval of the
Government programme and the adoption of a budget.
We greatly appreciate the good offices of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) and the mediation efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States, whose
collective efforts have led to those positive developments.
There is now a need for expeditious preparations
for the upcoming legislative and presidential elections.
We welcome the commitments by international
16/24

30/08/2018

partners to providing the necessary technical, logistical
and financial support for the electoral process and
call on the Government of Guinea-Bissau to make
progress on the measures needed for the timely,
credible and fair conduct of the elections. We also call
on all parties to promptly take the necessary steps to
implement the remaining provisions of the Conakry
Agreement, including the adoption of a stability pact
and constitutional review. Political stability can be
achieved only through the continuing implementation
of political reforms aimed at strengthening governing
bodies, and in order to develop guiding principles for
those reforms the country needs an open and inclusive
nationwide dialogue.
In addition to that, we need to work on establishing
the most effective possible measures for ensuring the
country’s stability and resilience through increased
support to existing development plans and the United
Nations peacebuilding plan, with a special focus on
education and health care. Ensuring the participation
of women and young people at every stage and level of
the political process is equally important. We call on all
donors to provide the necessary funds for implementing
all such measures.
Another matter of concern for all of us remains
the perils of drug-trafficking and transnational
organized crime, with their multidimensional impact
on the economy, overall security and community and
individual well-being. National engagement is critical
to implementing the various international programmes
and projects aimed at strengthening the security, judicial
and law-enforcement sectors. We therefore call on the
Guinea-Bissau authorities to continue strengthening
the country’s national institutional framework and
response to these perilous threats, in close cooperation
with UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and INTERPOL.
In conclusion, we would like to extend our full
support to the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and reaffirm our readiness to
cooperate closely with all the relevant parties to support
the peacebuilding and consolidation efforts in GuineaBissau.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of today’s meeting and appreciate the
briefings by Special Representative José Viegas Filho,
Ambassadors Anatolio Ndong Mba and Mauro Vieira,
and Ms. Tavares Pinto. We would like to welcome
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister
of Guinea-Bissau, and to take the opportunity of his
presence here to highlight the political progress that
has been made in recent months in Guinea-Bissau. We
welcome his appointment by consensus, the formation
of an inclusive Government, the reopening of the
National Assembly and the establishment of the date of
18 November for holding legislative elections.
We believe that those developments are encouraging
and should make it possible to move forward with the
full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
the Guinea-Bissau six-point road map, established to
resolve the political crisis in the country. We would
also like to take advantage of this meeting to emphasize
three specific aspects where we believe we must
redouble our efforts in order to consolidate the progress
that has been made and achieve a sustainable peace in
Guinea-Bissau.
The first is the holding of legislative elections
in November. Establishing a free, transparent and
inclusive electoral process will help to ensure the
normal conduct of the 2019 presidential elections. That
involves promoting a democratic climate and ensuring
the broad participation of citizens, particularly women
and young people, and of all the country’s political
forces. It will be essential to take special care of the
technical, logistical and financial aspects of organizing
the elections. We welcome the support provided by
the United Nations Development Programme in that
regard, and we note the importance of ensuring that the
international community continues to cooperate with
the process.
My second point is about the fight against organized
crime. As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and several of my colleagues who spoke
before me have already made clear, we are concerned
about the presence in the country of transnational
organizations involved in illicit activities, in particular
the increase in activities such as drug trafficking
that undermine the social fabric and the institutions
required to build a sustainable peace. We appreciate
the work being done by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in Guinea-Bissau, together with the
United Nations Integrated Office for the Consolidation
of Peace in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), to overcome
those challenges, including the reactivation of the
Transnational Crime Unit.

S/PV. 8337

Third is comprehensive attention to the root causes
of the conflict. In that regard, we believe that in the
future it will be essential, first and foremost, to work
to strengthen the rule of law and establish inclusive
democratic institutions in Guinea-Bissau, as well as
to promote national reconciliation and sustainable
development. It is also crucial that the various efforts,
initiatives and mechanisms deployed in the field
can maintain political and operational coherence,
reflecting and responding to the needs and priorities
of all sectors of the population. To that end, increasing
the involvement of women and young people in the
political life of the country is vital. In that regard, we
would like to welcome the establishment of the BissauGuinean Council of Women, which seeks to improve the
participation of women in peacebuilding, reconciliation
and the political processes at the national level.
In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of maintaining and strengthening the
support and assistance of international and regional
communities in these efforts. We particularly want to
highlight the coordination between the Peacebuilding
Commission and UNIOGBIS, as well as the involvement
of the Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and the European Union, among others.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would first like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, as well as to join other
speakers in congratulating Special Representative José
Viegas Filho on his appointment as Head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) and assuring him of our full
support in discharging his responsibilities. We would
also like to thank him for his briefing on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of UNIOGBIS over
the past six months. We believe that the mission should
be provided with all the support it needs to carry out its
mandate effectively.
We would like to thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ambassador Antolio
Ndong Mba, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), for their useful
briefings on the basis of their engagement with various
stakeholders during their recent visit to Guinea-Bissau.
We also thank Ms. Elisa Tavares Pinto and all the
Bissau-Guinean women for their important advocacy
work for peace.

18-2718017/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

We welcome the progress made in resolving the
political and institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau
and commend the country’s political stakeholders
for implementing the 2016 Conakry Agreement
and demonstrating their commitment to respecting
the country’s Constitution. The adoption of a new
Government programme and State budget is a step in
the right direction towards ending the negative impact
of the political crisis on the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Nevertheless, we also recognize the challenges that
must be addressed in terms of tackling the root causes of
Guinea-Bissau’s problems, and the fact that the situation
in the country still remains fragile, thereby emphasizing
the importance of sustaining the recent gains. The
Bissau-Guinean stakeholders should continue to act in
unity. The current developments in the country should
be followed closely, and we take note of the report
of the Secretary-General and its recommendations
(S/2018/771). We also appreciate the briefing by
Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba on the outcome of
his recent visit, which sent a very good message about
the Council’s active and continued engagement.
The holding of timely and credible legislative
and presidential elections in accordance with the
Constitution and the national law of Guinea-Bissau is
crucial to consolidating sustainable peace and national
reconciliation. We underline the need to provide
assistance to strengthen the capacity and independence
of key institutions in order to support the electoral
process. In that context, we commend UNIOGBIS
for extending capacity-building programmes to
Guinea-Bissau’s security, law-enforcement and
defence institutions.
The increasing threat caused by transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking is a matter of
serious concern that undermines the peace and stability
of the country. In that regard, we stress the need for the
concerted efforts of the relevant bodies at the national,
regional and international levels in order to address
the challenge.
Finally, we appreciate the continued support and
engagement of the Economic Community of West
African States, the African Union, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
all the other international partners working to find a
lasting solution to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Their
coordinated role remains vital to ensuring sustainable
peace and development in the country.
18/24

30/08/2018

Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau. I congratulate him on taking office
and wish him every success in stabilizing his friendly
country. I would also like to welcome Mr. José Viegas
Filho, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau, who is here with us in the Security
Council for the first time. I wish him success in his
tasks, especially at this critical moment of the country’s
history, and we support him fully. I also thank him for
his valuable briefing.
I thank as well Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira and Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares
Pinto for their informative briefings.
Today, I would like to focus in my statement on
three issues: the political situation, the upcoming
elections, and transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking.
First, we reiterate our welcome of the effective
steps taken by all relevant parties to make progress on
implementing the first three demands of the Conakry
Agreement. However, we believe that there is still
room for more progress. We urge all parties concerned
to cooperate and implement the remaining provisions
of the Agreement in the coming period, especially
the necessary reforms mentioned therein, including
the review of the national Constitution. I reiterate my
country’s support for the decisive efforts of the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union, the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, and in
particular the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which has been continuously
engaged in this matter and helped to achieve the
progress that we have seen recently.
Secondly, regarding the legislative elections
scheduled to be held in November, we share the concerns
of the Secretary-General in his most recent report
(S/2018/771) regarding the slow implementation of the
agreed timetable pertaining to the preparations for the
elections. We urge the Government of Guinea-Bissau
to step up its efforts to ensure that the elections are
held on time and in a transparent and credible manner.
My country welcomes the ongoing support provided
by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to facilitate the
preparations for the elections, pursuant to its mandate
as set out in resolution 2404 (2018). We welcome the
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

continued support of international partners to fund the
elections, especially the financial support announced
by ECOWAS in its final summit communiqué of 31 July.
Thirdly and finally, we are pleased to see the
increased efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime to prevent drug trafficking and organized
crime since the renewal of the UNIOGBIS mandate last
February. This matter threatens peace and stability not
only in Guinea-Bissau, but also in the region as a whole.
In that regard, we call on UNIOGBIS to maintain this
approach and to provide the necessary support to all
the relevant authorities in the country in order to build
local capacity and address this matter.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the presence
of the Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Aristides
Gomes, and are grateful for the information provided
by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. José Viegas Filho; Ambassador Anatolio
Ndong Mba, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012)
concerning Guinea-Bissau; and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira of Brazil, in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
We offer special thanks to the representative of civil
society, Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares Pinto.
Guinea-Bissau continues to face a range of
challenges that must be addressed in the framework of
the political process and inclusive dialogue that should
enable members of the Government, political parties
represented in the National Assembly and civil society
in general to continue working towards consensus with
a view to constructively implementing the agreements
that have been reached. Genuine commitment will be
required to reach a lasting social and political solution
solely in the best interests of the people of GuineaBissau and in strict respect for the country’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
We believe that one of the main structural factors
of the crisis, the political impasse, has improved
significantly in recent months with the consensus
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation
of the Government, demonstrating the crucial role
that political will plays in resolving conflicts. In this
regard, we believe that the elections to be held this year
and next cill be critical. To that end, the commitment
of the international community over the short term
will therefore be essential as the primary condition

S/PV. 8337

with a view to providing relevant and timely financial
and technical support to the updating of the registry
of voters and strengthening of electoral mechanisms so
as to ensure the holding of transparent, inclusive and
ultimately peaceful elections.
At the same time, in the context of State stability
and security issues, the fight against drug trafficking,
transnational crime and impunity must also be
priorities. To that end, the United Nations has a key role
to play in promoting development, strengthening and
upgrading State capacities, and reducing vulnerability
to drugs and crime by strengthening the justice sector
and police. The international community must provide
Guinea-Bissau with the assistance it needs to enhance
its control over its coastline and airspace and to train
members of the relevant State institutions.
We commend all efforts of the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States and
its Mission in Guinea-Bissau, and the contributions
of the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the important work
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to bring the parties to the
conflict together and promotie dialogue. We welcome
the work carried out by former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Touré, as well
as that of the current Special Representative and head
of UNIOGBIS, Mr. José Viegas Filho, who has made
continuous coordination with all levels of the State
a priority. In this regard, we believe that the work of
UNIOGBIS must be strengthened and focus on initiatives
to continue creating opportunities for dialogue and
providing technical cooperation in the security sector.
We believe that such efforts will contribute to the
consolidation of an inclusive Government.
We also commend the work carried out by the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, led by Brazil. We underscore the
importance of entrenching the configuration’s links
with the Security Council in terms of coordination,
information exchange and active participation. At the
same time, we welcome the initiative of the National
Forum of Women and Girls for Peace in Bissau. We
believe it essential to incorporate a gender perspective
and women’s participation into mediation and dialogue.
In conclusion, we reiterate that there can be
no development without peace or peace without
development. We therefore believe it imperative to

18-2718019/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

redouble our joint efforts for the stabilization of
Guinea-Bissau. We have also reiterated that sustainable
peace must be attained through political tools to find
negotiated political solutions. In this regard, in order
to achieve stability and sustainable peace and GuineaBissau, we must ensure the well-being of the population
and of the most vulnerable sectors.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
welcome the presence with us here today of the Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau and the statements delivered
by the various briefers. We also listened closely to the
statement by Ms. Pinto.
We have observed notable progress in GuineaBissau over recent months. In implementing the Conakry
Agreement, the parties in Guinea Bissau have reached
agreement on forming an inclusive Government,
reconvening the National Assembly in plenary session,
and the date of legislative elections. China welcomes
this progress. Regional and subregional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, have played a significant role in overcoming
the political crisis and helping the parties to engage in
dialogue to resolve their differences.
Currently, the situation is largely stable in GuineaBissau. Nonetheless, the country faces challenges in its
efforts to improve economic and social development,
to combat drug trafficking and to make progress on the
political process. China calls on international donors
and partners in multilateral and bilateral cooperation
to continue to support Guinea-Bissau and to build its
capacity to improve the lives of the population. We hope
that the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Guinea-Bissau country team, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and others will provide targeted
assistance to Guinea-Bissau based on the country’s
actual needs.
China has always supported African countries
in their efforts to find African solutions to African
problems. We call on all parties in Guinea-Bissau to
work in the long-term interests of the country by finding
consensus and by using dialogue and consultation
to overcome differences, seeking the stability and
development of the country and striving to improve
the lives of the population. China has worked together
20/24

30/08/2018

with the international community, including ECOWAS,
to promote dialogue and communication among the
different parties in the country and to maintain stability
and sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau and
West Africa as a whole. That can play a positive role.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
We are pleased to see the Government under new
consensus Prime Minister Gomes, whom we welcome
today, now working towards legislative elections on
18 November. Holding free, fair, credible and transparent
legislative elections in 2018, in accordance with the
Constitution and national laws and commitments,
is critical.
Discussions on a stability pact, flowing from the
Conakry Agreement, have also started the process of
reflection on longer-term reform to the security sector,
justice, administration and the Constitution. These
will help Guinea-Bissau to achieve political stability
and sustainable peace over the longer term. As our
civil society briefer made clear, an inclusive approach,
particularly including women, will be vital.
The United Kingdom is grateful to the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS) for its work in the country,
realigning its work to its revised mandate. In particular,
we welcome the support of UNIOGBIS for legislative
elections and political dialogue.
With regard to sanctions, we are satisfied that
targeted sanctions are having the intended impact,
limiting the influence of those under sanctions to have
a disruptive impact on the Conakry Agreement and
providing a disincentive to military entry to politics.
The United Kingdom supports the scheduled review
of European Union and United Nations sanctions in
summer 2019, after the presidential elections.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Prime Minister of GuineaBissau.
Mr. Gomes (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French):
Today’s consideration of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/771) on developments in my country and the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) gives me the
opportunity to thank the Council for the special and
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

sustained attention that it has focused on my country
over the past two decades.
Allow me to take this opportunity to also express
our deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report and for his continued efforts to
help ensure peace and political stability in our country.
I thank his Special Representative, Ambassador José
Viegas Filho, for introducing the report and thank him
and his entire team in Bissau for the remarkable work
they are doing.
I would also like to express our gratitude to
the members and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Mauro Vieira, who recently visited
Guinea-Bissau. This was his second visit, which
highlights his personal interest in and commitment to
stability and progress in our country. We thank him
for his encouraging briefing and greatly appreciate
his objective and confident view of our country. We
also thank Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau, for the work he
carried out with total objectivity.
Six months ago, the Security Council engaged in
timely and serious consideration about what could or
should happen in Guinea-Bissau, given the numerous
internal contradictions and the persistence of a political
impasse that seemed insurmountable. As the Council
knows, the Conakry Agreement, which was to serve
as a road map and mark the way out of the crisis, has
been difficult to implement, in particular because of
the differing, even contradictory, interpretations that
have hampered it. As a result, its validity and binding
character were called into question beginning the
day following its signature, on 14 October 2016, in
the capital of the Republic of Guinea, by some of the
participants in the negotiations conducted under the
auspices of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) mediator, the President of the
Republic of Guinea, Mr. Alpha Condé.
I will not rehash the many ups and downs of GuineaBissau’s recent political history, since the successive
reports that have been submited to the Security
Council in recent years make ample mention of them.
I would rather, if I may, dwell on the organization of
the legislative elections that are due to take place on
18 November, that is to say, in less than three months.

S/PV. 8337

A new hope was born in Guinea Bissau following
the Lomé agreement of 14 April, thanks to the fruitful
impetus of the ECOWAS member countries, whose
tireless support and active solidarity I should like to
salute here and now. In that regard, I am pleased to
highlight the leading and decisive role played by all the
Heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States, and thank them for their understanding
and for having always been at our side in the search for a
consensual and lasting solution to the political crisis in
Guinea-Bissau. In particular, I thank Mr. Alpha Condé,
President of the Republic of Guinea, and Mr. Faure
Gnassingbé, President of the Republic of Togo, for
their invaluable and fraternal support in their capacity,
respectively, as mediator and outgoing Chair of our
subregional organization.
Indeed, thanks in particular to the persistent efforts
of ECOWAS and the good will of political parties,
civil society and other important actors in Guinea
Bissau, the political crisis, which had raged practically
uninterrupted since 2014 and made it difficult for
Parliament in particular to function fully found a
happy outcome, thereby enabling the appointment by
the President of the Republic, Mr. José Mário Vaz, of a
consensus Prime Minister, whose primary responsibility
is to create the necessary conditions for the holding of
legislative elections on the scheduled date.
The inclusive Government that I have the honour to
lead took office on 26 April. A calendar had already been
adopted two months prior to that date. Nevertheless,
the Government was able to catch up in the process of
organizing elections without cutting any corners.
It is not unusual, after such a long period of crisis
in a country as fragile as ours, for it to be difficult and
even laborious to quickly restore a climate of trust
between political parties and other protagonists in
national life. One of our major concerns since we set
about carrying out the task entrusted to us has always
been to prioritize dialogue. We have decided, whenever
possible, to take no major decisions that commit
the parties represented in our Government without
consulting with them first. Let me stress that ours is
a consensus-based and inclusive Government. Indeed,
in our current context, it is not advisable to adopt
unilateral acts that could upset the balance that we are
still trying to establish and that might have a negative
impact on the electoral process and, ultimately, on the
organization and the success of the elections.

18-2718021/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

It is true that the holding of elections is essential to
political stability in Guinea-Bissau. However, it is also
true that Guinea-Bissau has experienced successive
political crises for more than two decades, despite its
long-standing tradition of success in organizing five
different rounds of elections since the establishment
of a multiparty political system in the country.
In other words, it is entirely legitimate to
question the real sources of political instability
in my country, which arise on a recurring basis.
The correct answers to those questions will lead us to
a diagnosis that is likely to provide strategies for all
stakeholders to follow in the current crisis with a view
to its definitive resolution.
The recurring political crises in Guinea-Bissau
involve a number of factors, including the following
elements. The collapse of State institutions following
the failure of the economic development of our national
post-independence project has had a considerable impact
on shaping the political crises that we have witnessed
to date. That widespread situation is characterized by
social and political malaise and has engendered classic
survival strategies across all fields to access the fragile
State structures of Guinea-Bissau, including enormous
vulnerability to transnational and organized crime.
As a result of those crises, the gaps among social
groups are growing. Individuals who should in principle
make up the elites within the State institutions are instead
obliged to be part of an everyone-for-themselves system.
That approach to socioeconomic survival is encouraged
by some who exploit the institutions by monopolizing
them rather than by serving the State. Therefore,
we have for years seen a succession of progressive
monopolization processes by individuals and groups of
individuals, most often organized into political parties.
Those political entities end up evolving only around
projects of pure and simple predation on our meagre
national income. As these resources dwindle, the more
fiercely the battles rage among actors who seek to take
advantage of the rare sources of financing, which are
the ministries, independent funds, State enterprises
and projects financed by donors.
While it is true that such political struggles over
various sources of State income exist everywhere, we
must point out that they have become exacerbated in
my country by the following factors: the collapse of an
entire system regulating access to State institutions; the
total or partial loss of legal and regulatory mechanisms
that regulate access to institutional posts; the total or
partial absence of rules protecting different professions
22/24

30/08/2018

within State institutions; the loss of the tradition of
merit-based promotion, and the collapse of the principle
of organization according to which each post must
correspond to a well-defined task.
The context of such structural State failure is
exacerbated by a Constitution that is not harmonious
or sufficiently clear, which makes political governance
even more difficult. The Constitution, which should
be nothing more than a basic law of provisory political
compromise and which was drafted for that purpose
at a specific time more than 30 years ago, remains
unchanged in its most important aspects, including the
distribution of powers between the two heads of the
executive branch, namely, the Prime Minister and the
President of the Republic.
One of the consequences of the failure of the
national project of the post-independence period, with
its range of individual and collective disappointments,
was the withdrawal of different social and ethnic
groups. That has only reinforced the idea that it is
everyone for themselves in the management of the State
of Guinea-Bissau. As a result, crises arise one after
another and resemble each other. That is why the State
must be rebuilt through reform of the defence, security
and justice sectors and the whole range of institutions
allowing a return to regulation, which would facilitate
competition and make it harder to wage war. It would
also stimulate further growth through investment,
creating more income to distribute and therefore fewer
political parties trying to prey on public funds.
Once that vision shared by the Government and
the international community has been consolidated,
we could negotiate the restructuring of our cooperation
and the coordination of aid. All cooperation agencies
in the country would be reconfigured with a view to
supporting the country in its reforms once they have
been prescribed and perhaps even the subject of a
round table.
Such an approach could be launched immediately
after the legislative elections and allow us to respond
appropriately to the current and legitimate questions
that are being posed. For example, is the presence of
UNIOGBIS still useful in Guinea-Bissau after more
than 20 years? What about the presence of the ECOWAS
mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB)? In our opinion,
it is necessary to strengthen the international presence
while reshaping it in response to the needs of the reform
and rebuilding of the State. We believe that cooperation
between the United Nations and the Government
18-27180

30/08/2018

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

following the legislative elections should be based on the
principle of strengthening the Government’s capacity
to carry out reform. With regard to the presence of
ECOMIB, it would be desirable for it to be able to carry
out on the ground the additional mission of supporting
us more closely in the reform process in general and in
particular in the defence and security sectors.
If all the measures that I have just cited are to
succeed, Guineans must come to an agreement among
themselves before the elections. It is in that spirit that
I proposed to the political parties represented in our
Parliament the adoption of a stability pact, the draft
of which is still the subject of discussions, which I
personally led on 20 August. Those consultations will
be broadened to take into account the point of view and
contribution of civil society and all those who are willing
to participate in improving its content and promoting
its adoption. We are convinced that the stability pact,
once adopted with the shared support and commitment
of all, will contribute greatly to lifting spirits and to
forging a feeling of national unity of action at all levels
in the judicious, effective and responsible management
of the destiny of our people.
The free, transparent and credible elections sought
by all can happen in Guinea-Bissau only if we ensure
in advance the involvement of all, without exception, in
choosing the method and specific technical conditions
that will allow them to take place. A reliable electoral
census, undertaken in full transparency, under the
conditions stipulated by the electoral law and without
eliciting suspicions of manipulation or fraud, is a sine
qua non condition for success. That is the bet that
we have made, and it is certainly the path that the
Government as a whole has chosen to follow. That is
why I took the time to recall the negotiation among the
political parties regarding a well-defined process that
has proved to be the best suited to the electoral census.
The organization of elections at the national level
is never an easy task, even for the richest countries,
where the democratic system is firmly and sufficiently
anchored in their values. In the case of our country,
Guinea-Bissau, I must say that the difficulties that we
face are still numerous, but they are not insurmountable.
Certain aspects related to the agreed choice that we
have made with regard to the electoral census and to
the printing of voting cards are described in the report
under consideration. In that regard, I would like to
remove all ambiguity and to affirm that we are sparing
no effort to ensure the holding of legislative elections
in our country on the scheduled date of 18 November.

S/PV. 8337

That said, I again call on the international
community to keep its promises and, above all,
to honour its pledges because at the moment the
international community is not contributing a penny to
preparing and, ultimately, to holding the census that is
due to start. Currently, only the Government, with its
meagre resources, is dealing with that very burdensome
task for the State budget. That is the mandate that I
have received, and it is a responsibility that I, as Prime
Minister, intend to fully assume, with the support of all
members of the Government.
Given the delivery schedules for the biometric
registration kits that we ordered from abroad, and which
we paid for through our own funds on deposit with the
United Nations Development Programme, and in order
to be able to meet, as far as possible, all the stages of the
electoral process, we appealed to brotherly and friendly
countries, such as Timor-Leste, Nigeria, Mali, Angola
and Cabo Verde, to provide us on a temporary basis
with some of the equipment for voter registration at
their disposal, which will allow us, with the goodwill of
all political actors of our country, to initiate operations
in the coming days and to anticipate the identification
and full registration of voters throughout the national
territory. Allow me to express our deep gratitude to all
those countries for their great support and solidarity.
Ultimately, we will make use of the kits provided
by Timor-Leste and Nigeria to address the electoral
census arrangement, which we have negotiated with the
political parties.
Our Government has made an exceptional effort to
contribute to the financing of the legislative elections,
the organization of which requires considerable funds
that, unfortunately, we alone are not able to ensure.
There is currently a significant financial gap that needs
to be urgently filled. That is why we have sought the
help of our development partners and the international
community in general. In that regard, I take this
opportunity to very warmly thank all countries and
institutions, including the ECOWAS Commission and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union in
particular, which have been willing to help to ensure
the availability of the necessary funds in the form of
pledges that have yet to be disbursed to us. I would
also like to express our gratitude to the Government of
Portugal, which, as in previous elections, has provided
us with a significant amount of materials.
Admittedly, the organization of the legislative
elections in Guinea-Bissau on 18 November is not
an end in itself. However, it is clearly a decisive step

18-2718023/24

S/PV.8337

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

towards restoring political stability in our country,
consolidating the gains of democracy and strengthening
the rule of law. Over the past two decades, we have
faced difficulties of all kinds. However, we hope that
a national surge will emerge. I am convinced that a
better awareness of the real issues — in particular, the
ongoing pursuit of the improved social well-being of
our people — is possible in our country. We have every
reason to assert that our people — the people of Guinea
Bissau, who are a peaceful, hospitable and noble
people — are ready to demonstrate once again their
civic and political maturity and their commitment to
further working, alongside other peoples of the world,
to build a more just, peaceful, secure and prosperous
world for all.
At the beginning of my remarks, I said that two
decades ago — to be more precise, in June 1998, the
date of the outbreak of an armed conflict that proved
to be devastating and whose consequences we still
suffer today — the situation in Guinea-Bissau has
been on the agenda of the Security Council. Was it
not the Secretary-General of that time — the sorelymissed Kofi Annan, an illustrious son of Ghana, his
native country, and of Africa, where he was raised, a
citizen emeritus committed to the world, and to whose
memory and unforgettable work I respectfully pay
tribute — who recommended to the Security Council
the establishment of an effective political structure in
Guinea-Bissau in 1999?
Twenty years later, where are we? The question
indeed deserves to be asked and calls for reflection.
In that regard, I am pleased that the Secretary-General
has indicated in his report that he intends to make
recommendations to the Security Council on a new
configuration of UNIOGBIS, which no doubt will better
meet our common desire to achieve greater efficiency
and further results, including by rationalizing resources
and focusing on targeted actions that can have an
impact immediately, or at least in the short term. I am
thinking in particular but not only about strengthening
the rule of law, protecting fundamental freedoms,
matters related to the existence and functioning of
an accessible, effective and fair justice system, the
overarching issue of gender, the increased participation
of women in society in general, and in particular their
rightful place in all political and economic areas, and
the effective exercise of power, as noted by Ms. Tavares
Pinto in her most edifying briefing. We are, in any case,
ready to participate actively in such consideration.
24/24

30/08/2018

The crisis situation in Guinea-Bissau is not
inevitable. We have known periods of great stability,
during which most of our efforts were focused on
the problems of development and creating better
living conditions for our people. Our country has
many strengths for building a better future for its
population and for providing genuine opportunities
for the education and flourishing of its young people
in particular.
The citizens of Guinea-Bissau, our countrymen, are
not bellicose people. On the contrary, we are a united
and peaceful people. In the recent past, our soldiers
have participated, honourably in United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Guinea-Bissau served on the
Security Council in 1996 and 1997 and assumed the
presidency 22 years ago this month. At that time — that
is to say, at a time when our country recorded notable
economic growth and showed promising development
indices — no one would have imagined that, two
decades later, we would be here to consider how to
unite our energies and resources in order to rebuild a
State that many years squandered in political conflict
have weakened to the point of failure. As we have seen
elsewhere, especially in Africa, that is no easy task,
but for our part we are firmly resolved to succeed in
turning the situation around so that our country can
assume its rightful place among the community of
nations. It is that rightful place — that of a dignified
and respectable country conscious of its national and
international obligations — that we wish to rediscover
and restore within the international community.
I conclude by vigorously reaffirming that
the situation prevailing in Guinea-Bissau is not
irredeemable; it is within our power to change course.
Not only do we have the ability, but we, the citizens
of Guinea-Bissau, ultimately bear the responsibility
to do so. Such is the new path we wish to blaze — a
course that will allow us to renew the institutions of our
Republic, crucially through the transparent holding of
free and credible legislative elections on 18 November.
This path towards a stable Guinea-Bissau will allow us
to build peace, democracy, social justice and respect
for human rights, and thereby a hopeful and prosperous
future for our country and its population.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
18-27180
