S/PV.7060

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7060th meeting

Friday, 15 November 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laasel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Identical letters dated 21 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Kenya to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/624)

13-56623 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1356623*

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

The President (spoke in Chinese): There were
7 votes in favour, none against and 8 abstentions. The
draft resolution has not been adopted, having failed to
obtain the required number of votes.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the vote.

Peace and security in Africa
Identical letters dated 21 October 2013 from
the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council (S/2013/624)

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): The
voting that was just concluded fills us with desolation,
and I would like to explain our abstention, which in and
of itself is a source of great sadness for us.

The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Burundi,
Gabon, Ghana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Namibia, Senegal and Uganda to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/660, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Azerbaijan, Burundi, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Namibia, Rwanda, Senegal, Togo and Uganda.
I wish to draw the attention of members to document
S/2013/624, which contains identical letters dated
21 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Kenya to the United Nations, addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Azerbaijan, China, Morocco, Pakistan, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Togo
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Argentina,
Australia,
France,
Guatemala,
Luxembourg, Republic of Korea, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America

2/16

15/11/2013

There were a number of reasons for it. First, our
delegation has dedicated both time and effort in order
to promote more constructive interaction between
the International Criminal Court and the Security
Council. We had believed that both bodies were
multilateral — one legal, the other political — united
by their mission to prevent conflict, fight impunity
and demand accountability for perpetrators of mass
atrocities. The draft text that was put to the vote today
does not contribute to such constructive interaction.
Instead, it erects a barrier of distrust between the two
bodies that is harmful to both and to the community of
nations in general.
Secondly, the submission by some countries of
a draft resolution for the Council’s consideration in
the full knowledge that it would not be adopted runs
counter to our vocation to promote consensus and unity
within the Council. In this instance, the contrary was
achieved. The vote put on display a divided Council
when there was neither justification nor need to do so.
Thirdly, and for that very reason, this morning’s
exercise has the singular attribute of creating nothing
but losers. No country or group of countries has
benefitted; all of us have lost something. In our view, the
voting was detrimental to the African Union, which has
seen its proposal rejected; to the International Criminal
Court, whose aspiration to universal membership
is under assault; and to the Security Council, which,
as I said, finds itself divided. We were all adversely
affected.
Fourthly, the considerable progress recently
achieved in building a truly fruitful partnership between
the Security Council and the African Union has been
compromised, without any of the parties having sought
such an outcome. The damage may not be irreversible,
but there has clearly been a misunderstanding, and

13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

neither side was able to reverse the regrettable outcome,
which was foreseeable to all.
Fifthly and perhaps most importantly, achieving
peace and security, on the one hand, and justice, on the
other, frequently raises dilemmas in the short term. We
can all agree that these concepts go hand in hand to the
extent that, if there is to be peace, justice is needed, and
justice can be attained only in situations of peace. But
sometimes we sacrifice justice to achieve peace, and the
threshold of how to resolve this dilemma is different in
each of our countries. We understand the reasons being
put forth with the best of intentions by those countries
that have invoked article 16 of the Rome Statute for the
situation that is the object of the draft resolution, and
we trust that those countries will also understand why
some of us do not share their reasoning.
That brings me to my last point. It has been
insinuated that failure to vote in favour of the draft
resolution is somehow an expression of ill will towards
the African Union and its member States. My delegation
most categorically rejects such a suggestion. From our
national vantage point, we frankly find it offensive,
given our long and proven solidarity with all brotherly
developing countries in multiple forums and numerous
cases, as well as our deployment in some African
countries of Guatemalan military observers and troops.
Our principled position regarding the draft resolution
should in no circumstances be confused with contempt
for those who proposed it.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg is both a State party to the Rome Statute
that has strongly supported the International Criminal
Court (ICC) since its establishment, and a longstanding partner of Africa. We recognize and respect
Africa’s commitment to the fight against impunity,
which is illustrated by the fact that 34 African States are
today parties to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
Two weeks ago, members of the Security Council
met with the Contact Group of the African Union to
discuss the latter’s request for a stay of proceedings
against the President and Deputy President of Kenya.
This dialogue was an important opportunity for the
Council to hear the concerns of the African Union
and Kenya, a State party to the Rome Statute. We take
these concerns very seriously, and we said at that time
that we were eager to find solutions of benefit to all
stakeholders. We reiterate that position now.

S/PV.7060

Unfortunately, we did not have an opportunity to
do so. While differences of opinion within the Security
Council continued, a vote was cast. We did not support
the draft resolution asking the International Criminal
Court to suspend the investigation and prosecution
of President Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto for
a period of 12 months, under article 16 of the Rome
Statute. There were two reasons for this. First, resort
to article 16 was not necessary because there are other
resources available to address the concerns of Kenya
and the African Union. Secondly, article 16 is, in our
opinion, not applicable in this case.
First, there are indeed other means available to
address the legitimate concerns of Kenya that its elected
leaders should be allowed to conduct the affairs of their
country, despite their trial before the International
Criminal Court.
The first method available is that of cooperation
with the Court. At the request of President Kenyatta’s
defence team, the Court decided on 31 October to
postpone by three months the onset of the President’s
trial. In addition, the Court has already taken the
necessary steps to arrange the two trials so that at any
time either the President or the Deputy President will
be fully available to manage the affairs of Kenya. Other
defence motions currently await a decision of the Court.
This shows that the ICC takes the concerns of Kenyan
leaders into account.
The second way is that of resort to the Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute. At the request of
the African Union, the twelfth session of the Assembly,
which begins in five days in The Hague, shall include a
special segment on charges against Heads of State and
Government. The Assembly is the appropriate forum to
consider amendments to the Court’s rules of procedure
and evidence addressing the concerns of Kenyan
leaders. Kenya and other States parties are already
engaged in this process with the aim of achieving
tangible results in The Hague.
Secondly, we have come to the conclusion that
article 16 of the Rome Statute is not applicable in the
case before the Council. Article 16 of the Rome Statute
gives the Security Council the authority to request
the ICC to suspend investigation or prosecution for
12 months, through a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. The reference
to Chapter VII means that the Security Council must
assume the existence of a threat to peace due to the

13-566233/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

very fact of the proceedings under way in the ICC. We
understand the challenges Kenya must deal with. We
recognize the real value of the efforts and sacrifices
that Kenya has agreed to in order to help maintain
regional peace and security, particularly in Somalia
and in combating terrorism. But in our view, pursuing
the suit in the ICC against the President and Deputy
President of Kenya does not of itself create a threat to
regional or indeed international peace and security.
We remain willing to continue our dialogue in order
to respond to the legitimate concerns of Kenya and the
African Union. Next week’s session of the Assembly of
the States Parties to the Rome Statute provides for that
possibility.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
before us because, as a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, we understand that
we are dealing with a court of justice established in order
to help eliminate impunity, and that is complementary
to and not a replacement for the responsibility of every
State — a responsibility that cannot be renounced — to
ensure that justice, truth and memory are served in the
face of atrocious crimes. Those are the central pillars of
Argentina’s policy of promoting, protecting, defending
and guaranteeing human rights.
We also abstained having taken into account the
fact that, in complying fully with the Statute of the
Court, it is the responsibility of the Security Council
to analyse the subject at hand in strict interpretation of
article 16 of the Statute. That means understanding that
suspending a trial can be necessary in order to preserve
international peace and security while not implying
a ruling on the substance of a case under the Court’s
consideration. We abstained, moreover, because on a
number of occasions we have shared our frustration
and that of others who see the Security Council as a
body that is once again helping to promote the law of
the jungle. As the President of Argentina has said, if
multilateralism is to be genuinely equitable, compliance
with United Nations resolutions is required of weak
countries and strong, small countries and large.
We also abstained because we recognize the
legitimacy of the claim of those of us that have
voluntarily subjected ourselves to the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court by becoming a party to it,
and we see that once again our destinies and the need for
true justice are tied to the decisions of political bodies
such as the Security Council. That is why Argentina
4/16

15/11/2013

hopes for the universal participation of all Member
States in the Court and that those who defend the fight
against impunity will reflect that in a full commitment
to ratifying the Statute of the Court.
Argentina appreciates the presentation of the
African Union Contact Group of Ministers on Kenya’s
understandable concerns and the reasons given for
not supporting the draft resolution. Argentina has
heard them and recognizes the decision of the Kenyan
leadership to cooperate with the Court and assume its
responsibility as a State party to take the route of going
to trial, which would enable a coherent response to
Kenya’s concerns.
At the moment, the working group on amendments
of the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
is focusing on negotiating amendments to the Court’s
rules of procedure. Argentina is firmly committed to
that process, and it is encouraging that we have been
working closely with Kenya and other African countries.
By historical consciousness and collective fate, we are
of the South and we therefor favour dialogue and the
search for ways to overcome and avoid dead ends. The
people and Government of the nation of Argentina, as
our former President Kirchner said, are the children of
the mothers and grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo,
and that is why we understand that all victims have the
right not to be forgotten or treated with indifference,
including those in Kenya in 2007. They all deserve
justice, truth, reparations and a guarantee that what
happened will not happen again.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Argentina’s firm
support for the International Criminal Court, and we
will continue to focus our efforts on the noble task of
its universalization.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I am taking the
floor to explain Pakistan’s vote. Pakistan is not a
signatory to the Rome Statute and thus not a member of
the International Criminal Court (ICC). However, we
recognize the rights and obligations of the States that
are members of the ICC.
Pakistan voted in favour of the draft resolution
before us today for the following reasons. The African
Union as a whole, and unanimously, has repeatedly
asked the Security Council to defer the cases against
Kenya’s President and Deputy President, in accordance
with article 16 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, for a period of one year. The African
Union has made a determination that the proceedings

13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

of the ICC may pose a threat to the efforts to promote
peace and national healing and reconciliation in Kenya.
It has further determined that Kenya is a front-line State
in the fight against terrorism at the regional, continental
and international levels, as was demonstrated by the
terrorist attacks in Nairobi in September, and that the
ICC proceedings against the President and Deputy
President of Kenya will distract and prevent them from
fulfilling their constitutional responsibilities, including
the oversight of national and regional security affairs.
That request was made on sound and solid strategic
political and legal grounds. Its logic is compelling.
In making that request, the Government of Kenya
and the African Union have been fully conscious of the
complexities of the case and its repercussions for peace
and security in the region. The African Union is a close
partner of the Security Council in the maintenance of
regional and international peace and security. Almost
two-thirds of the issues on the Council’s agenda relate
to Africa. In addressing those issues, the support
and involvement of the African Union and Africa’s
subregional organizations are crucial. The African
Union has actively cooperated with the international
community, the United Nations and the ICC to end
impunity and administer international criminal justice.
In all the eight cases before the ICC, the African Union
has provided critical assistance to the Court.
The African Union has also reached out to the
Security Council and engaged it. We appreciated the
detailed briefings to the Council from the ministerial
delegation led by the Ethiopian Minister for Foreign
Affairs on 31 October. The group drew the Council’s
attention to the peace and security challenges in the Horn
of Africa. The members of the Council are unanimous
in recognizing the crucial role being played by Kenya
in countering the terrorist threat in the region and in
promoting peace and stability in Somalia. We have
a shared desire to further strengthen the cooperation
between the African Union and the Security Council.
The proceedings of the International Criminal
Court in the Kenyan case illustrate a tension between
demands for justice by international courts and respect
for democratic choice for the people of Kenya. That
is a new situation; therefore, there should be a new
solution that addresses that genuine political and legal
predicament.
From the strictly legal standpoint, the principle
of complementarity is important. The International

S/PV.7060

Criminal Court is a court of last resort. The primacy
of national jurisdiction needs to be respected. The legal
norms of immunity have further complicated the case.
The core legal argument is thus the functionality of the
offices of the elected President and Deputy President of
Kenya. Demands for criminal justice and international
prosecutions should help, not hinder, efforts undertaken
to create a stable order, reconciliation and sustainable
peace.
A provision is already available in article 16 of the
Rome Statute for the deferral of the case for a year and
its renewal. That article can be justifiably invoked to
reconcile the demands of justice and the requirements
for peace and stability in the region. The considerations
that enabled the Court to postpone by four months the
case of the Kenyan President, primarily on the grounds
of the functionality of his office, could also provide for
a longer deferral, as requested by Kenya.
In the light of all this, we supported the draft
resolution on the request for the deferral of the Kenyan
case. The draft resolution reaffirms the commitment
of the case to end impunity and highlights various
developments, including the cooperation of Kenya with
the International Criminal Court during the past five
years. While the draft resolution could not be adopted,
we hope that the dialogue between the Council and the
African Union will continue in order to find a pragmatic
solution acceptable to everyone. That would be in the
best interests of the Council, the African Union and the
Court.
We voted in favour of the draft resolution to express
our strong solidarity with the African Union and Kenya
on political and legal grounds.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We supported the draft resolution. We regret
that the position of Security Council member States
on the matter was divided and that the Council was
unable to adopt the proposed decision. We feel that
the African countries presented very compelling
arguments. Indeed, at such a critical time for Kenya,
when the military contingent of that country is playing
a key role in combating terrorism in Somalia, and when
Kenya itself has become a target for terrorist attacks,
the democratically elected President and Deputy
President of that country should be able to remain in
their country and resolve the pressing tasks faced by
their Government.

13-566235/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

We would not wish to see events unfold in such a
way that insufficient attention were paid to the African
continent by some members of the Council, which in
turn could lead to the appearance of yet another hotbed
of instability in Africa.
The request of the African States does not
presuppose any sort of circumvention or violation of
the Rome Statute or undermine its integrity. We do not
see any attempt here to pit African countries against the
International Criminal Court. This is simply a matter of
the sound application of one of the norms of the Statute,
namely, article 16, which was the very reason for that
article’s establishment in the first place. In our view,
its application would ultimately enhance the authority
of the system of international justice among African
countries, and demonstrate the system’s maturity and
readiness to address complex and ambiguous situations
responsively.
In our view, the root causes of the situation we
encountered today reside, inter alia, in systemic problems
that derive from the interpretation and application of
the Statute, as we have repeatedly stressed. First and
foremost, we refer to the interrelationship between its
provisions and the standards for the immunity of high
Government officials.
To conclude, I would like to underscore the
commitment of my country to combating impunity with
respect to the gravest violations of international law.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Security
Council members held a very constructive dialogue
with the high-level Contact Group of the African Union
last month. We had hoped that that dialogue would
be the start of a discussion. We listened carefully
and respectfully to the African Union’s concerns. We
fully understand the desire to allow the President and
Deputy President of Kenya to fulfil their constitutional
responsibilities. We are engaged and prepared to
address those concerns. But there is a right place to
do that, and that place is at the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and the Assembly of States Parties, not
here in the Security Council.
The Assembly of States Parties meets in five days’
time. A dedicated segment will be devoted to addressing
the African Union’s concerns. Preparatory work is
already under way and a number of amendments have
already been submitted, including one by the United
Kingdom on presence through video technology. The
Court itself has taken a number of decision that help

6/16

15/11/2013

to mitigate the African Union’s concerns, including
staggering the proceedings and excusing presence in
exceptional circumstances. On 31 October, the start date
of President Kenyatta’s trial was put back, for the third
time, to February 2014. The Court rightly takes such
decisions independently, on the basis of applications
made by the defendants. Those developments
demonstrate a constructive, creative and legally proper
response to the concerns raised.
The ICC, by design, operates in and around conflict
situations where there is a threat to peace and stability.
It was established as a court of last resort, with the
strong support of African States, to deal with such
situations. Of the eight situations before the Court, five
were initiated at the request of African States parties.
Nobody, least of all the United Kingdom, underestimates
the gravity of the security challenges in the Horn of
Africa, but the question before the Council today was
whether or not continuing with the ICC proceedings
constituted in itself a threat to international peace and
security. In our view, it does not. We therefore do not
consider that the criteria for deferral under article 16 of
the Rome Statute are met, and we therefore abstained in
the voting on the draft resolution.
This assessment in no way changes the United
Kingdom’s commitment to peace and security in the
Horn of Arica and across the continent. We have a longstanding and deep relationship with Kenya. My Prime
Minister is personally engaged in supporting African
efforts to bring greater peace and stability to a region
that has been blighted by violent extremism for too
long. The United Nations is supporting over 100,000
peacekeepers in Africa. Just this week, the Security
Council authorized an increase of over 4,000 troops for
the African Union Mission in Somalia.
We are disappointed that the draft resolution was
unnecessarily put to a vote in a way that highlights
disagreements within the Council shortly before a
meeting of the States parties, the outcome of which we
hope will be to reduce those disagreements. Despite
that, the United Kingdom will continue to engage
through the Assembly of States Parties in a manner
as constructive and helpful as possible with a view to
addressing the concerns of the African Union, and we
encourage others to do likewise.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that we were drawn today into a vote whose
outcome was known in advance. We regret it all the
more so because it was unnecessary.
13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

The Security Council met with the Contact Group
of the African Union, and that exchange enabled us to
reach an agreement on principle with respect to Kenya’s
role in ensuring regional stability and on the need to
find common solutions to the legitimate concerns of
the African Union with a view to allowing President
Kenyatta to fulfil the obligations entrusted to him by
the Kenyan people following the March 2013 elections.
Our disagreement, therefore, resided not on our
shared goal but on the way to reach it. A majority of
the Council’s member States believed that suspending
the judicial proceedings by involving article 16 of the
Rome Statute was neither applicable nor necessary and
that other solutions were available.
For France, the meeting was a launching point to
define these shared, pragmatic solutions in the spirit of
the customary working relations between the Security
Council and the African Union. Those solutions are
within reach. The Kenyan lawyers themselves have
demonstrated the way by filing procedural motions
at the Court, which recommended various relaxations
of the proceedings and a deferment of the actual case.
The Court itself showed the way by adopting several
decisions taking into account the need for the Kenyan
authorities to shoulder their responsibilities in a process
of alternation that would guarantee that neither the
President nor the Deputy President would ever both be
absent simultaneously from Kenya, as well as deferring
the proceedings for several months and allowing them
to participate only in some parts of the case. The States
parties themselves, in the framework of joint work
with Kenya, showed the way by recommending various
rearrangement of procedures, including using video
teleconferencing.
The meeting of the Assembly of States parties in
the Hague next week will provide an opportunity to
realize these fruitful exchanges. But the choice made
was to move forward hastily, for which we were offered
no explanation. Such haste is useless and fraught with
the risk of an artificial and dangerous confrontation
between the African Union and the Security Council,
which would should like to avert. These are crucial
partners in resolving crises on the African continent.
That is why my country abstained in the voting,
proving that we hope to continue the dialogue as we
move beyond this painful episode.
France is a partner of the African Union in Mali,
Somalia and the Central African Republic. We are
mobilizing together, on the basis of shared values,

S/PV.7060

to help civilians in need. France has lost soldiers in
defending those populations. France is a friendly ally
of Kenya, which is a democratic and respected country.
We understand its concerns and the role it plays in
support of regional stability, in particular in Somalia.
In that spirit, France will continue to work with Kenya
and African Union countries to find solutions to allow
Kenya’s leaders to take up their responsibilities, while
also respecting the integrity of the Rome Statute.
The various proposals put forward by various States,
including Kenya, are on the table of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute, which will meet as
of 20 November. We support the principle. A solution
is always within reach. We must grasp it. We must look
to the future.
Mr. Laasel (Morocco) (spoke in French): We regret
the absence of consensus on the draft resolution before
us, which should have brought us together rather than
divide us. We wish to underscore that the meeting of
the African ministerial delegation with the members
of the Security Council on 31 October allowed for
sincere and frank discussions on this matter. The
ministerial African delegation also had an opportunity
to present the substance and reasoning behind Africa’s
presentation of the draft resolution. We share those
motives.
Kenya has undertaken a number of significant
reforms in recent years, including by relaunching the
process of national reconciliation in 2008, the adoption
in 2010 of a new Constitution, and the establishment of
institutions to protect human rights. These reforms led
to the democratic election of Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta as
President and Mr. William Ruto as Deputy President.
Moreover, Kenya, a target of terrorism in Africa, has
shown untiring commitment to fighting terrorism,
which is an enormous challenge to its stability and that
of East Africa as a whole. The Westgate Mall attack in
Nairobi in September, which caused dozens of deaths,
attests to that.
During consultations on the draft resolution, Africa
openly and constructively committed itself to reaching
a consensus-based document. At this time, we express
our appreciation to the other members of the Council
for their willingness to discuss this matter and for their
efforts to find common ground, but we regret that it
was not possible to achieve a united position on the
draft resolution.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States abstained in the voting because we believe that the

13-566237/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

concerns raised by Kenya regarding the International
Criminal Court (ICC) proceedings against President
Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto are best addressed
within the framework of the Court and its Assembly of
State Parties, and not through a deferral mandated by
the Security Council. This position is consistent with
the view that we shared with the African Union Contact
Group at the Council’s informal interactive dialogue at
the end of October.
Furthermore, the families of the victims of the
2008 post-election violence in Kenya have already
waited more than five years for a judicial weighing of
the evidence to commence. We believe that justice for
the victims of that violence is critical to the country’s
long-term peace and security. It is incumbent on us
all to support accountability for those responsible for
crimes against humanity.
At the same time, we want to emphasize our
deep respect for the people of Kenya. We share their
horror and outrage at the recent Westgate Mall terror
attacks and understand their desire both for effective
governance and for accountability under the law. We
are mindful as well of the importance of those issue
to the States members of the African Union that have
raised similar concerns. We recognize that the situation
the Court is confronting in those cases is a new one.
The ICC has never before had a trial of a defendant who
is also a sitting Head of State or a person who may act
in such a capacity, and who has appeared voluntarily
subject to a summons. Accordingly, we are encouraged
that Kenya is continuing to pursue its concerns through
an ongoing ICC process.
We are also encouraged that the Assembly of States
Parties, which includes the Government of Kenya, is
working to enable trial proceedings to be conducted in
a manner that will not force the defendants to choose
between mounting a vigorous legal defence, on the
one hand, and continuing to do their jobs, on the other.
The Assembly, which under the Rome Statute has
responsibility for overseeing the Court’s administration,
will meet next week and have the chance to engage in
dialogue and consider amendments that could help
address outstanding issues.
Because of our respect for Kenya and the African
Union (AU), and because we believe that the Court
and its Assembly of State Parties are the right venue
for considering the issues that Kenya and some AU
members have raised, we decided to abstain rather

8/16

15/11/2013

than vote against on the draft resolution before us. The
United States and Kenya have been friends and strong
partners for half a century. We value the friendship and
will continue working with the Government and the
people of Kenya on issues of shared concern, including
security against terror, economic development,
environmental protection, the promotion of human
rights and justice. We also continue to recognize the
important role that the ICC can play in achieving
accountability, and are steadfast in our belief that
justice for the innocent victims of the post-election
violence in Kenya is essential to lasting peace.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan is not a
party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). Nevertheless, we strongly believe that the
protection and vindication of rights, as well as insistence
on accountability, contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our decision to vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us today is based
on the following understanding.
First, Kenya and the region in which it is situated
are facing complex security challenges. Kenya is
a front-line State in and one of the key regional
contributors to the fight against international terrorism.
In that connection, the judicial proceedings against the
country’s senior officials would undoubtedly create
serious obstacles to the normal functioning of State
institutions in Kenya and thereby pose a threat to
the ongoing efforts to ensure and promote peace and
stability in the region. Azerbaijan understands the
concerns of Kenya and the African Union, and deems
them legitimate and reasonable.
Secondly, the request for deferral cannot be
considered a measure of impunity. It is important that
the draft resolution recalls the need to fight impunity
and to hold accountable all perpetrators of the 20072008 post-election violence in Kenya.
Thirdly, the Government of Kenya has demonstrated
a strong commitment to fighting impunity and to
complying with its international obligations, including
those deriving from the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, to which Kenya has been a party since
1 June 2005. It should be particularly noted that both
the President and the Deputy President of the Republic
of Kenya have extended full cooperation to the ICC
process.
Fourthly, the Government of Kenya has made
considerable efforts to restore the stability and

13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

security in the country since the 2007 post-election
political crisis. The peaceful and democratic conduct
of the general elections in March is illustrative of the
country’s progress and determination to move forward.
Fifthly, the concept of complementarity is the
cornerstone of the operation of the International
Criminal Court. We believe that Kenya is capable of
investigating the alleged post-election crimes, and we
take note of its ongoing efforts and measures in that
regard.
Azerbaijan voted in favour of the draft resolution
before us today to express its support for the deferral of
the investigation and prosecution against the President
and Deputy President of the Republic of Kenya for a
period of 12 months, in accordance with article 16 of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia deeply regrets
that a vote was called today. It was unnecessary and,
as has been said, we have all lost. We have valued the
dialogue with Kenya and the African Union (AU) on
this very difficult question and believe that further
dialogue was needed. The concerns of Kenya and
the AU were clearly conveyed to the Council by the
African Union ministerial Contact Group. We listened
carefully. There was a genuine willingness on the part
of all Council members to consider those concerns.
Australia certainly understands the security
challenges that Kenya faces. We recognize that
the security situation in East Africa is volatile and
precarious, with serious threats that are flowing across
borders with deadly results. We acknowledge that
President Kenytta and Deputy President Ruto face a
serious challenge in trying to meet their trial obligations
at the same time as devoting their attention to tackling
security threats in their country and the region. But that
challenge must be balanced against the need to preserve
the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
support of international peace and security.
Australia is a staunch supporter of the ICC,
the principles it embodies and the integrity and
independence of the Court, which are central to its
mandate to end impunity for serious international
crimes. We consider that Security Council action under
article 16 of the Rome Statute to defer an investigation
or prosecution should be taken only in exceptional
circumstances when the proceedings themselves
threaten international peace and security and alternative
options have been exhausted. That threshold was not

S/PV.7060

met on this occasion, and therefore we were not able to
support the draft resolution.
In any case, there were real alternatives to pressing
ahead with a divisive vote in the Council on the question
of deferral. The ICC Trial Chamber has already
postponed the start of President Kenyatta’s trial until
5 February 2014, at the request of his defence team.
The Assembly of States Parties will meet next week,
and constructive work is already under way by parties
on proposed amendments to the rules of procedure and
evidence to help address Kenya’s concerns. Australia
will continue to listen closely to African States parties’
views at the Assembly and will adopt a responsive and
flexible approach to any proposal that States parties
bring to the Assembly for its consideration.
Australia is determined to do what it can to ensure
that President Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto
are able to fulfil their constitutional responsibilities.
In turn, we trust that Kenya and other African States,
particularly those with relevant obligations under
the Rome Statute or resolutions of the Council, will
cooperate in full with the ICC to ensure that the
Court can continue to play its role in contributing to
our common objective of deterring the commission
of serious international crimes, which is intrinsic to
achieving peace and security. We are also determined
to continue to work to strengthen the relationship
between the Council and the African Union, as was
cited so well by the observer of the AU in the Council
just a few months ago: “The United Nations needs a
strong African Union, and the African Union needs a
strong United Nations” (S/PV.7015, p. 7).
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Since the issue
of the Kenyan cases at the International Criminal Court
(ICC) was brought to the attention of the Council,
my delegation has had thorough deliberations on the
issue in consultation with other Council members.
Throughout the process, my delegation has been greatly
benefitted by the close cooperation and partnership
rendered by African members in the Council and other
members of the African Group in the United Nations.
The dialogue with the high-level Contact Group of the
African Union (AU) last month, in particular, helped us
to better understand the situation in Kenya as it faces
various security challenges, as well as its efforts to
fight international terrorism and to move ahead with
the national reconciliation process.
We also found the AU’s concern over the issue to
be genuinely legitimate. However, my delegation came

13-566239/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

to reaffirm its conclusion that the Security Council
is not the right venue to deal with this issue, and that
ICC issues had better be addressed in the framework of
the ICC, not least considering the upcoming Assembly
of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC. It is
desirable not to set a precedent of the Security Council’s
involvement in the ICC’s legal process. We believe
that this will be in the best interest of the ICC, of the
Security Council and, eventually, of the whole United
Nations membership. For that reason, my delegation
decided to abstain in the voting.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Togo deeply
regrets that the Security Council was unable to agree
to adopt the draft resolution that was circulated today,
requesting a 12-month deferral of the proceedings
against the President and Deputy President of Kenya,
under article 16 of the Rome Statute, as requested by the
African States. Togo regrets that the Council remained
divided to the end on such a significant request of
capital importance to Africa.
My country nevertheless hopes that this
unfortunate day, on which the Security Council found
itself unable to reach a consensus even on giving the
benefit of the doubt to Africa, will not have a negative
impact on relations between Africa and the Security
Council. For Togo, the ongoing promotion of trust
between the African Union and the Security Council
remains necessary so as to promote and strengthen
peace and security in Africa. The mitigation of crises
and conflicts on the African continent depends on that
very trust, for the growing number of African issues
on the Council’s agenda, which are referred to every
time Africa is discussed in the Chamber, should be no
cause for joy or satisfaction for the Council, much less
for Africa.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Is this the right place to be
today to discuss this issue? Yes, it is. Did we precipitate
this case this year? No. Does Africa seek confrontation?
Not at all; otherwise, we would not be in the Chamber
today. I would ask members to follow my argument.
Terrorism is the most serious threat to international
peace and security. It affects all the people of the world,
without discrimination, from the World Trade Center
in New York to the Westgate shopping mall in Nairobi.
Fortunately, we have countries; we have leaders. We are
committed to the fight against terrorism, and Kenya and
its President and Deputy President are with us. They
are at the forefront of the fight against international

10/16

15/11/2013

terrorism, and we are grateful for their commitment
and determination in the fight against Al-Shabaab
in Somalia — a country where African blood is shed
on behalf of this Council, which is supposed to bear
the primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
In that regard, His Excellency President Uhuru
Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto
should be respected, supported, empowered at this
time — not distracted and undermined. That is why,
after the vote of this morning, Rwanda is expressing
its deep disappointment over what transpired regarding
the request for the deferral of the cases against the
President and Deputy President of Kenya, despite
the proactive efforts of Africa to engage the Security
Council in a legitimate process in the interest of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
That is why this is actually the right place. The
failure to adopt the draft resolution before us today,
which has been endorsed by the countries of the entire
African continent, is a shame; indeed, it is a shame. Let
it be written today in history that the Security Council
failed Kenya and Africa on that issue.
I express my deep gratitude, Mr. President, to
your delegation and country, China, as well as to the
delegations of Azerbaijan, Pakistan and the Russian
Federation for voting in favour of the draft resolution
before the Council, together with the delegations of
Morocco, Togo and Rwanda. Today’s disappointing
vote undermines the principle of the sovereign equality
of States enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
and confirms our long-held view that international
mechanisms are subject to political manipulation and
are used only in situations that suit the interests of some
countries. It also undermines the tremendous efforts of
the Kenyan Government to achieve the reconciliation
of the Kenyan people. In that connection, I wish to
recognize, at this moment, the Speaker of the Senate of
Kenya, who is present among us.
Six months ago, in May, Kenya tried to engage
the Security Council regarding the cases against its
President and Deputy President. I must state that the
Council heard, but did not listen. Yes, the Council did not
listen. Then, on 12 October, African Heads of State and
Government, in an extraordinary session of the African
Union (AU), considered the threat posed by terrorism
in Kenya and in the Horn of Africa. Consequently,
they decided to request the Security Council, through

13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

Kenya, to defer the investigation and prosecution of
President Kenyatta and Deputy President Ruto for 12
months so as to allow them time to deal with the threat
of terrorism.
It is not that, in coming before the Council today,
we have sought confrontation. No, we have not. We
believed that the request was reasonable. We believed
that the request was legitimate, as it was based on the
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In order to ensure that the
Council would take the AU message seriously, our
leaders set up the African Union high-level contact
group on the ICC, which came to New York. It engaged
in an interactive dialogue with Council members and
delivered a message from Africa requesting their
support. Is that a confrontation that the Council would
have wanted to have take place here, today? No, not at
all.
We were therefore hoping that, after extensive
consultations, the Council would express solidarity
with Kenya and with Africa, by negotiating in good
faith and adopting the draft resolution. That did not
happen, as some members of the Council even refused
to negotiate on any single paragraph. We profoundly
regret that.
Our colleagues who did not vote in favour of the
draft resolution have argued — as members have
heard — that the Kenyan situation does not meet the
threshold needed to trigger the application of article
16 of the Rome Statute. They have explained that
article 16 shall be applied only when the investigation
and prosecution could create, or worsen, a situation
threatening international peace and security.
I am here and I am wondering: If a terrorist attack
by members of Al-Shabaab — an Al-Qaida-linked
movement that has killed more than 70 innocent victims
and wounded 200 others — does not meet the threshold
line that other situations have crossed, then which one
would? If a clear and present threat of terrorism against
the Kenyan people, resulting from their determination
and courageous intervention in Somalia, does not meet
the threshold, what other threat can be alleged to do so?
Are we in the wrong place today? No.
May I request that all members of the Council
recall why article 16 of the Rome Statute was proposed
in the Council more than 10 years ago. Let me repeat
that question. May I request that all members of the
Council recall why article 16 of the Rome Statute was

S/PV.7060

proposed, more than 10 years ago. That article was
not proposed by an African State — not at all. It was
proposed by some of the Western Powers present at the
Council table to be applied solely in their interest. In
other words, article 16 was never meant to be used by
an African State or any of the developing countries. It
seems to have been conceived as an additional tool for
the big Powers to protect themselves and protect their
own. Is that not so? That is how it appears here today.
Council members will remember that some
countries that did not vote in favour of the draft
resolution have enacted laws to refuse any cooperation
with the ICC that involves targeting their nationals, to
sanction countries cooperating with the ICC in that
regard, and even to use military means to release any
of their nationals arrested at the request of the ICC. I
hope that all Council members can agree that that is
a far cry from our modest request for a deferral of
12 months — just 12 months.
In that regard, we believe that an equal application
of all of the provisions of the Rome Statute not only
strengthens the ICC but also legitimizes it as a credible
and fair player. Justice becomes so when the vulnerable
and the strong have equal protection. It is unfortunate
that the ICC will continue to lose face and credibility in
the world as long as it continues to be used as a tool for
the big Powers against the developing nations.
We have always been preached to about the values
of democracy and self-determination, but surprisingly,
those who taught us those principles do not believe in
Africa determining its fate at all. Instead, Africa has
been given a bitter pill to swallow, and we have seen
that tendency during the whole process leading up to
the vote we just held.
In the same context, African Heads of State and
Government proposed, in their wisdom, a Kenyan
solution to a Kenyan problem. New York thought
otherwise; no, New York is a beautiful city — the
Council decided otherwise. The Western Powers indeed
had an alternative solution to resolve the Kenyan
concerns, namely, interaction with the Court and with
the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute. Is
this the right place for that? Yes, it is. Is the Council
the right place? Yes, for those that are members it is
also the right place. We do not say that it is not — it
is — but let us come here and interact with the Council.
The Council must hear Africans; hear what the Heads
of State of Africa want; hear what the Kenyans want.

13-5662311/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

On the subject of the Court, let me say that, with
respect to acting too precipitously, we have to be very
careful about what the Council is stating. Let me say
that, after five long years of procedures against Kenyan
leaders, we were surprised that, suddenly, the ICC
was willing to show flexibility on the very day that
the African Contact Group was interacting with the
Council. Whose hand was behind that? Why was it on
that very day? Why did they decide that very day?

15/11/2013

issue related to international peace and security, and
the Security Council cannot abdicate its responsibility
in that matter.

That shows us that, in fact, maybe this is not the right
place to be, that the Africans are not in the right place
to decide this matter, and that we belong elsewhere. But
we do belong here. As members have heard, two-thirds
of our time here in the Security Council is dedicated to
Africa. That is why the Africans came here. So how can
the Council explain to me the fact that, all of a sudden,
the Prosecutor said:

In conclusion, one of the positive outcomes of
the process that led to the vote this morning is the
reaffirmation of African unity and solidarity. Today,
the Chairperson of the African Union is represented
here by the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
whom I recognize, and the representative of the
country concerned, namely, Kenya. I therefore thank
all African members and their friends, and I hope that
we will continue to fight for our rights and for the equal
sovereignty of States and to advance the agenda of
mutual respect among nations. There is something very
special in Rwandan culture that we call agaciro, or our
dignity. Today was a great rendez-vous of agaciro, of
our dignity and of African dignity.

“You know what? Let me give you four months
now. It is okay, you do not need to go and bother
that exclusive club. No. Get out of there.”

The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

No. It cannot work like that. Are we living together in a
global world, in a fraternity? Are we really? I am asking
myself. No, it cannot work and it cannot continue like
this.

The Chinese delegation has just voted in favour of
the Council’s draft resolution on deferring International
Criminal Court (ICC) proceedings against the leaders
of Kenya. We regret that the Council was unable to
adopt the draft resolution.

The Group was also surprised, actually, to learn
that members of the Council were aware of that issue.
Indeed, they asked us about the decision to request a
postponement of the commencement of the case against
the President of Kenya even before the decision was
actually taken. That raises serious questions concerning
the independence of the handling of this case. Yes,
members have forgotten that. They have started to say
that it is not the right place, that this is too precipitous,
that this is a confrontation. Come on. We do not want
confrontation at all. Actually, Kenya is a member of
the ICC. Members saw the Kenyan Deputy President go
there. How can they say that we want confrontation or
that we are too precipitous?
As for the Assembly of States Parties, I would
remind members that the Assembly is composed only
of States parties to the Rome Statute, and that Morocco,
Togo, Rwanda and other members of the Council are
not parties to the Statute and could not participate
in the deliberations concerning the Rome Statute. I
refer here to what the representative of the Russian
Federation was telling us. So why would there be any
amendment to enhance respect for African leaders?
The issue at hand is not simply a legal matter; it is an

12/16

Kenya is a country of major importance in Africa.
In recent years, Kenya has been making steady
efforts to reform its judicial system, promote national
reconciliation, peacefully resolve ethnic conflicts and
gradually restore stability and development. China
would like to express its appreciation for that.
Kenya has long been at the forefront of the fight
against terrorism and has been playing an important
role in maintaining peace and stability in the Horn of
Africa, Eastern Africa and the entire African continent.
Deferring the ICC proceedings against the leaders of
Kenya is not only a matter of concern to Kenya, but also
a matter of concern for the entire African continent. It
is in fact an urgent need in order to maintain regional
peace and stability. It is therefore a matter of common
sense that the international community should help the
Kenyan leaders to focus their attention on discharging
their mandate and to continue their role in maintaining
peace and stability in Kenya and the wider region. in
exercising their jurisdiction, international judicial
institutions should abide by the norms of international
relations, follow the principle of complementarity and

13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

respect the judicial sovereignty, legal traditions and
current needs of the countries concerned.
For some time, members of the Security Council
have held a comprehensive and in-depth discussion with
the African Union and Kenya over deferring the ICC
proceedings against the Kenyan leaders. China believes
that the request of the African countries is reasonable
and well founded on the basis of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Their
objective is to maintain peace, stability and secuirty
in the region and to effectively fight terrorism. They
request that the democratically elected leaders of
Kenya be accorded basic respect in matters of African
peace, security and stability. African countries best
understand their needs.
The Council should therefore heed and positively
respond to the common call of the African Union and
the vast majority of African leaders. China will continue
to support the efforts of Kenya, the African Union and
most African countries to find a real solution to the
issue under consideration.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kamau (Kenya): Africa came to the Security
Council in the belief that the Council was in command
of its own reality and master of its mandate,that the
Rome Statute was fully operable, that article 16 of the
Statute was alive and an actionable piece of legislation
and that the Security Council was capable of executing
its singular mandate and responsibility under that
Article. Africa has learned that, despite the Security
Council’s own recognition of the recent terror attacks
in Nairobi and the terror threats in neighbouring
capitals as threats to international peasce and security,
that recognition counts for little in the Council when
article 16 is under consideration.
Sadly, for some members of the Council, the
heartbreaking loss of lives and scores of shattered bodies
at the Westgate Mall do not meet the unspecified and
imaginary threshold of article 16. In fact, apparently,
the threat to the stability and political management of
a country that would result from a leadership removed
amid a regional war against terror do not meet that
imaginary threshold either.
Africa came to the Council to seek a deferral
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) for
12 months — nothing more and nothing less. We are

S/PV.7060

not here to discuss the cases or the Assembly of States
Parties. That is not the busines of the Council. Africa
is not putting political pressure, as some misguided and
purist activists have claimed. It is the law. Africa wanted
both the spirit and the letter of the law applied — not
a favour or a handout, just the application of the law.
Africa wanted that because we believe that the Rome
Statute belongs to us as much as anybody and that its
application would be without fear or favour. We were
under the impression that the good and global citizenry
of many African States in fighting terror and promoting
international peace and security would resonate and
have meaning in the Council.
We were wrong. The deferral has not been granted.
Africa’s request, through the abstentions by certain
members of the Council, has been voted down. Reason
and the law have been discarded. Fear and distrust have
been allowed to prevail. Africa is disappointed. We
regret that very much.
We take note that some Security Council members
have chosen to tie the denial of the request by Africa to
the paranoid fear of an imaginary and possible future
abuse of article 16 by countries that has nothing to
do with the prevailing matter before the Council, the
pressing terror threats to East Africans and the need
for an adjunct, sustained and uninterrupted leadership.
Such a turn of events in the Chamber is simply sad,
absurd and confounding. It does nothing for building
confidence in or solidarity with the Council, especially
at a time when the usefulness of the Council is under
question.
It would seem that Africa should come to the
Security Council only after taking into account all
possible imaginary circumstances of abuse of the
Statute and other permutations of possible negative
applications that could potentially arise. Only then can
a Member State contemplate an affirmative decision by
the Council on the basis of article 16. Clearly, that is
impossible.
Yet, with anything less, we face accusations of
setting a bad precedent and of breaking seals. Such
accusations come thick and fast, accompanied by the
thinly veiled threat of facing the wrath of the ICC and its
cabal of European Assembly of States Parties members
and their friends. The singling out of some African
Council members for particular criticism and vitriol
has been unfortunate and uncalled for. The deferral
request came from the entire continent. Clearly, to
certain Council members, the supposed fear of setting

13-5662313/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

a precedent or of treading on legal niceties is much
more important than the need to promote international
solidarity, peace and security or helping to maintain
stability in a nation or region under the threat of terror.
Indeed, our understanding is now clear. The
Security Council is no institutional destination for
solving complex and fluid international security and
political problems. For Africa, the message is that
we need stay only within the African family to solve
unusual and complex political problems, working
within the African Union to seek solutions to the
challenges that we face. That is all right with us.
Be that as it may, despite appearances, the Security
Council is as much an institution of Africa as of any
region. For us, it would seem that many members of
the Council are stuck in a time warp. Some members, it
seems, perceive Africa as if it were caught in the reality
of the 1990s and a few, I dare say, as if we were caught
in an even earlier era. One might ask why I say that.
It is because there seems to us little if any confidence
in either Africans or African solutions among some
Council members. There is little trust in our ability to
understand our reality, manage our affairs and act in
the best interest of our people and countries.
Our engagement here has been met by some with
derision, suspicion, impatience and even irritation. At
every turn, the bogeyman of impunity and dictatorship
has been dragged out to devastating effect. That is
wrong, and it is unfair, and it is sad and it is tragic. It is
an indictment on the state of international relations at
the dawn of the twenty-first century.
For Africa, the Rome Statute has failed its first
crucial test in the Council and has done so in spectacular
fashion, in the full glare of the African continent.
The Statute is clearly deeply flawed, inoperable and
inapplicable in the context of the Council. Nevertheless,
and without prejudice to the foregoing, Kenya is grateful
for the recognition given to it and its concerns by all the
members of the African continent and their respective
Heads of State and Government, as well as the African
Union Commission and its leadership. Africa’s
solidarity around this issue has been a watershed; it has
been heartwarming and simply amazing.
Kenya, like the rest of Africa, is also most
appreciative of the support and direction that the deferral
draft resolution has received both from the African
member States of the Security Council — Rwanda,
Morocco and Togo — and from the other four members

14/16

15/11/2013

of the Security Council: Russia, Pakistan, and in
particular Azerbaijan and China in their respective
facilitative roles as President.
There is little doubt that the victims of the 2007
post-election violence deserve justice. But no one
recognizes that more than Kenyans themselves and
no one here should doubt that, or imagine themselves
more concerned than Kenyans and, for that matter, than
Africans for the victims of our mishap in 2007.
In the name of Africa and in the name of Kenyans,
I would like to express my deepest gratitude for the
guidance, camaraderie, solidarity and support that
we have received and enjoyed as a Mission and as a
Government in this effort. And we also thank those
who saw it fit to give us support inside and outside the
Council. Kenya will not forget. Africa will not forget.
For many of us, our business here is done, but the
matter is not closed. Clearly, however, the Council has
removed itself from being part of an amicable solution
and with that it has done irreparable damage to the
Rome Statute and its furtherance in the future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak as the representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union (AU) on a very
vital issue for Africa whose historic significance and
value cannot be overstated. We have indeed been
fortunate that the initiative of African Heads of State
and Government — no matter how disappointing,
as we have seen, the result may have been — has
coincided with your presidency and, prior to that, with
the presidency of Azerbaijan, to which we are equally
indebted. We salute both presidencies, on behalf of our
continent, on whose behalf our leaders speak.
I would like to thank our colleagues on the Security
Council for having strengthened our confidence in the
unity of our great continent and for having demonstrated
the indomitable spirit of the people of Africa in ensuring
that their voice is heard and that their ownership of
their policies and strategies, including for achieving
peace and security, is respected. We have absolutely
no doubt in our mind that the reason why the three
African members of the Security Council stood firm
and remained united under difficult circumstances was
their conviction that what they had was a just cause
and what African leaders were requesting was far from
difficult for the Security Council to meet. The Council

13-56623

15/11/2013

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7060

was simply being asked to discharge its responsibility
under the Charter. It failed to rise to the occasion. It
failed to demonstrate that it takes seriously ownership
by Africa of its present challenges and its future.

power under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. There is no doubt for us in Africa, who live
next door to Kenya, that the situation in Kenya and the
region merits a favourable response from the Council.

Let me reiterate, this is not now a Kenyan matter. It
is an African issue.

At the risk of boring members, because this was
also said by my Minister when he addressed the Council
in the interactive dialogue, the Security Council,
in its press statement issued on 21 September, while
condemning the Westgate terrorist attack in Nairobi,
said:

I would also like to express profound appreciation
to those members of the Security Council that felt that
African Heads of State and Government know what is
best for Africa better than most, and decided to support
us on the request for deferral. At the minimum, those
members of the Council must have concluded that
African Heads of State and Government, some of whom
are the original founders of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), deserve the benefit of the doubt. That is
what has been denied them by the rest of the Council
members, in some of which we had great confidence
indeed that they would contribute to raising the level of
trust between Africa and the Council. The argument that
there are other alternatives cannot be taken as a serious
argument. What Africa has asked is for the Council to
exercise its authority and carry out its responsibilities.
The African case for deferral was made by our
Ministers in the Contact Group when they had the
opportunity a while ago to engage the Security Council
in an interactive dialogue. The African case was
presented by them in a sincere manner and with passion.
That is what one does when one is earnestly committed
to a cause. They tried to convince the Council that this
was not a Kenyan matter but an African one, which has
given rise to a great deal of concern with respect to the
peace, stability and security of Kenya and the region.
Our Ministers emphasized that, given the delicate
situation in the region in connection with the continuing
terrorist threat, the distraction of the attention of the
two Kenyan leaders from their leadership obligation
would represent a grave threat to regional peace and
security.
The position of African leaders is that the
continuation of the ICC process itself constitutes a threat
to the peace and security of the region in Kenya. The
logic is compelling, as the representative of Pakistan
said earlier so eloquently. It cannot be questioned that
African leaders are closer to Kenyan leaders than most
others. No doubt, what Africa was asking was within
the law. Article 16 of the Rome Statute gives authority
to the Security Council to secure deferral of cases under
the ICC remit for a period of 12 months by exercising its

“The members of the Security Council reaffirm
that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security.” (SC/11129)
During times such as these, the Commander-in-Chief
of the Kenya Defence Forces ought to be given support,
rather than distracted by a body whose track record
on African matters has not exactly been the kind that
inspires confidence. The African request could not be
rejected on legitimate grounds. Let us not kid ourselves;
abstention under the circumstances amounts precisely
to that — rejection.
I want to go back and talk a little bit about what I
said earlier with respect to the failure of the Council to
give even the benefit of the doubt to African leaders.
Obviously, what we see here is essentially the question
of trust being the elephant in the kitchen. The lack of
trust in the ability of Africa to strike the proper balance
between security and justice must be suspected to be
the major source of the problem. How else would the
Security Council tell African leaders that their concern
about the peace and security of Kenya and the region
has no legitimate basis? The empirical reality supports
African leaders, and recent developments have in fact
accentuated the concern.
Have African countries been found wanting when
it comes to the question of justice and combating
impunity? If truth be told, although we are not perfect,
our recent performance in that regard makes us second
to none. The fact that we put our money where our
mouth is has been confirmed time and time again.
The AU is not a State-centric organization that allows
sovereignty to be used as a shield for impunity. One of
the solemn obligations of member States is to allow
“the right of the Union to intervene in a member
State pursuant to the decision of the Assembly

13-5662315/16

S/PV.7060

Peace and security in Africa

in respect to grave circumstances, namely, war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity”.
“Africa tolerates impunity” is the mantra of those
who still want to engage Africa as teachers, not as
equals — a throwback to an earlier period that we all
want to forget, but must draw lessons from.
The AU may not be, for obvious reasons, strong
enough to address all the challenges Africa is facing
in ensuring peace and security in the entire continent.
That is why we remain grateful to all those who have
been helping us to make progress in that area. We are
not unmindful of those contributions, including, most
significantly, the contributions of those in the Council
who felt that on the critical question of deferral they
should not be with us. They are wrong, and they have
offended Africa, an Africa that has not only expressed
its commitment to fighting impunity and to fidelity
to constitutionalism, but has demonstrated those
commitments in practice. In other words, for African
leaders not to be trusted — and that is what the decision
of the Security Council amounts to — is a paradox
that perhaps highlights the challenge we still face in
creating effective international cooperation to secure a
peaceful world.
We do not want to be misunderstood here. We do
not claim that there has been no cooperation between
us and that Africa has not benefited from it. It has,
and it is indebted for that. But support, no matter how
important, should not lead to loss of ownership. There
is no doubt that Africa has also shown how much it
is prepared to handle its problems. But it is through
effective partnership that we can thrive. The progress

16/16

15/11/2013

achieved in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan, Mali
and others would not have been happened without that
partnership.
Over the past few weeks, as a continent, we tried
to ask, in a spirit of partnership, that we be understood,
and that the united calls of all African nations be
heeded on a matter of great importance to Africa’s
peace and security. The response we just received is
bound to make Africa draw the logical conclusion as to
how quite a few in the Security Council have difficulty
in seeing Africa exercise ownership of its policies and
strategies for peace and security of the continent. That
does not make anyone hopeful about the future.
It is for African leaders, in their wisdom, to draw
the proper conclusions from this episode, which cannot
be seen as a proud chapter in relations between Africa
and the Security Council — not that we have had
too many proud chapters, anyway. That Rwanda, as
a member of the Council, together with its two other
African brotherly countries, Morocco and Togo, has
spearheaded that effort is indeed another paradox.
But we do not lose hope easily. We will persevere
and our unity is our strength — the strength we want
to use to advance the principles of democracy in
international governance, including in the area of
security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at noon.

13-56623
