S/PV.8005

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8005th meeting

Tuesday, 18 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2017/604)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-21847 (E)
*1721847*

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

that work in partnership with Haiti in the process of
consolidating stability in Haiti.

Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.

A little less than three months before the closure of
MINUSTAH and the transition to a smaller peacekeeping
mission — the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) — Haiti remains on the
path towards stabilization and democratic consolidation.

The situation concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2017/604)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Mexico and Peru to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Guillaume
Dabouis, Head of the Political Section of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/604, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré Braithwaite.
Ms. Honoré Braithwaite: I would like to express
my gratitude to the People’s Republic of China for
convening today’s meeting on Haiti in its capacity as
President of the Security Council.
(spoke in French)
I take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would also like in particular to thank all of those
countries that contribute troops and police personnel
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), as well as all the Member States
2/26

18/07/2017

As I highlighted during my previous briefing
(see S/PV.7920), the near-completion of the electoral
cycle earlier this year has opened up political space
for the new Government to start addressing the many
challenges facing the country, using this unique
opportunity to tackle the root causes of instability,
poverty, exclusion and impunity. Since then, initial
steps aimed at overcoming longstanding problems in the
areas of governance, the rule of law and socioeconomic
development have been taken.
The Administration, under President Jovenel Moïse
and Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant, has reiterated
the President’s campaign promise to transform and
modernize the State to better meet the needs of the people
and fulfil their rights and to embark on an institutional
reform process involving all sectors of society. To
that end, a Government programme was adopted that
is built around priorities in security, justice, energy,
education, health, agriculture and decentralization,
with an emphasis on accountability and transparency
as well as the fight against corruption, a condition
sine qua non for the restoration of trust between the
citizens and the State as well as for economic growth
and human development.
While these commitments have yet to be further
nurtured by concrete measures, the executive has
launched its flagship development programme, the
“Caravane du changement” initiative, in five of Haiti’s
10 departments, so as to enhance the State’s service
delivery and improve the living conditions of the
population, primarily in rural areas. The programme
is considered to be the backbone of the Government’s
economic growth and development strategy and is
centred on the revitalization of agricultural production
and investment in public infrastructure, with a view
to increasing market access and improving basic
social services.
In this post-electoral climate, with political
polarization significantly reduced and in the context
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

of an improved relationship between the executive and
the legislature, a joint legislative agenda was adopted,
for the first time in 10 years. This has set the stage for
strengthened collaboration between these two branches
of power, which is necessary for the implementation
of the ambitious reform agenda. Furthermore, the
Government has started to take difficult decisions and
reduced the State subsidy on petroleum and gasoline,
aiming at decreasing fiscal pressure and opening the
space for other public investments, while Parliament
has commenced the review of key legislation to improve
the investment climate, reinforce governance structures
and restore State institutions.
Looking ahead, for the country to make full use of
the window of opportunity that emerged following the
electoral process, additional measures will be needed
to consolidate the security and stabilization gains of
the past few years, create greater social and political
cohesion and truly reinforce State institutions so that
they can meet the needs of the Haitian people.
In this respect, I am encouraged by President
Moïse’s campaign pledge to launch a broad-based
national dialogue with the objective of forging a common
vision for progress and to articulate an institutional
reform agenda with priorities that address the most
pressing socioeconomic and political challenges. Such
a dialogue process would require comprehensive action
by all actors, including State institutions, political
parties, the private sector and civil society, to establish
a forward-looking agenda able to deliver tangible
results. I am also encouraged by the calls from a broad
cross-section of Haitian society for reforms to simplify
the electoral cycle, establish a permanent electoral
council and strengthen legal oversight bodies, among
other things, with a view to stabilizing the country’s
democratic institutions and reforming its governance.
With regard to institutional strengthening and
reforms, I wish to reiterate my call on all actors,
executive and legislature, to move swiftly to fully restore
the judiciary and bolster its independence through the
filling of key positions, as a first step, without further
delay. It is troubling that the third branch of power has
still not been brought to full functioning. Key positions
in the Office of the Ombudsperson and the constitutional
council have also to be filled as a matter of priority
in order to foster the rule of law and the enjoyment of
human rights. The absence of tangible progress in the
field of the rule of law has negative impacts on people’s
lives and their human rights, on the investment climate

S/PV. 8005

and on economic growth. It is in this context that I
repeat my plea for resolute action to finally modernize
the penal system through the adoption of the criminal
code and the criminal procedure code, both now
before Parliament.
Without a properly functioning justice system,
the Haitian National Police (HNP) cannot effectively
deliver security for all Haitian citizens, and domestic
and international investments in the national police
force will not develop to their full potential.
As the national police grows in strength and
performance, all efforts must aim to create the necessary
framework for the effective delivery of justice and the
rule of law. This includes the State’s responsibility to
guarantee and preserve the apolitical and independent
character of both the judiciary and the national police.
It also includes the need for continued prioritization by
the Government of institutional development and the
professionalization of the national police. The provision
of adequate financial resources for the police and for
the prisons administration for the implementation of
the 2017-2021 HNP strategic development plan will
serve as one indicator of the Government’s commitment
to achieving this goal, amid its determination to
reconstitute a national defence force.
While the security situation remains relatively
stable, including in the areas from which MINUSTAH
has withdrawn its troops during the last three months,
the resolute implementation of the reforms and plans
for inclusive dialogue is all the more important so as
to sustainably consolidate the gains registered thus far
and pave the way for the transition from MINUSTAH
to MINUJUSTH.
Ultimately, Haiti’s security, political, social and
development agenda can be shaped only by the national
authorities and the Haitian people themselves, and
the responsibility for the further consolidation of the
stabilization gains rests with the Haitian people. Muchneeded donor support can assist and complement
Haitian-led efforts where needed and desired. In this
context, I commend the Government of Haiti for the
leadership demonstrated to set the development agenda
and reinvigorate the aid-coordination architecture. This
continuous leadership will be indispensable to translate
the Government’s vision into action and to align
donor support behind clearly articulated strategies
and deliverables.

17-218473/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

With this in mind, MINUSTAH’s drawdown
and transition process have been designed, in close
coordination with the national authorities, to ensure
a progressive and orderly transfer of security and
civilian tasks to the State institutions. As MINUSTAH
transitions to MINUJUSTH with its specific focus on
the rule of law, police development and human rights,
a joint United Nations country team-MINUSTAH
transition plan has been brought to near-completion.
The plan has identified residual stabilization needs
and priority areas for the continued engagement of
MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country team and the
donor community, as peacekeeping in Haiti disengages
from certain areas, including decentralization, border
management, juvenile justice and certain specialized
policing areas.
As MINUSTAH continues the implementation
of its integrated drawdown plan until the Mission’s
closure, on 15 October, and ensures an orderly transition
of core mandates to MINUJUSTH, the partnership
of the international community with Haiti as well as
continued and coordinated support for Haiti’s reform
agenda will be critical.
I therefore thank all of Haiti’s international partners
and friends for remaining steadfast in their financial and
political support to Haiti and for the their belief in the
country’s ability to lay foundations for lasting change,
sustainable development and stability that benefits all
segments of the society. It is in that spirit that I call on
Haiti’s partners to continue optimizing their support for
the Haitian authorities and the Haitian people to fully
seize the opportunity that they themselves have created.
Lastly, I wish to thank all my colleagues in
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
for their dedication and commitment during this
demanding period of change for Haiti and the United
Nations system in the country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Honoré Braithwaite for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Honoré Braithwaite for her
briefing, which together with the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2017/604) clearly outlines that the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
is successfully on the path to closing and that the
4/26

18/07/2017

United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) is on track to replace it by 16 October.
I would like to begin by recognizing Special
Representative Honoré Braithwaite, as well as the
troop- and police-contributing countries, for their
support to the United Nations mission over the past 13
years. Thanks to their leadership and the dedication of
the men and women serving in MINUSTAH, Haiti has
made strides towards democracy and stability.
First, I would like to underscore the importance
of a smooth transition between the two missions,
MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH. We are pleased to hear
that good progress had already been made. To date,
half of the military component and one of the 11 police
units have withdrawn from Haiti without incident. In
fact, there has been a reported decrease in the levels of
criminality and civil protests. We applaud the transfer
of tasks from the military to the Haitian National Police
in the northern part of the country and in some of the
most security-sensitive areas of Port-au-Prince. We also
commend the transfer of tasks from MINUSTAH to the
host Government and the United Nations country team.
Secondly, I want to emphasize that the work
begun by MINUSTAH is not over yet. MINUJUSTH’s
core mission will include the rule of law and police
development, as well as human rights. The entire justice
system, including corrections and the judiciary, needs
significant reform, and focusing on the rule of law is
especially critical at this juncture. As the police and the
judiciary go hand in hand, strengthening the capacity
of both sectors is necessary to entrench the rule of law
in Haiti and to address such urgent challenges as high
pre-trial detention rates and prison overcrowding. We
also call for increased attention to Haiti’s economic
situation and challenges related to humanitarian and
disaster preparedness, which should be prioritized so
that Haiti is prepared for the next crisis.
The United States stands ready to assist however it
can. We have been one of Haiti’s strongest international
partners for more than 30 years. Together with the
Government of Haiti and the international community,
we continue to support the strengthening of Haiti’s
overall security, democratic development and economic
growth.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré
Braithwaite for her comprehensive briefing. We warmly
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

recall our visit to Haiti last month and appreciate her
help in facilitating it.
We acknowledge the very timely mission of the
Security Council to Haiti, which provided us the unique
opportunity to witness first-hand the achievements of
the country made thus far despite the serious obstacles
that it has faced in terms of political instability and two
major national disasters. We were able to demonstrate
the unified solidarity and support of the Security
Council to the Government and to the resilient people
of Haiti to strengthen their country and institutions.
Kazakhstan welcomes the many positive
developments in Haiti in recent months, including
building institutional and political stability, such
as the completion of the first 100 days of the new
administration, President Moïse’s flagship “Caravane
du changement” initiative and the joint legislative
agenda comprising 51 draft laws aimed at improving
the business climate, reinforcing State functions and
ensuring better territorial planning. The adoption of
the five-year Haitian National Police (HNP) strategic
development plan for the period 2017-2021 is promising
and will therefore require adequate financial resources
and training support from the international community.
We also acknowledge the observation by the
Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2017/604)
that the ongoing withdrawal of military and police
components of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the gradual transfer of tasks
to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) have been smooth and without
disruption. At the same time, Haiti continues to face
enormous difficulties and has yet to overcome numerous
and complex challenges with regard to strengthening
democracy, political institutions, the rule of law, the
protection of human rights, promoting economic and
social development and enhancing business investment
from outside the country.
We call on the Government of Haiti to make every
effort to successfully implement the HNP strategic
development plan so as to ensure that adequate
security arrangements be put in place, in particular in
those geographical and functional areas from which
MINUSTAH troops and police have withdrawn.
The issue of cholera in Haiti must remain at the
centre of the United Nations focus. We welcome the
fact that the intensified cholera response has resulted
in a significant decline in suspected cholera cases. In

S/PV. 8005

that regard, Kazakhstan joins the Secretary-General’s
call to the international community and donors for
voluntary contributions to the United Nations Haiti
Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. That
could have a direct and immediate impact on saving
lives in Haiti and address the suffering that so many
Haitians have endured.
As MINUSTAH withdraws, we acknowledge with
gratitude its committed efforts to bringing stability and
peace to Haiti since its establishment in 2004. Our task
for today is to prepare the ground for MINUJUSTH’s
mandate to advocate for constitutional, legislative,
judiciary and criminal justice reform with a view to
promoting human rights and protecting civilians. Haiti
will need help in holding its national elections. The
significantly reduced civilian staff in the new mission
calls for a highly competitive selection of both national
and international personnel. At the same time, the
United Nations country team with the entire United
Nations system and international partners will have
to assume greater responsibility for peacebuilding and
sustainable development tasks.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate Kazakhstan’s firm
commitment to supporting Haiti’s efforts to peace,
progress and prosperity.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré
Braithwaite, for her presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/604) and assessment of the
situation in the country during the critical period of
gradual transition from the current United Nations
mission to a justice support mission.
Accordingly, in April we supported the adoption of
resolution 2350 (2017), taking into account the important
role that the United Nations plays in stabilizing the
situation in the country and the need to continue to
provide assistance to the Government of Haiti. In their
statements, members of the Security Council frequently
emphasize the importance of transitional periods and
stress that, once that stage has been completed, we can
judge the effectiveness of the United Nations system
and the Security Council in particular. We therefore
have paid particularly close attention to the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
We note the positive assessments of the political
process in the country, the establishment of a

17-218475/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

Government, the completion of the first 100 days of
the administration of President Moïse and the gradual
progress in improving national criminal legislation, as
well as the establishment of the Haitian National Police
strategic development plan for the period 2017-2021.
We take note of the view that Haiti stands ready to bear
responsibility to independently address its challenges.
However, an analysis of the statistics noted in the
report during the reporting period in connection with
violations and the number of operations conducted
by Blue Helmets and Berets indicates the need for a
steadfast focus on security issues. The Mission, the
Secretariat and the Security Council are faced with the
challenge of ensuring that the planned reforms do not
generate a security vacuum. Consequently, the gradual
drawdown of the military and police contingents and
troop levels needs to be done in a very cautious manner.
There must be certainty that the Government is in a
position to independently and fully guarantee security
and tranquillity for the Haitian people.
The second half of the report focuses on the
transition from the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti. Once again, we would
like to highlight what we referred to in April when
resolution 2350 (2017) was adopted (see S/PV.7924). In
recent years, the Security Council has firmly advocated
having mission mandates be as comprehensible, explicit
and obtainable as possible. That was the premise as
we worked on resolution 2350 (2017). Ultimately, the
resolution explicitly stipulates that the Council “[r]
ecognizes the ownership and primary responsibility
of the Government and the people of Haiti”. This is
also referred to in paragraph 6, which focuses on the
mandate of the Mission established. It states that the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
“shall be mandated to assist the Government of Haiti”.
In that context, we noted that the wording, which
focuses on the work of the future Mission is somewhat
vague and it may be interpreted in a way to suggest
that the Mission has certain independent functions
and priorities that the Government must support. We
will closely monitor work along those lines, chiefly
with regard to the need to deliver good services and
monitor the human rights situation. Those duties must
be carried out strictly in line with the mandate handed
down by the Security Council.
6/26

18/07/2017

In conclusion, we reiterate what the Council has
stated repeatedly based on experience. The effective
support of the United Nations is possible only when
there is trust-based cooperation with the host State as it
assumes the leadership role.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Honoré Braithwaite for her briefing
today. I would like to pay tribute to her and to the
important work she has done during her time in Haiti.
It is particularly encouraging to hear that the transition
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is on track.
It is important that that continue. A smooth and
seamless transition will send a clear signal to the
people and Government of Haiti that the United Nations
relationship with Haiti has changed but our commitment
has not. MINUJUSTH marks a new era in the United
Nations support for Haiti. Its three-pronged focus
on police, the rule of law and human rights will help
Haiti to address its future opportunities and challenges
independently for the first time in many decades.
The successful delivery of MINUJUSTH’s mission
will allow it to eventually leave Haiti, having laid the
framework for security and stability that Haitians can
continue to build on themselves.
I know that there is a lot of work ahead, both for
Haiti and the United Nations. I suspect that few of
us who recently visited Haiti believe that success is
guaranteed. In the weeks following the visit, I have
come to believe that three fundamental conditions are
required to make MINUJUSTH a success.
The first condition for success requires the new
Mission to be equipped with the tools that are fit for
purpose and matched to Haiti’s needs. For example,
to further develop the capacity of Haiti’s police, the
United Nations Police Commander will need officers
with the right technical and language skills to engage
meaningfully with their local counterparts. Another
example is the United Nations country team. Joint
analysis and programming with MINUJUSTH will
help ensure that it is better placed to support long-term
justice reform in Haiti. As the Secretary-General’s most
recent report (S/2017/604) rightly points out, all of the
United Nations tools will need to be more politically
acute if they are to catalyse change. Indeed, United
Nations tools only go so far.
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

The second condition for success is a Government
that embraces Haiti’s challenges as its own and
proactively takes on new responsibilities. The gap left by
MINUSTAH is not primarily for its successor Mission
to plug, but for Haiti’s Government and institutions to
fill. That means providing Haiti’s police with proper
equipment and salaries and not squandering those scarce
resources elsewhere. As the Special Representative has
outlined, it means investment in a justice system that
protects all Haitians with the rule of law, leaving no
space for corruption to flourish and impunity to fester.
It means making critical appointments to the Supreme
Court and taking urgently needed reforms through
Parliament. And finally, it means doing much more
to tackle the scourge of gender-based violence. All of
this requires that the priorities of Haiti’s politicians are
aligned with those of Haiti’s people.
The third condition for success is also about taking
responsibility. MINUJUSTH and the whole of the
United Nations must continue to win back the trust of
Haiti’s people. On our trip to Haiti, we heard about two
issues that have damaged the United Nations legacy.
One relates to cholera — a tragedy for the Haitian
people and an obstacle to the United Nations turning its
own page in Haiti. I am pleased to hear that infection
rates are down. Eradication is within grasp, and like the
Ambassador of Kazakhstan, I call on donors to do what
they can to make that a reality.
The other tragic issue that has damaged the
reputation of United Nations peacekeeping is the
shockingly widespread sexual exploitation and abuse
carried out by peacekeepers sent by the Council in the
past to Haiti. Such crimes have left deep scars across the
country. If we are to ask people to trust in peacekeepers
and their mission, we cannot allow that to happen
again — not in Haiti, not anywhere. We have agreed
to a clear framework of action through resolution 2272
(2016). There can be no space for backsliding on those
commitments.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom looks forward
to a smooth and seamless transition over the next few
months. We also hope that those three conditions: a
mission equipped with the right tools, a Government
ready to lead on Haiti’s challenges and a people ready
to trust in the United Nations again can accompany
the next phase of the United Nations relationship with
Haiti.

S/PV. 8005

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite, for her briefing on the situation in
the country.
Ukraine welcomes the fact that the long period
of institutional instability that plagued the electoral
process in Haiti appears to be behind us. Despite the
significant difficulties, we are pleased that the country
has returned to constitutional order, based on the will
of voters.
We commend the Haitian authorities on their
positive steps to restore democratic institutions and
congratulate the Haitian people who, while facing many
political, economic and social challenges and natural
disasters have managed to bring the country back to
order. We underline that the efforts of all political
stakeholders should be focused on ensuring stability
and security as a crucial element for further democratic
consolidation. Broader unity is indispensable to
achieve goals such as strengthening national human
rights institutions, ensuring respect for human rights,
combating criminality, sexual and gender-based
violence, putting an end to impunity and providing
accountability.
Ukraine commends the important role MINUSTAH
has played for the past 13 years in ensuring stability
and security during particularly difficult times, such as
the most recently held elections or Hurricane Matthew.
Its contribution to strengthening the capacity of the
Haitian National Police is indispensable.
In April, the Security Council adopted resolution
2350 (2017), extending the mandate of MINUSTAH
for a final six months. The resolution also outlined the
legal framework for the transition to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We welcome the special attention given in the recent
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/604) to the planning
for MINUJUSTH, in particular on the issues of the rule
of law and human rights.
During its recent visit to Haiti, the Security Council
reviewed the implementation of resolution 2350 (2017),
focusing on the smooth transition from MINUSTAH to
MINUJUSTH. The Council saw that while the security
situation in this Caribbean country has improved, it
is still fragile. Thus, it is important to ensure a wellprepared continuity of United Nations presence so that
the mistakes of the past are not repeated.

17-218477/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

We consider continuing work to strengthen the
Haitian National Police essential. The recent report
of the Secretary-General highlighted the gains made
over the years in developing the capacity of the Haitian
National Police. At the same time, further consolidation
of those achievements is vital.
On the other hand, we would like to underline
the necessity of continued efforts of the international
community, multilateral agencies, Haiti’s regional
partners and individual States in supporting the longterm security and development of Haiti. Those actors
and the United Nations national and international
bodies constitute the basic three pillars supporting the
country’s stability.
We recognize that considerable national, regional
and international efforts have been made in combating
cholera. However, Haiti continues to face significant
challenges that affect these efforts. In this vein, we
welcome the consensus adoption on 13 July of General
Assembly resolution 71/161 B, which reaffirmed support
for the Organization’s new approach to cholera in Haiti,
including the establishment of the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, and
invited Member States, donors, financial institutions,
the private sector and others to extend financial support
for the initiative.
Taking this opportunity, we would also like to
welcome the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Haiti.
We wish her every success in the challenging task of
implementing the United Nations new approach to
reducing the impact of cholera in Haiti and supporting
national efforts to fulfil Haiti’s 2030 sustainable growth
and implementation plan.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the briefing he provided us on
the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUSTAH, Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, for her
briefing and especially for her work and dedication.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered by the Permanent Representative of Peru
on behalf of the Group of friends of Haiti.
In reading this report of the Secretary-General
on MINUSTAH (S/2017/604), we find much to be
8/26

18/07/2017

heartened by and other news that continue to cause
us concern. We are pleased to learn that Haiti has
continued to forge ahead in strengthening its democracy
and stability. It is positive that President Jovenel Moïse
has put together a road map to guide the Government
with a focus on security, justice, energy, education,
health and agriculture and containing a strategy for
decentralization. We note that the Haitian National
Police has continued to boost their ability to provide
security and to ensure that the law is upheld throughout
the country. Moreover, we were also pleased to learn
about the decrease in suspected cases of cholera and
related deaths as a result of the efforts carried out by
the Government of Haiti and its international partners.
We are nonetheless concerned by the fragile
socioeconomic situation of the country and the
vulnerability of its people. Mitigating these realities
will require the Government’s efforts and resources
to be concentrated in the areas identified as priorities.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, as
of 19 May 2.35 million people in Haiti were living in
a situation of severe food insecurity and more than
143,000 are suffering from acute malnutrition.
Given such enormous needs, we need to be very
clear and sincere in expressing that we are seriously
concerned that the Haitian authorities are even thinking
about remobilizing the Haitian Armed Forces, which
would clearly divert human and financial resources
away from the areas that require urgent attention.
Priority should be given to all those initiatives that
generate direct benefits for the Haitian people and
strengthen the State’s institutions. The shear cost in
terms of investment and operationalization of restoring
these Armed Forces in Haiti at a time in which the
country has so many pressing needs to deal with must
not be overlooked.
We believe that energy and resources must be
focused on further strengthening and training the
Haitian National Police so that it can fulfil to the letter
the task of ensuring national security. To date, national
and international efforts have been focused on this and
that must continue to be the case if we are to avoid
compromising the gains achieved in the area of security
over the course of the 13 years of MINUSTAH’s
presence. It would be regrettable if those achievements
were to be undone because of tensions caused by
unresolved socioeconomic problems, coupled with
other weaknesses in the country’s institutions, such as
deficiencies in the judicial institutions and the human
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

rights situation. We endorse the calls made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, by
the Independent Expert of the Human Rights Council
on the situation of human rights in Haiti, and by civil
society organizations to the Government of Haiti to
establish a separate ministry for human rights.
We note that the actions carried out in the context
of the withdrawal of MINUSTAH are proceeding
smoothly and have not had any visible adverse impact
on the general security situation in the country.
Uruguay’s own troops stood down on 15 April, bringing
to a successful end a 13-year phase of support and
assistance to Haiti and its people on the ground, which
began with the establishment of MINUSTAH in 2004.
Today, our objective is to keep our hard-won gains and
improve the general situation of the country by seeking
out other possible avenues for cooperation.
The adoption of the transition plan between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team,
which identifies priority needs and objectives for
Haiti, reflects the planning work carried out in order
to ensure the orderly handover from MINUSTAH to
the new Mission. As far as plans for the organization
and operationalization of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), the report
of Secretary-General provides us with a wealth of
information thereon, demonstrating the professionalism
of the work the United Nations is carrying out in
consultation with the Haitian authorities.
The mandate of the new Mission will entail
assisting the Government of Haiti in strengthening
the institutions of the rule of law; supporting and
strengthening the Haitian National Police; and
monitoring, reporting and analysing the human rights
situation, thereby addressing the current needs in Haiti.
MINUJUSTH will only be successful in its mandate if
it enjoys the full support of the Haitian authorities.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite for
her comprehensive briefing. We greatly appreciate her
efforts and the relentless work of her team of civilians,
military and police to promote long-term stability in
Haiti. We witnessed these efforts clearly during the
most recent Security Council visit to Haiti.
Egypt welcomes the progress in promoting
democracy and security in Haiti, especially with regard
to the endorsement by the Parliament, on 22 March,

S/PV. 8005

of the Prime Minister and the new Cabinet, as well
as the most recent results of local elections, which
were recently held in Haiti. We hope that the return of
Haiti to constitutional order and the full reactivation
of its executive and legislative branches will promote
political and institutional stability and increase the
country’s ability to overcome urgent challenges.
Despite progress at the political and institutional
levels, Haiti continues to face many serious challenges
on several fronts, starting with the difficult economic
situation and the numerous humanitarian and security
challenges, especially with the ongoing cholera
outbreak in the country, as well as the weak rule of
law institutions and national police. In that regard, we
believe it important for the United Nations to continue
to play an effective and vital role in Haiti until the
building of national institutions is complete, and to help
Haiti to enhance its capacities with a view to optimally
shouldering its responsibilities. That will help prevent
Haiti from relapsing into a new crisis with new
humanitarian, security and political complications that
might require international intervention once again.
Moreover, we believe it is imperative for the
international community to work together to support
Haiti and mobilize efforts to promote the capacities
of State institutions during this critical turning point
so that Haiti can turn a new page towards a more
prosperous and stable future. Therefore we have
supported the calls to review the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
to close it down and adopt a new approach for a United
Nations presence in Haiti by establishing a new United
Nations mission — the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) — that is
better able to meet the needs of the country. It must
focus on the police and rule of law components.
It is therefore important to work to prevent any
setbacks in the transitional period the closure of
MINUSTAH and the deployment of MINUJUSTH. In
that connection, we welcome the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/604), as well as ongoing
efforts to withdraw the military and police components
of MINUSTAH in a way that does not affect — and thus
far has not affected — the broader security situation in
the country. In that regard, as MINUJUSTH takes on its
mandate in October and in the light of our conclusions
from the Council’s valuable field visit to Haiti last
month under the presidency of Bolivia, we would like
to make the following five observations.

17-218479/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

First of all, we stress the importance that the new
United Nations mission mandate be limited to the
building of Haitian national institutions, especially
rule-of-law institutions and the Haitian National Police,
in line with the national priorities and needs set by the
Haitian Government, without any non-traditional or
successor mandate.
Secondly, we attach special importance to the
cholera outbreak in Haiti, especially as the United
Nations bears a moral and legal responsibility to
support the Haitian authorities in combating the
epidemic. Therefore, the expected United Nations
presence in Haiti must enjoy the necessary capacities
to fight the outbreak. We welcome the report’s
reference to the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran
as the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for Haiti,
to guide the implementation of the United Nations
approach to cholera and to support national efforts to
implementation the Sustainable Development Goals in
Haiti. We also call for the provision of the necessary
funding for fighting and ending this epidemic.
Thirdly, the capacities of the United Nations
country team must be enhanced so that it can meet the
future needs of Haiti and can focus on infrastructure
development; the promotion of vocational training,
education and health services; and the creation of
a legislative environment conducive to foreign and
domestic private sector investment, especially in the
agriculture and tourism sectors. Such initiatives will
give rise to job opportunities for tens of thousands of
young people and promote the empowerment of women.
Fourthly, we must also firmly and seriously address
the accusations of sexual abuse by MINUSTAH because
during the Council’s latest visit to Haiti, we listened
to their national concerns on that issue. We sensed
their bitterness at us not having addressed those cases
and understand the situation’s potential impact on the
reputation and credibility of the United Nations.
Finally, as the peacekeeping era in Haiti draws to a
close, supporting the efforts of building and sustaining
peace must be the focus of the upcoming phase of the
engagement of the United Nations and the international
community in Haiti, especially in the light of a clear
national vision of priorities that requires coordination
among the different components of that engagement.
In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to express
our full support to the people and the Government of
Haiti. We have full trust in the ability of its elected
10/26

18/07/2017

Government and people to overcome this critical phase
and open a new chapter of development, prosperity and
conclusion in its region.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her comprehensive briefing
today. We commend Haiti’s efforts to consolidate
democracy, restore constitutional order and promote
stability, as well as the contribution of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to that end.
In order to ensure the successful implementation
of MINUSTAH’s mission and, above all, to support
Haiti’s reconstruction efforts, Japan is proud to have
contributed to MINUSTAH, especially after the
earthquake in 2010. The Security Council’s visit was
timely given the inauguration of the new Government
and the transition of the United Nations presence. The
visit provided us with a clear understanding of the
reality on the ground and enabled us to demonstrate
the continued United Nations support of the Haitian
people. It also offered an opportunity to encourage
Haitian efforts to further consolidate national unity and
build a resilient and more prosperous society.
Japan is well aware that the smooth transition
from MINUSTAH to the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is essential.
We look forward to a continued responsible transfer of
tasks to MINUJUSTH, along with a greatly expanded
role for the United Nations country team. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s vision for implementing
MINUJUSTH’s mandate and designing a strategy for
gradual transition to local institutions, as outlined in
his most recent report (S/2017/604). Japan strongly
hopes that MINUJUSTH will further strengthen police
and justice institutions as foundations for the stability
and development of the country.
During our visit, we witnessed the positive results
of the close cooperation between MINUSTAH and
the Government of Haiti on strengthening the Haitian
National Police (HNP). Challenges remain, however,
including the ability of the Haitian National Police
to respond to large-scale violence; border controls;
the need for police stations and related facilities;
and ongoing rule-of-law issues. We hope that the
Government will focus on those priority security areas
in partnership with the international community.
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8005

Another area of concern is public health. Cholera
was mentioned by everyone, including the President,
during the Council’s visit. Since 2010, Japan has
contributed more than $9 million through UNICEF and
other international organizations in order to combat
cholera. We are prepared to continue our support,
especially on preventive socioeconomic measures
such as poverty reduction and improving resilient
infrastructure, with a focus on water, sanitation and
hygiene. Japan will also continue to support postdisaster reconstruction in Haiti as well as development
and the improvement of basic social services. While the
main focus of the United Nations Mission is undergoing
changes, our support to the people of Haiti should and
will remain steadfast.

that is why the sustained engagement of all bilateral and
international partners is very much critical to secure
sufficient and timely assistance for the sustainable
development of Haiti.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Special Representative Sandra Honoré Braithwaite for
her briefing and for her admirable contribution to the
work of the United Nations and to stress how much we
appreciate her efforts. The mission was well executed.

We are encouraged to note the reduction in the
number of suspected cases of death from cholera in
recent months in Haiti despite the impact of Hurricane
Matthew last year. However, the limited resources that
have been made available to fund the cholera response
is a matter of concern. The new approach of the United
Nations to deal with this issue should be supported to
respond to the needs of the people of Haiti, and to the
victims of the cholera outbreak and their families in
particular. That is all the more appropriate, fair and just
in the light of the responsibility that the United Nations
has, as indicated by the representative of Egypt when
he took the floor.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/604), which notes the steady progress that Haiti
has made in consolidating its institutional and political
stability. In that regard, the adoption of a Government
road map that emphasizes accountability and
transparency while at the same time fighting corruption
is indeed encouraging. The Special Representative
rightly underlined that aspect earlier. A joint legislative
agenda to be followed by both the executive branch
and the legislature will also be a significant element in
strengthening their collaboration in implementing the
reforms outlined by President Jovenel Moïse. We also
support his goal of moving forward with a broad-based
national dialogue to forge a common vision around
reform priorities that address the most pressing social,
economic and political challenges, and we agree with
the Secretary-General on the need for the inclusion of
electoral reform in this agenda in order to strengthen the
national capacity to administer elections in the country.

The Security Council mission to Haiti last month
was indeed a demonstration of the continued engagement
of the United Nations, and we are pleased to have
participated in this important mission. We would like
to seize this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Bolivia for its role and leadership. The significance
of the United Nations presence and transition to the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti to
the country’s stability, development and institutional
consolidation in the area of the rule of law, police and
human rights is indeed paramount.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
to Ms. Honoré Braithwaite again for her significant
contribution to Haiti’s stability, as well as to all
departing the civilian staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
uniformed personnel for their steadfast commitment
in achieving the Mission’s mandate. Ethiopia, as one
of the police-contributing countries to MINUSTAH,
is pleased to have made a very modest contribution to
those efforts.

Ethiopia also welcomes the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General for
full restoration of the independence of the judiciary
in order to consolidate Haiti’s democracy and
continued development.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré
Braithwaite, for her very enlightening briefing, as well
as for her contribution and that of her teams to the
stabilization of Haiti.

Haiti remains relatively stable, but it certainly
needs long-term support to address its vulnerability
and economic fragility. We join other colleagues who
have called for this to be given high priority. In fact,

I associate myself with the statements that will be
made by the observer of the European Union, as well as
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

17-2184711/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

France welcomed the adoption of resolution 2350
(2017), which formally acknowledges the closure of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) by October 15, and establishes a new
mission focused on the issues of police, the rule of
law and human rights. That decision, which was made
unanimously by the Council, is essential. More than
13 years after the establishment of MINUSTAH, it
was time to formally acknowledge the successes of
the mission in stabilizing Haiti and to move towards
a new form of United Nations presence more adapted
to the needs of the country and the conditions on the
ground, which have evolved considerably and in a
favourable direction.
As underlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/604), the work of MINUSTAH in recent
years has been essential to getting Haiti out of the
emergency situation in which the country found itself
even just recently. It has made it possible to restore a
general climate of relative security, participated in the
reconstruction efforts after the terrible earthquake of
2010 and contributed to the significant firming up of
the Haitian National Police, the increasing strength
of which is a guarantee of stability for Haiti. That is a
collective success, which, naturally, is due in great part
to Haitians themselves. However, we must also give
credit to the United Nations, the Council, as well as
to the troop-contributing countries, without which this
Mission could not play its role.
The new United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti, which will begin operations in
October, should consolidate the progress achieved. It
should make the Haitian National Police an autonomous
actor, but also undertake major new projects in the area
of the rule of law, such as the fight against impunity, the
strengthening of professionalism and the independence
of the judiciary, as well as the establishment of a
prison system that is compatible with the needs of the
country and the requirements in terms of respect for the
rights of prisoners. The human rights situation, which
remains a source of concern, should also be closely
monitored, with regular recommendations made. This
last component seems indispensable to robust and
effective peacekeeping, and is therefore inseparable
from the rest of the activities of the next mission. The
commitment of Haitian authorities will naturally be
essential to ensuring the success of the Mission.
France has long called on the Council to shoulder
its responsibilities with respect to the question of
12/26

18/07/2017

Haiti, by making the necessary decisions to ensure that
the engagement of the United Nations on the ground
remains as appropriate and effective as possible over
time. It is now done, and we are very glad of it. This new
essential step does not mean the end of the commitment
of the United Nations alongside Haiti. On the contrary,
it demonstrates the Council’s ability to continually
adjust how the United Nations is involved on the
ground, with the main concern of responding to the
needs of the populations concerned. It also marks the
establishment of a more responsive and powerful tool at
the service of Haiti and Наitians, the success of which
depends on maintaining our collective commitment. In
that framework, the fight against the terrible cholera
epidemic must of course continue to bring us together.
We believe that it is also essential — and this is
a crucial point — to help Haiti move from a logic of
assistance to one of sustainable development. That is the
priority. That will be the mission of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, in conjunction
with the country team. The latter will also have an
important role to play in future developments.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute once
again to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, as well
as to all MINUSTAH personnel for their exemplary
commitment to peace and security in Haiti.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I associate myself with the
statement that will be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later today.
Let me join others in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, for her comprehensive
briefing to the Council, and for her invaluable work, as
well as that of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), in that country.
Her briefing and the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/604) underline the progress made
in the consolidation of democracy and stability in
Haiti. The restoration of constitutional order, with the
inauguration of Jovenel Moïse as President, and the
formation of a Government under Prime Minister Jack
Guy Lafontant, is indeed a milestone that has opened a
window of opportunity for the future of Haiti.
Building a better future for Haiti will take time and
continued determination. In addition to the progress
made on the judicial track, further judicial reform,
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

including fighting corruption and impunity, improving
access to justice and penal reform, will be crucial to
Haiti’s socioeconomic development. These efforts will
also create better conditions for private investment.
Strengthening the rule of law, respect for human rights
and further strengthening the Haitian National Police
force must therefore remain top priorities. Delivering
on the expectations of the Haitian people will require an
inclusive process in which all actors, including national
authorities, political parties, civil society and the private
sector, work together to deliver the necessary reforms.
Women have a key role to play. Their full, equal and
effective participation is particularly important.
MINUSTAH has played a significant role in
supporting the progress we are now seeing in Haiti.
Its institutional memory and key resources need to
be used strategically during the transition period and
beyond. It is particularly important that MINUSTAH’s
work on gender mainstreaming and against sexual
and gender-based violence not be lost in the transition
process. Therefore, it is essential that a strategic focus,
coordination and budget for gender issues be maintained
and that adequate reporting on these matters take place.
We commend the Secretary-General for the many
examples of work on gender and sexual and genderbased violence in the report.
As Haiti moves forward into this new phase in its
development, the partnership between the Government,
bilateral donors and the United Nations must also
evolve. It is essential that the United Nations deliver
as one in its support for national efforts. The Global
Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections Areas
in the Rule of Law in Post-Conflict and Other Crisis
Situations could continue to play an important role in
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations in this
regard. In addition, an integrated and joined-up United
Nations presence in Haiti — during and after the
transition — will be needed to address the risks and
drivers of instability. This includes efforts to reduce
social inequality, help spur economic growth and
strengthen trust in institutions.
Adequate planning for the successor mission
to MINUSTAH, including for the handover to the
United Nations country team and on how that country
team should best be configured, will be critical.
Planning should take place in the spirit of the agenda
on sustaining peace and with a focus on long-term,
inclusive development.

S/PV. 8005

While the Secretary-General reports that Haiti
appears to be on a steady path towards institutional and
political stability, it is important that the United Nations
and the Security Council in particular remain ready
to support this process. As the needs in the country
change, we will need to consider how best to use the
different instruments in the United Nations toolbox
to ensure peace and security and achieve sustainable
peace and development.
I join others in acknowledging the concerns
pertaining to cholera and sexual exploitation and abuse
related to the United Nations presence in Haiti that were
raised during the Council’s recent visit. We welcome
the intensified cholera response, which has resulted in
a significant decline in suspected cholera cases. We
were happy to co-sponsor General Assembly resolution
71/161 B, in support of the Secretary-General’s new
approach to eradicating cholera and building resilience
in Haiti.
We also welcome the efforts to strengthen
protection from sexual exploitation and abuse and the
outreach efforts described in the report. Zero tolerance
for sexual exploitation and abuse for all peacekeeping
and United Nations staff, uniformed as well as civilian,
should be the only acceptable benchmark. Victims
need to be protected, assisted and provided with the
necessary rehabilitation, while perpetrators must be
brought to justice.
To conclude, the progress that Haiti has seen could
not have been achieved without the resilience, strength
and determination of the Haitian people. Sweden will
remain a committed partner for Haiti as it continues
with this new chapter in its development.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like at the outset to
thank the Chinese presidency for having convened this
important debate on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). My thanks go also to
Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, for
her excellent briefing on the situation in Haiti.
It is my pleasure to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the key role played by the Group of Friends of
Haiti, which, effectively coordinated by Uruguay, has
been able to mobilize the international community in
supporting Haiti.

17-2184713/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

At a time when MINUSTAH is moving towards
its close, the Senegalese delegation would like to
pay the Special Representative and all Mission staff
well-deserved tribute for their work on behalf of the
Haitian people during some of the worst times in their
long history.
From 22 to 24 June, that is, two months after the
adoption of resolution 2350 (2017), which extended
for a further final period of six months MINUSTAH’s
mandate and established the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), the Council
undertook, under the Bolivian presidency, a historic
visit to Haiti, its first to this country, which, I would
recall, is the first black republic and the first democracy
in the Americas hemisphere.
During said visit, the Council was able to see for
itself the remarkable progress made at the political level,
with the return to constitutional order following a very
successful transition, as reflected in the democratic
election and investiture of President Jovenel Moïse,
after several years of institutional stagnation.
Today, galvanized by President Moïse, the
Government of Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant has
set itself the lofty goal of revitalizing the key sectors
of agriculture, the environment, transport, security,
justice, energy, education and health, as well as carrying
out decentralization efforts, in order to meet the needs
of Haitians throughout the country.
All of these actions are complemented by the
adoption of an ambitious joint legislative reform
programme that includes 51 draft bills and is aimed at
improving the business environment, strengthening the
role and authority of the State and ensuring better land
management, with a view to rehabilitating the damaged
Haitian ecosystem.
During its aforementioned visit, the Council
witnessed the commendable efforts made by the
Haitian authorities to turn the economic and security
situation in the country around, and also was able to
take stock of the magnitude of the remaining challenges
stemming from the environmental, economic and
social vulnerability of the country, which is exposed on
an ongoing basis to the constant threat of drought and
flood. Thus the international community, in particular
the United Nations, must continue to support the Haitian
Government in its efforts to relaunch the economy and
improve the living conditions of its people.
14/26

18/07/2017

We must bear in mind, therefore, that in Haiti
today 2.35 million people are living in a situation of
food insecurity. Nor must we lose sight of the fact that
cholera, although no longer as widespread as it once
was, remains a threat; that infrastructure is insufficient;
that the performance of judicial and administration of
justice institutions must be strengthened and supported;
and that residual insecurity remains a source of concern.
All of this goes a long way towards explaining
the tremendous hopes that the Haitian people have
pinned on MINUJUSTH, the new Mission, which
we firmly hope will, in accordance with its mandate,
help consolidate the rule of law through improving
accountability, respect for and the promotion of human
rights, the creation of a secure environment, and support
for justice and the operationalization of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) following the withdrawal of the
military component of MINUSTAH.
MINUJUSTH alone cannot do everything, thus
Haiti stands in greater need than ever of the support of
its development partners.
Accordingly, my delegation welcomed the visit
to Haiti by the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of
the Economic and Social Council which provided
the opportunity for examining ways to strengthen
the partnership between the Government and the
international community with a view to supporting
the country’s economic recovery and development. In
supporting the Secretary-General’s new approach to
confronting the cholera epidemic that has affected Haiti
for several years, my delegation believes that that should
be better addressed by the international community in
close collaboration not only with the Government, but
also with the victims in Haiti.
In that regard, it is worth recalling that the recent
call by Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
on Member States to contribute generously to financing
the Secretary General’s new United Nations approach to
cholera in Haiti, the cost of which is estimated at $400,
but for which only $2.7 million have been received
to date.
As MINUSTAH is on the verge of completing its
withdrawal, the Senegalese delegation urgently calls
on the international community, beginning with the
United Nations system and international financial
institutions, as well as the Haitian Government, to join
efforts so as, on the one hand, to prevent any form of
security vacuum — because despite the outstanding
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

work carried out by the Haitian National Police, the
security and justice sectors remain vulnerable and
need to be strengthened — and, on the other hand,
help the country improve its resilience in the face of
frequent natural disasters and lay the foundations for
sustainable development.
We must succeed in the transition between
MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH in close cooperation
with the United Nations country team.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State
of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special
Representative Honoré Braithwaite for her informative
briefing on the latest developments in the Republic
of Haiti and on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We take
this opportunity to express our gratitude for her work at
the helm of MINUSTAH.
During the visit of the Security Council to Haiti
in June, President Moïse shared the vision of his
Government with respect to confronting his country’s
principle challenges, while placing emphasis on the
“Caravane du changement” initiative and the joint
legislative agenda, and expressed his desire that
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) be reclassified under Chapter
VI, instead of Chapter VII, of the Charter of the
United Nations. Bolivia supports Haiti’s request and
emphasizes the need to change the mandate of the new
mission under Chapter VI of the Charter, especially as
there is no threat to international peace and security.
With regard to the progress on the ground, we commend
the work carried out by the Government of the Republic
of Haiti in connection with the road map focused on
the security, justice, energy, education, health and
agriculture sectors. Similarly, we commend its efforts
to adopt a joint legislative agenda that undoubtedly
demonstrates a commitment to democracy and stability.
During the visit of the Security Council, we
received first-hand information on the situation in the
brotherly country of Haiti, the preparation process for
closing MINUSTAH and planning the transition to the
new mission. The purpose of receiving that information
was to explore how the Council could further contribute
to the long-term stabilization of Haiti and collaborate
with the Haitian people in their efforts to develop their
country. The valuable information, which we received,
must be used as input for refining the new mandate of
MINUJUSTH in order to make it understandable, clear

S/PV. 8005

and more specific, especially with regard to the rule of
law and reform of the justice sector.
Given that the new Mission is designed to carry
out its work within a time frame not to exceed two
years, it must fulfil a series of tasks and strategic goals
during that same period. Bolivia would like to warn
of the potential risk of not meeting the goals set out
within such a short period of time because of a desire to
encompass too many tasks lacking defined objectives.
Such a flaw may counterproductively affect the work of
the new mission.
With regard to the work of MINUSTAH, we
congratulate the Mission on prioritizing its efforts so
as to ensure a successful transition and for assessing
its work, thereby leading to a review of the situation
and the progress achieved thus far. That work is without
any doubt reflected in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/604). We note that, before its final
closure, the Mission must address the outstanding
issues pertaining to the cholera situation, the justice
sector and sexual exploitation and abuse.
At the same time, Bolivia emphasizes the
importance of coordination between the new Mission
and the United Nations country team so as to ensure
that the responsibilities and tasks of other United
Nations bodies, such as the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly, do not overlap. In that regard,
we support the joint MINUSTAH transition plan with
the country team in Haiti in coordination with the
Government of Haiti, while always taking into account
the priorities and needs of our brotherly country.
We reiterate that the United Nations has a moral
responsibility with regard to victims of cholera in Haiti.
In that vein, we stress the international community’s
obligation to help the Republic of Haiti overcome
that crisis and reach the goal of building sound water,
sanitation and health systems. During the visit of the
Council, we heard from several stakeholders, including
a cholera victim, about current concerns relating to the
situation. We therefore call on the entire United Nations
membership to join in the fight against cholera in Haiti
and support General Assembly resolution 71/161 B,
adopted on 13 July, establishes a trust fund for that
purpose and calls on countries to voluntarily contribute
their respective share of unencumbered balance for
MINUSTAH to that fund. We urge the countries
members of the Security Council and of the entire
United Nations membership to shore up that fund.

17-2184715/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

Concerning, gender-based violence in Haiti, it
is related to the poverty and social discrimination
experienced by women. We urge the United Nations to
remain vigilant in its actions so as to combat genderbased violence in Haiti, in particular sexual abuse and
exploitation under the principle of zero-tolerance.
Bolivia recognizes the national ownership and
the primary responsibility of the Government and
the people of Haiti as they relate to all aspects of the
development of their country, and encourages the new
mission to provide logistical and technical experience
in coordination with the Government, while respecting
its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, I call on the Security Council to
reflect on the intrinsic interconnectedness between
peace and security and the basic needs of the
population. If basic needs, such as health, education,
water and sanitation services are not met, the road to
lasting stability and development will be difficult, if
not impossible, to achieve.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Honoré Braithwaite for
her substantive briefing and her and her staff’s
commendable service.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
In recent months, Haiti has continued its path
towards consolidating its stability and constitutional
order, thereby reaffirming the Security Council’s
decision to better adjust to the present needs of the
country by withdrawing the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and replacing it with
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).
As the Council witnessed during its mission
last June, Haiti is at a crossroads. A constructive
collaboration between the Government and the
Parliament and an inclusive dialogue with civil
society are now crucial to implementing the reform
agenda jointly adopted by the executive and legislative
branches, as well as for the development of a shared
national vision for the country’s future. We encourage
the Haitian Government to continue on that path.
We welcome the start of a thorough assessment of
constitutional review and emphasize in particular the
importance of a consensual and effective reform of
the electoral system. With the assistance of the United
16/26

18/07/2017

Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
the Haitian National Police has achieved remarkable
results, on which it must now build. We welcome the
priority assigned by the authorities to its consolidation,
which remains an essential pillar of security and
stability in the country. Efforts must be redoubled
to address weaknesses in the rule of law and justice
system, with a special focus on the independence of
the judiciary, the reform of the corrections system, the
reduction of women’s vulnerability and their increased
participation in the political and socioeconomic life of
the country. The United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) would rightly focus
on those sectors.
Among the challenges still facing the country,
allow me to point out the fight against cholera. We
highly appreciate the Secretary-General’s commitment
to supporting the Government’s efforts in that fight. We
welcome the adoption last week by the General Assembly
of resolution 71/161 B, which Italy co-sponsored.
Secondly, Italy remains firmly convinced that the
transition between the two Missions is a due response
to the evolution of the country’s needs. Building on
the results achieved by MINUSTAH, MINUJUSTH
will have targeted tools that are adjusted to the present
conditions on the ground and to the specific challenges
being tackled by the Haitian authorities. That transition
must be well planned and responsible. So far, the
withdrawal of MINUSTAH has not affected the overall
security situation and we invite the Secretary-General
to continue to follow that process with special attention
and to keep the Council duly informed.
It is essential to ensure continuity and to identify, as
of now, a strategy to progressively transfer competencies
to the country team, whose role will be strengthened
and, ultimately, to Haitian authorities. We invite the
Secretary-General to continue that planning effort
on the basis of the integrated approach highlighted
in his report (S/2017/604). I would like in particular
to underscore the political strategy underlined in the
MINUJUSTH priorities outlined by the SecretaryGeneral. We fully share the pivotal role assigned to the
Mission’s political pillar and to its good offices, as well
as the intention to put in place mobile and integrated
Mission deployment throughout the country, in order to
maximize its impact while at the same time keeping a
light footprint.
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

United Nations action in Haiti attests to the need
to ensure coherence between supporting the political
process, keeping peace and promoting development
and human rights. In that respect, in our view, Haiti
represents a test and reference model of the Council’s
ability to handle a transition based on a recognition
of the close connection that exists among prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and comply with the
criteria of effectiveness, peer mandates and a welltimed sustainable exit strategy. Such an effort requires
the involvement of the entire United Nations system
and the use of all the tools at its disposal to ensure
peace, avoid relapses into conflict and trigger lasting
development, In Haiti, we have the opportunity to
show the value of that strategy, which is in line with
the wider peace and security reform that Italy shares
and supports.
In conclusion, Italy has a long-standing history
of friendly relations and solidarity with Haiti and its
people. We will continue along that path as a member
of the Council, the United Nations and the European
Union, and at the bilateral level.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Special Representative Honoré Braithwaite
for her briefing.
Currently, Haiti’s overall situation is stable. The
new Government has formulated a roadmap for national
development and is committed to speeding up economic
and social reform and to improving people’s lives. The
Haitian National Police has become stronger and is
gradually taking over the responsibility of maintaining
national security and stability. That has presented a
new opportunity for the development of Haiti. China
hopes that the parties concerned in Haiti will seize this
opportunity to keep the current positive momentum,
expedite the development of areas such as energy,
education, health and agriculture, improve people’s
livelihoods, strengthen the rule of law, comprehensively
implement the strategic plan for developing the National
Police in order to reach its planned strength of 15,000
as soon as possible, thereby creating conditions that are
conducive to improving the situation in Haiti.
China welcomes the recent unanimous adoption
by the General Assembly of resolution 71/161 B in
response to the cholera epidemic in Haiti. We hope that
the international community will respond actively to

S/PV. 8005

the United Nations new approach to cholera in Haiti
in order to help the country eliminate the epidemic
as soon as possible. At the same time, there is a need
to increase humanitarian assistance, support Haiti
in enhancing its capacity in disaster risk reduction
and prevention, safeguard food security and provide
greater support to Haiti in its efforts to consolidate
peace and stability, and implement the Sustainable
Development Goals, as contained in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.
China appreciates the contribution made by
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and Special Representative Honoré
Braithwaite in promoting peace and development in
Haiti. With the mandate of the Mission expiring on
15 October, the current priority should be a smooth
transition so as to achieve an orderly withdrawal of
MINUSTAH on the basis of maintaining stability Haiti
and to ensure the successful deployment of the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support after 15 October.
China hopes that the Secretariat, MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team in Haiti will
maintain coordination among themselves and enhance
communication with the Government of Haiti so as to
ensure the success of the transitional process.
Once again, the recent successful visit by the
Security Council mission to Haiti sends a strong signal
of the Council’s attention to addressing the problem in
the country. China is ready to work with other Council
members towards a speedy realization of long-term
peace, stability and sustainable development in Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Security Council for
having kindly invited the Government of Republic
of Haiti to today’s meeting to share its views and
observations about the Secretary-General’s important
report (S/2017/604) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), on which the Special
Representative has just briefed us.
On behalf of the Government of Haiti, I would
also like to sincerely thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment to the people of Haiti, as his report
eloquently attests. As usual, it is an objective, detailed,
professional and balanced document. Our Government

17-2184717/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

took careful note of and meticulously studied his
observations and detailed recommendations. We are
deeply grateful to him.
Members of the Security Council visited Haiti from
22 to 24 June, demonstrating their readiness to assist
the Haitian people at this decisive juncture, replete with
new prospects for stability, growth and development.
The Government of Haiti warmly welcomed the mission.
At this pivotal time in the country’s life, the
Haitian Government welcomes the Secretary-General’s
overall assessment of the situation in Haiti. The
country is indeed deeply committed to consolidating its
democracy and to political and institutional stability.
Much progress has been made at the security, political
and institutional levels and in the areas of human rights
and the building of the rule of law, as underscored by
the Secretary-General. Mr. Jovenel Moïse’s assumption
of the presidency on 7 February to end a transparent
and credible electoral process has indisputably marked
a turning point in Haiti’s political trajectory.
Whether it is the return to constitutional order,
the establishment of a fully functional Parliament, the
assumption of duties by all publicly elected officials at all
levels of the governance system, consultations between
the legislative and executive branches with regard to
the implementation of critical reform programmes
needed to modernize the State, launched by the Head
of State, all observers agree that recent developments
demonstrate ongoing progress towards establishing the
rule of law and consolidating democracy in Haiti. The
same is true of the Government’s focus on security,
justice, education, decentralization, transparency,
accountability and the need to combat corruption.
Those developments were highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral and duly illustrate the new climate prevailing
in Haiti. Without a doubt, the goal of creating a secure
and stable environment, one of the major thrusts
of MINUSTAH’s mandate, has been achieved. The
capacities of the Haitian National Police (HNP) have
been significantly strengthened, as well as its ability to
ensure law and order throughout the country.
In that regard, the Government welcomes the fact
that the overall security situation has not been affected
by the current withdrawal of MINUSTAH staff. This is
proof, if further proof were needed, of the assumption of
security functions by the Haitian National Police. The
HNP has become a cornerstone of the national security
18/26

18/07/2017

architecture. This is a remarkable accomplishment by
the Mission in all respects.
Also, at a time when the mandate of MINUSTAH
draws to an end, the Haitian Government wishes to
extend its gratitude to all countries that have, over the
past 13 years, generously contributed and participated
in its various military, police and civilian components.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved at almost
every level, the Government of Haiti is well aware
of the myriad ongoing challenges and the magnitude
of the obstacles hampering economic development
and slowing down certain necessary reforms, which
create genuine obstacles to the rule of law and the full
enjoyment of human rights, including in their economic,
social and cultural dimensions.
The Government has taken note of what the
Secretary-General describes as limited progress in the
functioning of the judiciary and the administration of
justice and the residual shortcomings that have been
noted, in particular in the judicial and corrections
systems. In that regard, the views of the Haitian
Government and those of Secretary-General are aligned
with regard to the crucial importance of the judiciary’s
independence for building and consolidating democracy
in Haiti and the continued development of the country.
In line with its general policy declaration, the
Government, under the authority of Prime Minister
Jacques Guy Lafontant, is working to strengthen
the rule of law, which ensures stability and creates
conditions conducive to private investment, which is
so necessary.
Along the same lines, the Government of Haiti
has noted the human rights concerns indicated in the
report, including the often tragic consequences of
prolonged pre-trial detention and prison overcrowding.
Aware of the gravity of the problem and of the urgency
of rectifying it, the Head of State set up a commission
tasked with fully taking stock of the situation in order
to find a prompt solution. The work of the commission
continues and its conclusions and recommendations are
expected soon.
In general, the Government wishes to reiterate
its commitment to respecting, defending and
promoting human rights without any discrimination,
in accordance with its commitments and obligations
under international and regional human rights treaties
to which the Republic of Haiti is party.
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

The report also highlights a wide range of social
and humanitarian challenges — the fragile economic
situation, a gross 20-per-cent decrease in public
investment, a slowdown in private investment, the
vulnerable situation of repatriated individuals from
the Dominican Republic and the growing vulnerability
of Haitian households, which is reflected in the food
insecurity that affects more than 2 million people. At
the same time, the cholera epidemic is far from being
contained, despite some significant recent advances in
the fight against the scourge. In short, Haiti faces an
urgent situation, which recent United Nations missions,
including those of the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council, had had an opportunity to
take stock of. Such a situation obviously calls for the
adoption of urgent measures.
The Government of Haiti wishes to reiterate its call
to all its cooperation partners to quickly and sustainably
resume official development assistance flows, based on
flexible financing programmes and mechanisms that
not only respond to situations that have been observed,
but also to establish the conditions to enable Haiti to
transition from a state of economic fragility to that of
sustained, robust and sustainable growth, in accordance
with the wish expressed by the Secretary-General in his
latest report.
With regard to the conclusion of the operations
of MINUSTAH, the Government of Haiti welcomes
the successful conduct of the plan for the complete
and orderly withdrawal of the 2,370 troops from the
military component of the Mission and the progressive
reduction of its civilian and police components to
authorized levels. At the same time, my Government
attaches the utmost importance to the consolidation of
the gains, especially in the priority areas that have been
targeted, including strengthening the rule of law and
the justice system, promoting and defending human
rights and support for the development of the police.
Haiti will continue to work, in accordance with its
needs and priorities and in the best spirit of consultation
and cooperation, with United Nations bodies in
defining the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), its scope
of intervention and the establishment of its strategic
objectives. We are confident that the lessons learned
from the 13 years of the mandate of MINUSTAH
will be judiciously harnessed by MINUJUSTH. The
search for solutions to the serious problems that have
undermined the political, social and economic stability

S/PV. 8005

of Haiti for so long is critical. Our ardent hope is that
MINUJUSTH will achieve the desired result by the end
of its mandate, namely, on the one hand, significantly
improve the trust of all sectors of society in the rule
of law and in the checks and balances of democracy
and, on the other hand, contribute to the country’s longterm stability and economic development, to echo the
words of the Secretary-General. Rest assured that the
Government of Haiti will spare no effort to achieve this
goal and to enable the initiatives of MINUJUSTH to
meet our shared expectations.
In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to
reiterate to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, the warm
congratulations of the Haitian Government — to which
I join my voice — on her commitment and work in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ruiz Cabañas (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank China for having convened
this public debate. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), my friend Ms. Sandra Honoré
Braithwaite, for her briefing, and especially for her
tireless work over the past few years. Mexico recognizes
in her an esteemed and dedicated international
civil servant. Her dedication to the Haitian people and
her efforts to bring about the peace and development we
seek at the Organization are exemplary.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2350 (2017),
which provides for the conclusion of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and to which Mexico
contributed a group of military observers, and the
establishment of the new United Nations Mission in
Support of Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in October
is a natural consequence of the favourable development
of the situation in the country. The strengthening of
the rule of law and national institutions and the fullfledged pursuit of development with the support of
the United Nations and the international community
are signs of new times for Haiti, which is decisively
assuming responsibility for its future.
We welcome the General Assembly’s recent
allocation of adequate resources to help MINUSTAH
ensure a responsible, progressive and prudent transition
to the new Mission, so as to avoid a security vacuum

17-2184719/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

and to lay the foundations for sustainable and lasting
peace in Haiti.
The United Nations is not withdrawing from Haiti.
Our presence in the country has evolved and, more
important, our conception of peace and development
has also evolved. The United Nations country team,
which will continue to be present on the ground and
from which we expect impeccable coordination,
coherence, efficiency and transparency, plays a
central role in supporting Haiti’s economic and social
development, the strengthening of its institutions and
ensuring respect for human rights.
Mexico, as part of the Economic and Social
Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, has noted
the willingness of President Moïse to promote a new
national dialogue that will give way to a future of
prosperity. The United Nations must support the Haitian
Government and be sensitive to its priorities. We must
encourage Haiti to focus its development — like all
other States — on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development so that its people can reap the benefits of
the fulfilment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The United Nations has the unique opportunity in
Haiti to demonstrate that we face new paradigms and
a have a new way of working — that we have moved
from conflict management to sustainable development
coordination. In that connection, prevention and the
links between peace and security and development are
seen as concrete examples of the renewed framework of
sustainable peace. The new focus of MINUJUSTH and
its necessary coordination with the country team should
be seen as an opportunity for coordination — both on
the ground and at the Secretariat — of the efforts of the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
all United Nations agencies.
The United Nations has a moral and economic
debt to the Haitian people. We have not yet found an
appropriate response to the problems caused by the
terrible cholera epidemic in order to properly care
for the families of the victims and those affected. We
can no longer postpone the implementation of a viable
solution that will allow us to close this sad chapter of
the United Nations presence in Haiti.
Mexico, together with Jamaica, co-facilitated
General Assembly resolution 71/314, entitled “The new
United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti”, in which
the Assembly recognizes the responsibility of the
Organization to the people of Haiti with regard to the
20/26

18/07/2017

devastating effects the disease has had for the Haitian
people. In that connection, we reiterate the call made
by the General Assembly for Member States to consider
the possibility of contributing the unencumbered
balances and income credits of MINUSTAH to the
United Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner
Trust Fund.
Before concluding, I would like to take this final
opportunity to thank and acknowledge the commitment
of all military and civilian officials who have been part
of MINUSTAH over the past 13 years. In particular,
Mexico pays tribute to all United Nations staff who lost
their lives in pursuit of a better future for the beloved
Haitian people. We will never forget them.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank China for convening
this very important debate. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite, for her briefing and reiterate
my Government’s appreciation for her leadership.
I also welcome the contribution of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis.
I would like to start by commending Haitian political
actors for their visible efforts to work together on a joint
legislative agenda that includes more than 50 draft laws
to reinforce State functions, ensure better territorial
planning and improve the business environment in the
country. The “Caravane du changement” initiative,
aimed at revitalizing the agricultural, environmental
and transport sectors, is a good example of how a broadbased national dialogue can forge a common vision
around reform priorities that address the most pressing
socioeconomic and political challenges. Brazil joined
the Economic and Social Council’s Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti in its annual visit to Washington, D.C.,
and to Port-au-Prince in order to examine ways to
strengthen the partnership between the Government
and the international community in support of the
country’s economic recovery and development. The
importance of a responsible transition from the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to the United Nations Mission in Support of Justice in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), based on realistic planning and
Haitian ownership, was one of its main findings.
Brazil is fully committed to a smooth security
transition in Haiti. Last month, the Brazilian component
concluded the handover of security tasks to the national
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8005

police in the commune of Cité Soleil, Port-au-Prince,
in close coordination with MINUSTAH’s police
component and while sharing the lessons learned in
more than 10 years of operations in that area.

Those projects have played an important role in
supporting core stabilization objectives and will
certainly be crucial to the consolidation of the rule of
law in Haiti.

Although the Haitian National Police capacities have
improved in recent years, it is important to highlight the
considerable remaining challenges that this relatively
young institution faces. The number of police officers
is still insufficient, corresponding to only half of world
standards for public security. Training and management
also need significant improvement and support. We
believe that the successful implementation of the
Haitian National Police strategic plan for the period
2017-2021, just adopted by the Haitian Government,
will be crucial during the transition from MINUSTAH
to MINUJUSTH.

Brazil noted with appreciation the Council’s visit
to Haiti last month, which aimed at renewing support
to the Haitian Government and people and gathering
first-hand elements for a successful transition from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH. The 30 June briefing on
the visit (see S/PV.7994) made it clear that, for several
stakeholders, the fact that MINUJUSTH has been kept
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
fails to recognize the significant progress that has
been achieved in Haiti during MINUSTAH’s 13 years
of operations.

We concur with the observation in the Secretary
General’s report (S/2017/604) that MINUJUSTH’s
success will largely depend upon its ability to
quickly forge a relationship of partnership, mutual
understanding and cooperation with the Government
on priority challenges that need to be addressed in the
country. Bold Government leadership will be vital to
consolidating the progress made thus far.
The reference to a “two-year mandate horizon”
for MINUJUSTH in the Secretary General’s report is
not the exact language adopted in Council resolution
2350 (2017), which reads “a projected two-year
timeframe” — a more flexible decision that is line with
the conditions on the ground. Pre-empting the closure
of a mission that has not been established yet may
jeopardize its functioning and the implementation of
its mandate.
We are glad to see that the Secretary General’s report
acknowledges the importance of quick-impact projects
implemented by MINUSTAH in support of the Haitian
National Police in recent months. We believe that this
important tool should also be present in the section
which describes the operations of MINUJUSTH. The
planning under way should duly reflect and implement
Council resolution 2350 (2017), including paragraph 11,
which
“[D]ecides that the rule of law efforts of
MINUJUSTH, including community violence
reduction efforts and quick impact projects,
as appropriate, will be part of a strategy
towards a continued, progressive transition to
development actors”.

Besides that, we could not help but notice that the
issue of cholera was mentioned at every meeting as a
serious concern that required attention. MINUJUSTH
should be empowered to support the implementation of
the new United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti.
Brazil’s own support to that approach remains steadfast.
We will continue to collaborate with the health sector
in Haiti, including through bilateral initiatives, such
as the three hospitals and the rehabilitation centre that
the Brazilian Government has supported with a budget
totalling $90 million to date. As the United Nations
reconfigures its presence in the country, we believe
that Haiti could also benefit from the support of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its Peacebuilding Fund.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Brazil’s
long-term commitment to, and solidarity with, Haiti,
as well as our confidence in the Haitian people’s
persistence and their determination to succeed in their
quest for stability, democracy and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Dabouis (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its 28
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/604), and his Special Representative

17-2184721/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

for her briefing. I also thank the
Representative of Haiti for his statement.

Permanent

On 13 April, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2350 (2017), which extended the mandate
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for a final period of six months. The
resolution also laid down the legal framework for the
transition to the United Nations Mission in Support of
Justice in Haiti (MINUJUSТН), whose role will be to
strengthen the rule of law and the police and to protect
and promote human rights. MINUSTAH has played a
key role in the area of security for the people of Haiti
for almost 10 years, including ensuring security during
especially difficult times such as, for example, the most
recent elections. It continues to be a very important part
of security in Haiti.
The prolonged institutional instability that has
marked the electoral process in Haiti seems finally
to be over. The completion of the process has enabled
Haiti to elect a President transparently and credibly and
by an ample majority. The National Assembly has been
renewed, while a new Government has been formed
with a programme that has the Assembly’s confidence.
We welcome the country’s return to constitutional order
in accordance with the will of the electorate, despite the
enormous difficulties it has to deal with and its systemic
weaknesses. This is a vital ingredient in ensuring
that Haiti will be able to cope with its many political,
economic, social and environmental challenges.
As has been the case for the past few years, the efforts
of all concerned to ensure stability and security will be
crucial to the process of consolidating democracy. A
key element will be ensuring that consensus is reached
on thorough reform of the electoral system if Haiti is to
avoid new crises and regain the people’s trust. In order
to see that happen, the European Union will continue
to be a faithful partner to the Republic of Haiti and
remains committed to supporting it in consultation
with its partners during this delicate phase, including
through the necessary reforms.
We acknowledge the closure of MINUSTAH and
its replacement by a smaller entity, MINUJUSTH,
which will focus on supporting the Haitian National
Police. In that regard, we have given serious attention
to Security Council members’ comments at the 29 June
briefing on the Council’s visit to Haiti a few days before
(see S/PV.7994). In our view, the security situation in
Haiti is still very fragile, and we therefore consider
22/26

18/07/2017

it vital to complete the work of strengthening and
professionalizing the Haitian police. When the time
comes during the transition period, we must be sure
that the necessary continuity has been well prepared
for. The security and well-being of citizens, and the
stability of the country as a whole, depend upon it. In
that context, we welcome the special attention that the
Secretary General’s report gives to rule-of-law and
human rights issues, and we urge that they be revisited
in greater detail with clarification of the stages and
responsibilities involved.
In conclusion, I would like to once again express
the European Union’s appreciation for the contribution
that MINUSTAH has made to security and to building
democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. We also expect
to see some critical reactions to various aspects of the
Mission, since it is important to learn from the past if
we are to improve our effort in the future. We welcome
the preparations for the transition, which should be
carefully designed to ensure continuity for our joint
efforts. Now the sequence of events that will ultimately
leave the Haitian State fully responsible for the security
and protection of its citizens must be planned, detailed
and launched. Special attention must be given to respect
for human rights on the security front and to access to
impartial justice for all. It is essential to ensure that
the Haitian police and judicial system will be properly
prepared to take over all the tasks currently being done
by the United Nations Mission.
Together with the United Nations and the
international community, the European Union will
support the Haitian authorities in consolidating their
commitment and efforts to secure a better future, in
an atmosphere of peace, democracy and well-being, for
the Haitian people.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to speak in today’s debate at a crucial time
for Haiti when, with the support of the Security Council
and the Group of Friends of Haiti of the Organization
of American States, of which Colombia is part, Haitians
are taking a new step in the right direction in order to
build an environment of sustainable peace, now with a
special emphasis on justice. I would also like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti, for her briefing on
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/604) and for the
long years of commitment that she has shown to the
Haitian people and to the United Nations in carrying
out her duties.
On Friday, during the General Assembly’s adoption
of resolution 71/314, on the new United Nations approach
to cholera in Haiti, of which my country was a sponsor,
it became clear that the United Nations has a greater
impact on the ground with regard to its ethical duty
when it implements its mandates on the basis of precise,
comprehensive road maps that take into account the
specifics of each case, thereby enabling it to improve
its allocation of resources and efforts designed to deal
with conflicts, humanitarian crises and, in this case,
the consolidation of peace. My country acknowledges
the political process that Haiti has made, as the report
and the Ambassador of Haiti describe, and which has
unquestionably helped to bring an official end, starting
on 25 October, to the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to
usher in a new phase that can now focus on support to
justice through the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
Colombia firmly believes that the path towards
peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies goes hand
in hand with the strength of their democratic institutions
and the rule of law — a battle we will support Haiti in
carrying out. The efforts undertaken to ensure that the
Haitian people can count on a professional and more
robust national police force enjoy the support of the
Government of Colombia by way of our deployment
of police, men and women, as well as the training
provided in our country to women contingents of the
Haitian National Police, to which we today commit to
continue to support. Nevertheless, the next step must of
course be to make progress in strengthening the judicial
system in such a way that the path towards justice
includes the establishment of a foundation conducive to
improvements in the socioeconomic conditions of the
entire population.
In its 2017 report, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti makes it clear that it will continue to work so that
there is greater coordination among all actors involved
in addressing the challenges facing Haitians when it
comes not just to cholera, but generally with regard to
human rights, political participation and sustainable
development, so that they can respond to the challenges
they will face once MINUSTAH departs and the

S/PV. 8005

new mission begins, while also improving prospects
for development.
The history of friendship and cooperation between
Haiti and Colombia goes back to our own independence,
when Haiti afforded Simón Bolívar an opportunity to
restructure his troops and again take the path towards
the independence of our peoples. We would therefore
not be here were it not for that support. It is for that
reason that I would like to recall the words expressed
here by President Santos Calderón when we presided
over the Security Council in 2011:
“Haitians yearn to be heard. An international
community that does not take Haitians’ views of
their problems into account does not serve Haiti.”
(S/PV.6510, p. 3)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, the United States,
Uruguay and my country, Peru.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having organized this debate to discuss the latest
report (S/2017/604)of the Secretary-General, issued on
12 July, on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), requested by the Security Council
in its resolution 2350 (2017), adopted on 13 April.
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite, and thanks
her for her exhaustive briefing and the role she has
played in supporting the political process in Haiti, the
professionalization of the police and the maintenance of
a safe and stable environment.
The Group of Friends also welcomes with
satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April.
The Group of Friends acknowledges the important
role that MINUSTAH played in promoting stability
and security in Haiti. The Group expresses its deep
appreciation and gratitude to the staff of MINUSTAH
and to all Member States that have contributed to the
Mission. Furthermore, the Group pays homage to those
who were injured or lost their lives in the line of duty.

17-2184723/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability and improving socioeconomic
conditions are key elements to achieve greater security,
stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard, the Group
of Friends is pleased that Haiti has continued to make
progress in consolidating its democracy and stability.
The Group of Friends congratulates the President of the
Republic of Haiti, Mr. Jovenel Moïse, for the actions
undertaken during his first 100 days of in office,
including the “Caravane du changement” initiative.
The Group of Friends emphasizes the importance
that national ownership, inclusion and the role that civil
society can play to advance national peacebuilding
processes and reiterates the vitality of the commitment
of the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule of
law and to achieve greater progress in the justice and
security sectors.
The Group of Friends welcomes the continued
strengthening, professionalization and reform of the
Haitian National Police (HNP) and welcomes the
approval by Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant of the
HNP strategic development plan for the period 20172021, as well as the approach of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
to the institutional and professional development of the
HNP within the framework of the plan.
The Group of Friends stresses that there can be no
genuine stability, peace or sustainable development in
Haiti without democratic institutions and strengthened
democratic processes. In that context, the Group
recognizes the limited progress made in the performance
of judicial institutions and in the administration
of justice. The Group of Friends emphasizes the
importance of strengthening the rule of law through the
consolidation of Haitian institutions and reaffirms the
role of MINUSTAH and its successor, MINUJUSTH,
in supporting the Haitian State by promoting
better governance structures, the transparency and
independence of the judiciary, as well as the promotion
and protection of human rights, in accordance with
their mandates. In that regard, the Group of Friends
encourages the Government of Haiti to make progress
in the areas of justice and human rights.
The Group of Friends recognizes that the
strengthening of national human rights institutions and
respect for human rights, including those of women
and children; due process and the fight against crime,
24/26

18/07/2017

sexual and gender-based violence; the end of impunity
and prolonged pre-trial detention; and the promotion
of accountability, are essential to guarantee the rule of
law and security in Haiti, including access to justice.
The Group of Friends stresses the importance of the
Haitian authorities assigning the human rights portfolio
to a specific Government ministry.
The Group of Friends welcomes General Assembly
resolutions 71/161 A and 71/161 B, on the new United
Nations approach to cholera in Haiti, which aims to
renew the efforts of the Organization to eliminate the
transmission of cholera and to address the suffering of
its victims. The Group welcomes the decrease in the
number of suspected cases of cholera and related deaths
as a result of the increased response to cholera. The
Group believes that efforts to eliminate cholera should
continue and encourages Member States to contribute
to the United Nations Haiti Cholera Response
Multi-Partner Trust Fund to support the new approach,
including reorienting to the Fund, where possible,
the excess balance from MINUSTAH’s 2015-2016
balance sheet. The Group of Friends also welcomes the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Josette
Sheeran as Special Envoy for Haiti, who will guide
the full implementation of the new United Nations
approach to reduce the impact of cholera and will
support national efforts to achieve sustainable growth
in Haiti by 2030 and the implementation plan.
The Group of Friends notes that, while significant
progress has been made, Haiti continues to face major
humanitarian challenges, especially due to the impact
of Hurricane Matthew. In that regard, the Group
welcomes the mission of the Senior Transformative
Agenda Implementation Team of the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee, which made recommendations to
the humanitarian country team and the Government on
how to improve the effectiveness of the humanitarian
architecture,
optimize
coordination
between
humanitarian and development actors, and adopt a
more strategic approach to protection.
In addition, the Group of Friends affirms that
progress in the reconstruction of Haiti, as well
as Haiti’s socioeconomic development, including
effective, coordinated and commendable international
development assistance, and Haitian institutional
capacity-building in order to benefit from that assistance,
is crucial to achieve sustainable peace and stability,
and reiterates the need for security to be accompanied
by sustainable social, economic and environmental
17-21847

18/07/2017

The situation concerning Haiti

development, efforts in which the Government of Haiti
plays a leading role, with the support of the United
Nations country team.
The Group of Friends acknowledges the important
contribution of MINUSTAH to stabilization in Haiti.
It has initiated the implementation of a comprehensive
withdrawal plan covering the military, police and
civilian components. The Group of Friends welcomes the
fact that MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team have finalized and adopted a joint transition plan
as the culmination of the comprehensive planning
process that began in 2014-2015. The Group of Friends
reiterates its solidarity with and commitment to the
people and the Government of Haiti in their aspiration
for stability, reconstruction, recovery, economic
development and the consolidation of democracy.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like at the outset to thank the Chinese
presidency for having convened this meeting.
Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti and would like to make the following
additional brief comments.
We thank the Special Representative, Ms. Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite, for her briefing on the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2350 (2017) (S/2017/604) and reiterate our
country’s full support for her efforts.
We once again underscore the important
work carried out by all staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who,
despite the tremendous challenges with which they are
confronted, including devastating natural disasters,
have fulfilled their mandate of helping Haiti to move
towards sustainable peace and development. We also
reiterate our congratulations to President Jovenel Moïse
on his election and on the actions taken during his first
100 days in office, which are aimed at consolidating
democracy and relaunching the Haitian economy.
Argentina would like to underline the achievements
that we have seen in the run-up to the withdrawal of
MINUSTAH and the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), in
particular the progress on aspects relating to the future
implementation of MINUJUSTH’s important mandate

S/PV. 8005

of assistance to the consolidation of rule-of-law
institutions, the strengthening of the Haitian National
Police and the promotion and protection of human
rights in the country.
We support the transition plan and the political
strategy drawn up by the Secretary-General, as
described in the report submitted to us for consideration.
Without prejudice to all of the aforementioned, it is our
understanding that although resolution 2350 (2017)
envisages a two-year time frame for the new Mission, the
lifetime or duration of MINUJUSTH must be dependent
on the situation on the ground rather than prescribed
by rigid deadlines, thus avoiding any premature
withdrawal that would imperil the achievements made
throughout the 13 years of MINUSTAH’s presence in
the country.
Moreover, and, as is foreseen in the aforementioned
resolution, we believe it essential that the new Mission
include quick-impact projects which, according to the
report, have benefited more than 2 million people during
the fiscal year 2016–2017 by financing activities related
to the rule of law, governance, public infrastructure and
the supply of safe drinking water. Argentina believes
that such projects, together with those aimed at reducing
community violence, are vital in order to move forward
in the building and sustaining of peace in Haiti, as well
as to forge ties of cooperation and trust between the
United Nations presence and the Haitian people.
Argentina
had
previously
welcomed
the
appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General charged with drawing
up a comprehensive strategy for the implementation of
the Organization’s new focus on cholera in Haiti and
with supporting Haitian efforts to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals.
It is a great pleasure for me to share with the Council
the fact that my country, Argentina, recently announced
a voluntary contribution to the United Nations Haiti
Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. We are
confident that the new Mission will contribute to the
implementation of the aforementioned new approach
on cholera.
The withdrawal of the Argentine military hospital
last August and the ending of MINUSTAH’s mandate
in no way mean that we are cutting ties with Haiti,
particularly given that in addition to continuing our
bilateral cooperation, we will make available civilian
police officers and specific capacities, particularly

17-2184725/26

S/PV.8005

The situation concerning Haiti

in the framework of the Mission’s mandate, which is
aimed at strengthening and ensuring the professional
development of the Haitian National Police.
On that point, and without prejudice to the sovereign
decisions that Haiti might take on issues related to its
own security and defence, we trust that the eventual
planned deployment of armed forces in the country
will not detract from the effective implementation of
the recently concluded strategic development plan for
the Haitian National Police 2017–2021.
I should like to conclude by reiterating Argentina’s
commitment to Haiti and paying tribute to the work of
Ms. Honoré Braithwaite and to the work of all military,
police and civilian staff of MINUSTAH. We wish also
to honour the memory of those who have given their
lives in service of its noble mission.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the briefing that we have heard from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré Braithwaite. We also welcome
the presence here this morning of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Régis.
Chile aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti.
On 15 July, the ship Sargento Aldea arrived in
Valparaiso, bringing home the last Chilean troops
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and thus wrapping up Chile’s more than
12 years of participation in the Mission. Although our
military presence is coming to an end, the principles
that inspired our involvement in the first place still hold
true. Together with supporting security standards in the
country, including through the strengthening of police
capacity, our contribution to Haiti also focused on a
broad array of tasks aimed at supporting communities,
including the repair and rebuilding of educational
establishments, the building of kindergartens and
the financing of scholarships, among other areas of
cooperation. Our support and cooperation, together
with other actors and stakeholders and guided by
Haitian priorities, will continue as we seek to further
cement the achievements of the past 13 years.

26/26

18/07/2017

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/604)
details the major achievements in the stabilization of
Haiti, including the headway made in the consolidation
of democracy there. We congratulate President Jovenel
Moïse on the actions taken during his first 100 days
in office, including the “Caravane du changement”
initiative, which, hopefully, will lay the foundation
for a more equitable Haiti. We also welcome the
creation of a legislative agenda in keeping with the
way in which the Haitian people are coming together to
pursue a common goal. These milestones represent an
opportunity that we cannot let slip through our fingers
if we wish to consolidate the principle of national
ownership and foster the necessary synergies with the
international community.
The support of the United Nations for Haiti will
remain essential in the process of the consolidation and
transition. We welcome the joint plan drawn up between
MINUSTAH and the country team, which was arrived
at through a careful planning process. We reiterate
that we must be aware at all times of conditions on the
ground, and in particular of the need for coordination
among all stakeholders. We cannot allow the gains
achieved on the path towards stability and development
to be rolled back.
There is no doubt that the main humanitarian
challenge facing Haiti on the path towards sustainable
development is that of tackling the cholera epidemic.
We welcome the recent adoption of General Assembly
resolution 71/314, supporting the new United Nations
approach to cholera, which was co-sponsored by my
country. We hope that the adoption of the resolution
will strengthen the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, and we appeal
to the international community to contribute to the
financing of said instrument.
Finally, it would be remiss of me to conclude without
drawing attention to the tireless efforts of Ms. Sandra
Honoré Braithwaite to bring the process to a successful
close. Chile expresses once again its appreciation for
her commitment and that of her team to the Haitian
people and to the United Nations.
Finally, we reiterate Chile’s commitment to
Haiti and its people and reaffirms the importance of
continuing to support this sisterly nation, which has
sovereign authority over its own development.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

17-21847
