S/PV.7876

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7876th meeting

Thursday, 2 February 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Thöresson
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-02815 (E)
*1702815*

Ukraine

S/PV.7876

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

(see S/PV.7683), fighting has continued unabated,
with only short periods of respite. Almost 10,000
people have been killed — Ukrainian armed forces,
civilians and members of armed groups — and more
than 23,000 have been injured since the beginning of
the conflict, according to the human rights Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine; over 2,000 of those
killed were civilians.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs; Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan,
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome
Ambassador Apakan, who is joining today’s meeting
via video teleconference from Kyiv.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Two days ago, the Security Council discussed the
deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine and
succeeded in adopting a press statement (SC/12700) on
the subject. It became the first document of the Council
on the situation in and around Ukraine in almost
two years.
Unfortunately, despite the Council’s call for an
immediate return to a ceasefire regime, the situation
in Avdiivka and other areas of eastern Ukraine remains
tense, with strong signs of a possible further escalation.
Therefore, today’s discussion is meant to contribute
to the settlement of the conflict. If we find common
ground, I suggest we consider the possibility of
adopting a draft presidential statement. If the Council
agrees with such a proposal, in the coming days we may
embark upon drafting it to reflect the main elements of
this briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: The conflict in Ukraine will
soon enter its fourth year. Since the Department of
Political Affairs last briefed the Security Council on
the situation in eastern Ukraine, on 28 April 2016
2/20

02/02/2017

Since 7 January, and in particular over the past
few days, we have seen a dangerous intensification
of the conflict. On 1 February, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission reported over 10,000 explosions in
the Donetsk region over 24 hours, the highest number
of violations yet recorded by the Mission. While the
most serious clashes in the past few days predominantly
hit the Avdiivka, Yasnuvata and Donetsk airport areas,
heavy fighting has also been reported near Mariupol,
Popasna and the Svitlodarsk/Debeltseve areas, both
in Government- and non-Government-controlled
territories. The entire length of the contact line has
seen a serious escalation of hostilities, and there is still
a risk of further deterioration of the situation.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has also
registered frequent use of heavy weapons proscribed
by the Minsk agreements, such as multiple launch
rocket systems, including in the areas designated for
disengagement, as per the 21 September 2016 framework
decision of the Trilateral Contact Group relating to
the disengagement of forces and hardware. There are
reports of civilian casualties, including at least four
deaths since the escalation on 28 January, and heavy
losses among combatants on both sides. The human
rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine also recorded
damage to civilian houses and a school in populated
areas of Avdiivka, which raises serious concerns about
possible violations of international humanitarian law
by all sides.
There are now reports of clashes that are directly
endangering civilian crossing points, residential
areas and critical civilian infrastructure, such as
water purification plants and delivery systems, power
lines and heating supply lines. Ensuring the urgent
disengagement of forces at all checkpoints across the
contact line would greatly improve the security of
the population in the conflict-affected areas, where
more than 20,000 people cross the contact line daily.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians on both sides of
the contact line are still at risk of losing all access to
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

heating, water and electricity, bringing the spectre
of further displacement closer. That is particularly
worrying given the frigid winter temperatures in the
region at present.
There are also real threats of serious environmental
disasters should any of the major chemical-waste
storage locations in the area be shelled. As of yesterday,
thousands of inhabitants in Avdiivka, including
children, were reportedly at risk of being evacuated.
The combatants must stop the shelling in cities such as
Avdiivka, on both sides of the contact line, and enable
basic services to be restored. The Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, will shortly provide further updates on the
humanitarian situation on the ground.
We welcome the prompt statement (SC/12700)
issued by the Security Council on 31 January on the
deterioration of the situation in the Donetsk region. The
Secretary-General has expressed deep concern about
the high level of military readiness and the recently
intensified fighting, which is having an increasingly
serious impact on the civilian population in the
conflict areas. He has called on all parties to halt all
hostilities immediately, fully observe the ceasefire,
allow immediate and unhindered humanitarian access
to the affected population, facilitate full and safe access
for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission so that it
can report on the situation on the ground, and renew
serious efforts to reach a peaceful settlement of the
conflict. He particularly underlines how imperative it
is that all sides take every possible measure to protect
civilians and refrain from any action that could be seen
as provocative or might escalate tensions.
In just a few days, the intensity of the hostilities
around the Avdiivka-Yasnuvota-Donetsk airport areas
has risen to levels that the Special Monitoring Mission
has never before recorded in the area. The escalation
demonstrates how precarious the situation continues to
be and how suddenly and abruptly the security situation
can deteriorate. The statement agreed on at yesterday’s
meeting in Minsk between the Trilateral Contact Group
and representatives from various areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions lays down the urgent measures the
sides should take, not only in the area under discussion
but along the entire contact line, in order to prevent
further ceasefire violations that could in turn spiral
out of control. That is a positive development, but the
test will be in the implementation of the measures. The
pattern of successive ceasefire agreements broken by

S/PV.7876

fresh violence has left civilians caught in the crossfire
and trapped in suffering. With every new day of
fighting, the conflict becomes more entrenched and
more difficult to resolve. There is no military solution
to this conflict.
Despite the commendable efforts of the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Normandy four, the recent
intensification of the conflict coincides with a period
of relative stagnation in the diplomatic processes
designed to find a peaceful solution and ensure the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements. The
international community must remain constructively
and actively engaged, however, if we are to prevent
this crisis from becoming a catastrophe. In that regard,
there is a pressing need to revitalize the negotiation
process without delay.
The United Nations continues to strongly support
the efforts being made in the Normandy four and
Trilateral Contact Group frameworks and of the
OSCE chairship in Ukraine. We commend the work
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, which is
carrying out essential work under extremely difficult
circumstances in the conflict areas. The United Nations
calls on both sides to lift all restrictions on the Special
Monitoring Mission’s freedom of movement and to
immediately end all use of force or threats against the
Mission’s monitors. We welcomed the January visits of
Mr. Sebastian Kurz, OSCE Chairperson-in-Office and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria, to Ukraine and
the Russian Federation, and hope that his engagement,
along with other ongoing efforts, will bear fruit. The
United Nations stands ready to support those efforts.
I look forward to hearing today from Ambassador
Apakan, Chief Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, about his assessment of the latest
developments the ground.
It has been almost two years since 12 February 2015,
when the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements was signed in Minsk, and in
turn endorsed by the Security Council’s adoption, on
17 February, of resolution 2202 (2015). That remains
the foundation based on which we, the international
community, have committed to seeking lasting peace
in eastern Ukraine. I urge the Council to continue those
efforts with renewed vigour.
In accordance with the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, the United Nations
remains committed to supporting a peaceful resolution

17-028153/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

of the conflict in a manner that fully upholds the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Ukraine. The United Nations priority continues to
be on supporting the peace efforts in Ukraine led by
the OSCE and ensuring the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The parties themselves, however,
have the main responsibility to work constructively to
that end.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the security situation in eastern Ukraine.
I am reporting to the Council today on the significant
escalation of violence that has taken place in the past
few days. The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has seen a sharp intensification in fighting
in the Avdiivka-Yasnyuvata-Donetsk airport area.
That latest upsurge comes after months of sustained
ceasefire violations, particularly in five hotspots in
eastern Ukraine, including in the Svitlodarsk and
Debaltseve areas, Horlivka, in areas east of Mariupol,
around Shyrokyne, and in Popasna, Pervomaiske and
Troitske, in the Luhansk region. Sporadic fighting has
continued, with several spikes in violence recorded
from November through January.
Today the fighting in that triangular area is in its
fifth day. The tension levels witnessed have increased
during that period and the ceasefire violations are
becoming more frequent and severe. Since 29 January,
the intensity of the fighting in and around Avdiivka
has been greater than in any similar period in recent
months. On 31 January, the Special Monitoring Mission
recorded thousands of explosions in Donetsk caused
by incoming and outgoing mortar and artillery fire,
including from multiple-launch rocket systems. On
1 February, there were almost 10,000 explosions in
the Donetsk region. Today the situation continues to
be tense and volatile. This is the highest number of
explosions that the Mission has ever recorded. Most
were in the Avdiivka and Yasnyuvata areas. The Special
Monitoring Mission has also registered a steep increase
in the use of all types of weapons regulated by the
Minsk agreements, and the use of Grad multiple-launch
rocket systems, mortars and artillery is particularly
worrying. The use of tanks has also been observed.
4/20

02/02/2017

The sides’ indiscriminate use of proscribed
weapons has resulted in civilian casualties and
considerable damage to civilian homes and essential
infrastructure. The conditions for civilians who have
remained in Avdiivka have reached emergency levels.
The town lost electricity when power lines in the area
were damaged. In the meantime, civilians, including
the most vulnerable, have been left without heat in
sub-zero winter temperatures. The Avdiivka coke
factory, which was providing the area with its main
source of heating, has lost its power and water supplies.
Repair crews have difficulty conducting repairs owing
to the security situation. Efforts to ensure access in
order to repair power lines and restore electricity to
the coke factory and the Donetsk filtration station are
ongoing. The Donetsk filtration station supplies water
to the population on both sides of the contact line, and
its protection is of the utmost importance. Further
damage to Donetsk and other water filtration stations in
the region could leave large parts of the Donetsk region
without water.
All of those factors demonstrate a blatant disregard
for the obligations undertaken by the signatories of the
Minsk agreements. Instead of the disengagement of
forces and hardware, we see the engagement of forces
and a full range of hardware in areas where they are
prohibited by the Minsk agreements. The Special
Monitoring Mission’s safe access and ability to conduct
effective monitoring and verification continues
to be restricted. The Mission needs full, safe and
unhindered access.
At the moment, our teams and monitors are
facilitating local ceasefires in the area, in coordination
with the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination — the
joint military centre for Russian and Ukrainian officers.
That window of opportunity, along with the ceasefires,
as unstable as they may be, helped to allow repair crews
to access the damaged sites. Those efforts are still under
way. Local ceasefires show that, if they are willing to,
the sides can stop fighting.
Allow me to reiterate that the developments in the
Avdiivka/Yasnuvata and Donetsk airport areas are of
great concern. In that context, I welcome yesterday’s joint
statement by the Trilateral Contact Group appealing for
strict adherence to a full and comprehensive cessation
of fire, withdrawal into storage sites of all weapons
regulated by the Minsk agreements, safe and secure
access for members of the Special Monitoring Mission
in accordance with the Mission’s mandate, and, finally,
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

the facilitation of efforts aimed at restoring water,
electricity and heating supplies, including by way of
the repair of infrastructure. I would like once again to
say to the Security Council that a ceasefire is a basic
requirement. We call for the immediate cessation
of fighting.
The withdrawal of heavy weapons is another
imperative. I should also mention that work is ongoing
in the disengagement areas. In that context, I must say
that the verification of heavy weapons is an important
step that we are trying to achieve through monitoring,
verification and reporting. It is also imperative that the
Special Monitoring Mission be given immediate safe
and unhindered access to the affected areas in order to
verify that sides are complying with their obligations on
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of weapons. I would
also reiterate that the sides should try to prioritize the
protection of civilians and the repair of infrastructure,
which is also an immediate need.
We will also continue to monitor the humanitarian
situation, which remains a matter of deep concern.
Violence on such a scale, involving the loss of life,
is unacceptable, and the protection of civilians must
be paramount. Access to shelter, water, heat and
medical care is limited in many areas. In that respect,
the Special Monitoring Mission works closely with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies. The
Mission will continue to implement its mandate with
impartiality and in close cooperation with all sides, in
the context of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We continue to support the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, and thereby contribute to
efforts towards peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and His Excellency Mr. Apakan for
their briefings. I am also grateful for this opportunity
to join them in briefing the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
Over three years into the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, in what has become yet another protracted
humanitarian crisis, we are now faced with a significant
deterioration in the situation following the sudden and
recent escalation in violence. That escalation on both
sides of the contact line in Donetsk oblast near Avdiivka
and Donetsk city has claimed the lives of four civilians,

S/PV.7876

all women, since 18 January, according to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. According to the United Nations team on the
ground, it is resulting in widespread fear, panic and
a real struggle to survive by civilians. We call on all
parties to immediately cease all hostilities in order to
prevent a further loss of life and further unacceptable
human suffering.
The current escalation in violence is causing severe
damage to critical infrastructure — water, electricity
and heating. Combined with low winter temperatures,
the result is a deteriorating humanitarian situation.
Today temperatures are -10ºC but, -20ºC is not unheard
of at this time of the year. Adequate shelter, heating
and access to water are therefore essential to people’s
survival. Shelling has damaged electricity and water
systems, with a knock-on effect on the heating supply;
once damaged, it could take days, or weeks, for systems
to restart. For civilians living on both sides of the front
line, that means they are not only traumatized, living
a precarious and dangerous existence, but damage to
critical services is making survival an issue. We are
also concerned about the reported presence of heavy
weapons in urban areas, which further heightens the
risk to civilians’ lives.
For example, critical water and electricity systems
in Avdiivka, a front-line town in Government-controlled
areas, were damaged by the the recent violence on 29 and
30 January. The United Nations and other humanitarian
partners joined a Government-led assessment team to
the town on 1 February, and are working to ensure that
critical needs are met in support of the Government.
That is not without risk. For example, two technical
teams sent to repair infrastructure were promised a
ceasefire for a few hours on 1 February in order to carry
out their work, but were subjected to small-arms fire in
non-government controlled areas and, as a result, were
forced to abandon their work. A similar incident took
place earlier today. The arrival of powerful generators
on 31 January in Avdiivka provided some temporary
respite to 17,000 people, including 2,500 children,
but that is not sufficient. Unless repairs are made, the
power that keeps the heating system functioning in
Avdiivka cannot be fully restored. The result could be
displacement on a large scale.
Avdiivka is not alone. Approximately 1 million
people in non-government controlled areas in Donetsk
city were without water or heating for 24 hours
following the shelling. A repair team has managed to

17-028155/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

fix some power lines, thereby managing to preserve the
city’s heating systems and avoid a major catastrophe.
Elsewhere, the 500,000 inhabitants of Mariupol are
now reliant on a backup reservoir after the water main
on which the city depends developed a massive leak. It
will take several days — once hostilities are over — to
ensure the area is demined and heavy machinery can
access the area to carry out repairs. Unfortunately,
shelling could be heard again last night in Donetsk and
in other areas along the contact line.
I welcome yesterday’s statement of the Trilateral
Contact Group in Minsk, which called for not only
strict adherence to a full and comprehensive cessation
of fire but also the facilitation of humanitarian efforts
aimed at the restoration of water, electricity and heating
supplies, including through the repair of infrastructure.
I also acknowledge the efforts of the Government of
Ukraine and the de facto authorities to provide critical
heating and water for those most at risk, but I highlight
that that is not enough. On 31 January, the Government
of Ukraine appealed to international organizations to
prepare to support civilian evacuees from Avdiivka
should it be necessary. The United Nations and
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
stand ready to lend their support.
If hostilities continue, we may also face a serious
environmental crisis. Damage to the phenol plant near
the village of Novgorodske means that waste chemicals,
including deadly sulfuric acid and formaldehyde, are
now at critical levels. Leakage into the surrounding land
and the Seversky Donets River would have disastrous
humanitarian consequences in a highly industrialized
part of Europe. Similarly, there is a real risk at present
that damage to water facilities could have further
deadly consequences for the population living in the
surrounding areas, with the potential leak of chlorine
gas, which is routinely stored at such facilities.
This latest escalation in violence is exacerbating the
ongoing needs of an estimated 3.8 million civilians who
continue to bear the brunt of this protracted conflict
and who require various degrees of humanitarian
assistance. There are 700,000 more people in need
this year as compared to those identified in the
2016 humanitarian response plan. More than 60 per
cent of those in need — approximately 2.3 million
people — reside in non-Government controlled areas.
Furthermore, over 70 per cent of people in need are
the elderly, women and children. Those demographic
groups are particularly vulnerable and must be accessed
6/20

02/02/2017

immediately with lifesaving assistance and protection
interventions. When I visited Luhansk and Donetsk just
over a year ago, I met an octogenarian woman living in
one room in the bombed-out ruins of her house, whose
son had been killed in the cracked remains of what
was once her front door when he just happened to be
visiting to check on her safety and a bomb came down
on him — an innocent non-combatant nipping back in
the lunch hour from his market store. While tending to
her rambling rose bush growing up the charred remains
of her house, she told me of her unconscionable grief,
of the cold she endures and that she would only light a
camp fire during the night, as she was afraid that any
smoke during the day would allow others to target her
location. It was truly heartbreaking. That is the reality
for so many civilians caught in this conflict, trapped
by the fighting with minimal shelter, critical services
cut-off and in desperate need of assistance and building
repair materials to prevent death or injury by either the
violence or the elements.
While some humanitarian response efforts continue,
since July 2015 the de facto authorities in Donetsk and
Luhansk have imposed undue bureaucratic restrictions
that are severely affecting humanitarian access. That is
in contradiction to their commitments under article 7
of the Minsk full package of measures, as well as their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.
Few partners are officially allowed to operate in those
areas and, on 25 November 2016, the international
NGO People in Need — the last international NGO to
have access — was summarily ejected from Donetsk
non-Government controlled areas, depriving 140,000
people of immediate lifesaving assistance. The United
Nations repeats its appeal to all parties to guarantee
secure and unimpeded access for United Nations and
humanitarian partners to all people in need, wherever
they may be.
Finally,
Government-imposed
bureaucratic
impediments, particularly in relation to the ban on
commercial trade and the importation of food and
medicines across the contact line, remain a serious
constraint to alleviating the humanitarian crisis.
In addition, the suspension of social payments by
the Government has severely affected hundreds of
thousands of displaced people.
I am alarmed about the turn that this conflict has
taken and about the increasing toll it has on the civilian
population. As the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
deteriorates, increasing numbers of people are at risk
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

and in need — their resilience eroded and their hope
fading. The inability to reach a political solution to this
crisis is resulting in further civilian casualties, damage
to critical infrastructure and more human suffering.
This suffering will continue until this conflict comes
to an end once and for all.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Ukraine.
I thank the briefers for the updated information they
provided on the attack on the town of Avdiivka, in the
Donetsk region of Ukraine, by the Russian occupying
forces and their proxies, which led to a humanitarian
emergency in the area.
Ukraine continues to be fully committed to
implementing the Minsk agreements in their entirety.
The President of Ukraine has stressed on many occasions
that there is no military solution in the Donbas. The
Ukrainian Government is sharply focused on peaceful
and diplomatic means in that regard. Ukrainian forces
continue to respect the ceasefire. They have strict
orders to open a fire only in response to the attacks and
assault actions of Russia-backed militants.
On the contrary, Russia, as the party to the conflict
in Donbas, and its proxies have blatantly violated the
Minsk agreements from the very beginning. They have
continued their attacks and occupied several Ukrainian
towns and localities. As of now, Russian proxies occupy
about 1,700 square kilometres, going far beyond the
contact line agreed in Minsk on 19 September 2014.
Before the crisis in Avdiivka, there was the battle
for Debaltseve two years ago, which was captured by
Russian forces immediately after the Minsk summit on
12 February 2015, contrary to decisions taken by the
leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France.
In the early hours of Sunday, 29 January, the
Russian army and its proxies began massive artillery
attacks on Avdiivka and its suburbs from residential
areas in Donetsk and Yasynuvata, which are under the
control of the Russia-led terrorists, and sent assault
units to storm positions of the Ukrainian armed forces.
The Russian forces used Grad multiple-rocket launch
systems, tanks, 152-millimetre and 122-millimetre
artillery, and 120-millimetre and 82-millimetre
mortars. All those weapons are forbidden under the
Minsk agreements. On 29 January alone, the Ukrainian
positions were shelled nearly 400 times.

S/PV.7876

The shelling intensified on 30 and 31 January,
when civilian infrastructure sites were also targeted.
As a result, the Donetsk water filtration plant and the
Avdiivka coke plant, which provides heat for Avdiivka,
are now without electricity. The city is left without
water, electricity or heat. The current temperature in
Avdiivka is -18°C. Without central heat, civilians will
not survive. Sixteen thousand people ended up without
water, electricity or heat, including 2,000 children.
Just imagine: 2,000 children without heat at -18°C.
Ukrainian emergency services prepared to evacuate
people from Avdiivka.
Numerous attempts by the Ukrainian services
to repair damaged infrastructure were consistently
blocked until 1 February by the Russia-led terrorists,
who continued shelling, and by the Russian part of
the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination (JCCC),
which were unreasonably delayed in providing security
guarantees necessary to reach the destroyed objects.
According to information that we just received
15 minutes before the start of this briefing, the separatist
forces resumed the shelling of residential areas of
Avdiivka using high-calibre artillery systems. Several
residential buildings were hit and there are several fires
around the town. One of the shells exploded close to a
temporary heating station that had been set up by the
Ukrainian authorities to provide Avdiivka residents
with warmth in these freezing temperatures.
Destroying critical infrastructure and thus
creating a humanitarian disaster is a terrorist tactic
aimed primarily at civilians. This tactic obliterates the
Russian propaganda myth of so-called peaceful miners
who fight the authorities with their own shotguns.
Locals would never do this to their neighbours, but
those who have come to Ukrainian soil as aggressors to
destroy Ukrainian statehood do not hesitate to damage
factories, houses and powerlines. This tactic is not new
for the Russian forces.
The aforementioned actions by Russia may qualify
as a war crime. Ukraine will add evidence related to the
recent escalation and indiscriminate attacks on civilian
infrastructure to our claim against Russia on terrorism
to the International Court of Justice. This is a first but
very important step in bringing Russia to justice for its
mounting violations of the United Nations Charter and
international law.
The Ukrainian Government announced the
emergency situation in Avdiivka. We have managed

17-028157/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

02/02/2017

to sustain the functioning of the heating system at a
minimum level and to avoid the rapid degradation
of the situation into a real humanitarian disaster.
Eleven warming centres have been set up, scores of
field kitchens have been deployed, and kindergartens
and hospitals are functioning in emergency mode.
Additional police units have been deployed to protect
civil order and to help provide a timely response to
the emergency.

humanitarian catastrophe in Avdiivka, as was done, by
the way, by the Russian army in Aleppo not so long ago.

The events of recent days have become a test for
monitoring and coordination mechanisms in Donbas.
Since the outbreak of hostilities, Ukraine has repeatedly,
literally hundreds of times, requested Russian
representatives at the JCCC to use their influence to
stop the hostilities. Of the 230 requests made during
the period from 29 January to 1 February to stop the
hostilities in the area around Avdiivka, all but two were
ignored. On 31 January, Ukraine called for an urgent
video-teleconference meeting of the Trilateral Contact
Group (TCG) to defuse tensions. Once again, the
Russian side and their proxies in Donbas did not show
up, claiming that this was not the right time. Seriously?
Not the right time?

The attacks on and near Avdiivka in recent days as
well as the continuing Russian aggression underscore
two important trends. First, Russia and its proxies in
Donbas continue to block and undermine the peaceful
process by pursuing their political objectives through
the indiscriminate use of force. There can be no illusion
about the Russian role in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Every bit of progress made in the
TCG or on the contact line is flagrantly destroyed by
another assault by Russia-led terrorists.

Despite calls from all corners for a ceasefire
and the withdrawal of heavy weaponry, the militants
continue shelling day and night. On 1 February, despite
the appeal of the Trilateral Contact Group for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in the region of
Avdiivka, Russian militants did not stop shooting, and
even shot at the repair team that was trying to fix the
damaged power line. They shelled residential buildings
and last night shelled one of the roads designated for
the evacuation of civilians. This is nothing less than a
war crime.
I have a picture here that I would ask the Council
to look at. This is an apartment building in Avdiivka;
at least 1,500 people lived there. It was shelled by
terrorists, and the inhabitants rushed out into the
freezing cold; it was -20°C outside. This is beyond evil.
The perpetrators, those who pulled the trigger and those
who gave the orders, should face justice, and they will.
It has to be mentioned that when the content of
the aforementioned appeal was being discussed in the
Trilateral Contact Group, the Russian side was against
the formulations regarding repair work on the energy
and power-supply infrastructure. This is additional
clear evidence of the Kremlin’s intention to create a
8/20

Two Ukrainian soldiers have died and 14 have
been wounded over the past 24 hours. Altogether, 20
Ukrainian soldiers have been killed and 134 wounded
by Russian hybrid forces and Russia-backed militants
since the beginning of the year. We call on the Russian
Federation to abide by the ceasefire and to ensure the
necessary secure conditions for the repair work.

Secondly, the existing mechanisms created to avoid
further destabilization and to move forward with the
implementation of the Minsk agreements are not efficient
enough to fulfil their mandate. Despite the urgency of
the situation, the TCG met only three days after the
outbreak of hostilities, and the JCCC appears to be an
ineffective tool in a crisis situation — all of this due
to Russian non-cooperation. Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
observers still face serious restrictions on their freedom
of movement on the territories temporary controlled by
Russia-backed militants. They lack 24/7 monitoring
capabilities and the relevant technical means.
The events around Avdiivka have created an
obstacle to Russia’s aspiration to resolve the conflict
in Donbas by military means. Yes, the Ukrainian army
proved its strength and ability to repeal a Russian
offensive. However, Ukraine is paying a dramatically
high price, losing its best sons and daughters to this war.
We care about our people. The death of every
single soldier or civilian is yet another scar on the soul
of Ukraine. I ask the Council to look at this picture;
it shows a 26-year-old officer, Andriy Kyzylo, who
was killed on 29 February near Avdiivvka. Look at his
eyes, Mr. Ambassador; it is your weapons and your
compatriots who killed him.
(spoke in Russian)
You killed him.
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

(spoke in English)
Our people get down on their knees to treat their
fallen defenders. Russian invaders are buried in
unmarked graves. We are seeking peace and are doing
our utmost and taking every step to bring peace back
to Ukraine. Therefore, we do not advocate a military
solution and believe that the available political means
should be used. The armed confrontation could be
easily ended. The Russian Federation should stop
arming militants and sending its mercenaries and
military personnel to Ukraine.
Does anyone seriously think that rockets and
artillery shells grow on trees in Donbas? We are talking
about tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of rounds
of artillery ammunition. Since November, we and
international observers have noted an increased supply
of ammunition and armour to militants from the Russian
Federation. Now we are seeing the consequences.
What is clear is that an international security
presence on the ground needs to be enhanced so as to
prevent such provocations in future and thus contribute
to the implementation of the Minsk agreements and,
ultimately, to a peaceful resolution. We once again urge
the Russian Federation to exercise its responsibility to
implement the Minsk commitments, specifically their
security and humanitarian provisions. We urge Russia
to halt its support for terrorists and to stop building
hybrid terrorist armies in eastern Ukraine as well as its
military buildup along Ukraine’s eastern borders.
Moreover, we call on the Russian Federation not
to expand the framework of the escalation. Yesterday
Russian military forces shelled and damaged an
Antonov An-26 Ukrainian aircraft while it was
conducting a flight over the Odessa gas-deposit region
in the Black Sea, in Ukraine’s exclusive maritime zone.
This time only a lucky coincidence saved the crew from
the Russian shelling. God only knows what will happen
next time.
There is a rather simple remedy that would stop
this Russian aggression against my country and prevent
further civilian suffering. What the international
community needs to do is to step up the pressure on the
aggressor and urge the Russian Federation to get out
of Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

S/PV.7876

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful for today’s briefings, which
painted a disturbing picture of the ongoing events and
suffering of the people of eastern Ukraine.
What has basically been happening is quite obvious.
Kyiv is attempting to use clashes it has itself provoked
as a pretext for a complete refusal to implement the
Minsk agreements, signed on 12 February 2015 and
endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015). However hard
the Ukrainian side tries to portray things differently,
including by convening this meeting of the Council and
making statements that turn the facts upside down, there
is a massive amount of information, including open
admissions by Ukrainian officials right up to the level
of the country’s President, that is too overwhelming to
permit denial of the destructive policies of Kyiv and its
armed forces.
On 3 January, Ukraine’s Defence Minister Poltorak
confirmed that the Ukrainian armed forces had seized
new positions in the grey zone, with the demagogic claim
that that did not violate the Minsk agreements because
the occupied territories thereby belonged to Ukraine.
On 17 January, Interior Minister Avakov, speaking to
Ukrainian border guards, urged them to prepare to
seize the State borders in 2017. On 22 January, President
Poroshenko declared publicly that Ukraine would not be
doing anything about political reform until it regained
full control of its border with Russia, in an approach that
completely perverts the content of the Minsk package
of measures and deliberately renders them unrealizable,
practically speaking. Lastly, yesterday Deputy Defence
Minister Pavlovsky completed the picture by bragging
to the press that his heroic lads were moving forward
where they could, metre by metre, step by step.
That overtly militaristic rhetoric has had very real
consequences, as is clearly apparent from the latest
reports of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). Observers have confirmed that the
escalation was provoked by Ukrainian security forces.
On the night of 27 and 28 January, the Mission’s camera
at the Oktyabrskaya mine recorded intense crossfire
between the Ukrainian armed forces and militias, which
was preceded by firing from the north-west to the southeast, that is, from the security forces’ positions. At the
same time, another Special Monitoring Mission camera

17-028159/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

captured an intense artillery exchange in Avdiivka that
began with five shots fired from north to south, which
also meant from Ukrainian forces’ positions. The next
night, 28 and 29 January, a Mission camera in Avdiivka
recorded 15 shots fired from a north-westerly direction
towards the south-east, also from the Kyiv security
forces’ side, bombarding the militias’ positions. That
was followed by hours of fighting in the Avdiivka
industrial zone. The picture on the southern flank
was the same. According to the Mission camera in
Shyrokyne, intense crossfire on the night of 28 January
was preceded by 20 shots fired from west to east, that
is, again from the Ukrainian forces’ positions towards
the rebels’ territory, after which another battle ensued.
According to Mission data for 26 to 29 January,
indiscriminate shelling of residential areas under
rebel control, coming from areas where Ukrainian
security forces were deployed, injured civilians in
Brianka and destroyed more than a dozen houses in
Brianka, Donetskyi, Olenivka, Zaichenko, Kalynove,
Novooleksandrivka and Pervomaiske. The Mission
continued to observe Ukrainian forces’ military
equipment in the security zone. Between 26 and
29 January observers discovered four tanks in Avdiivka
and three howitzers in Mykolaivka, as well as the
disappearance from the security forces’ storage of
76 tanks, 10 mortars and 18 field guns. Only about 6 per
cent of the stored military hardware was actually there.
Thus began a new spiral of tensions that since
then has only been ratcheted up further. According
to yesterday’s Special Monitoring Mission report, the
number of violations has risen daily, reaching 10,300
shell explosions in a span of 24 hours. At the same time,
the statistics on restrictions to the Mission’s access
speak for themselves — in seven of nine cases it was
the Ukrainian forces that put obstacles in its way. The
numbers testify to the fact that, rather than attempting
to normalize the situation in the Donbas region and
arrive at reasonable compromises within the Normandy
format and the framework of the Trilateral Contact
Group, the Ukrainian authorities are desperately trying
to achieve a military solution to the conflict.
Another attention-grabbing feature is the fact that
any serious deterioration of the situation in the Donbas
region, amazingly, coincides with foreign visits on the
part of Ukraine’s leadership. Evidently that is how Kyiv
hopes to keep its self-created crisis on the international
agenda while at the same time roping in newly elected
Heads of Government with its reckless, confrontational
10/20

02/02/2017

policies. But, of course, the Ukrainian leadership needs
money, which it hopes to extract from the European
Union, various European countries, the United States
and the international financial institutions by setting
itself up as a victim of aggression.
Kyiv seems not to worry very much about the
humanitarian cost of such a policy. It is actively using
heavy types of armaments around village residential
areas, schools and hospitals, including heavy artillery
and multiple-launch rocket systems, which according
to the Minsk package of measures of 12 February 2015
should have been withdrawn from the contact line long
ago. Civilians are among those killed and wounded.
Thanks to Ukrainian security forces’ attacks, the
Donetsk filtration station and the Avdiivka coke plant
have been damaged and mineworkers’ lives threatened.
In order to prevent a humanitarian disaster and get
the situation back on a political track, the international
community must be firm and consistent. In that regard,
the Security Council sent an important message on
31 January (SC/12700) when it united in calling for an
immediate ceasefire and strict respect for the Minsk
package. Yesterday the Trilateral Contact Group made
an announcement in the same spirit when it called
for full compliance with the ceasefire regime and the
withdrawal of the heavy weaponry that comes under
the Minsk agreements. We expect to see effective
action from the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
aimed at de-escalating the situation as soon as possible.
The Normandy format participants, and those who can
exert the most influence on Kyiv, have a particular
responsibility in that regard. We hope that the forces of
common sense in Ukraine itself, as well as those who
are interested in resolving such situations by political
means, will not allow the situation in south-eastern
Ukraine to turn into a worst-case scenario, but will
instead focus their attention and efforts on ensuring
that the Minsk agreements are fulfilled.
Today President Poroshenko said that he had
personally ordered the Ukrainian delegation to
convene today’s Council meeting. When he called to
order today’s meeting, the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine proposed drafting a Security Council
document building on the statement we issued on
31 January. Sadly, the unbridled, odious statement we
heard today from Ukraine shows that the Ukrainian
delegation here in New York is continuing on the path
of war, which is deeply regrettable.
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
firmly condemns the resumption of fighting in eastern
Ukraine in the past few days, specifically in Avdiivka.
We are dealing with the worst upsurge in violence and
the highest rate of violations of the ceasefire that we have
seen in months. They have been accompanied by a spike
in the number of victims, including among civilians,
as well as a serious deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, which we are following closely. We are forced
to conclude that neither the security or the humanitarian
situation has improved since the consultations we
had on the subject two days ago, despite the fact that
the Council called unanimously for the immediate
restoration of the ceasefire (SC/12700). In that regard,
France calls on all the parties to exercise restraint, and
supports the appeal of the Trilateral Contact Group for
the immediate restoration of the ceasefire in accordance
with terms of the Minsk agreements, in particular with
respect to the prohibition against the use and withdrawal
of heavy weapons. The disengagement of forces on both
sides of the line of contact must also be implemented
without delay. We expect each of the parties to refrain
from any provocation that maight further aggravate the
situation. We also call on Russia to use its influence
with the separatists.
The work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in support of the ceasefire and de-escalation
is essential. We call on all the parties on the ground
to ensure the access and security of OSCE observers
in Avdiivka, as well as in all areas of the conflict, as
established in the mandate of the Mission.
The humanitarian situation is of particular concern
to us, as the civilian population is facing extreme
weather conditions and a disruption to the supply
of water and electricity in several areas, including
Avdiivka. We urge the parties to act as quickly as
possible to improve the living conditions of the civilian
population on the ground. Immediate compliance with
windows of calm is essential to enable the repair of
critical infrastructure in areas affected by fighting
and for the relief of populations. We believe that to be
crucial. The current crisis also calls to mind the crucial
importance of the ongoing presence of humanitarian
agencies throughout Ukrainian territory, including in
areas beyond the control of the Government.
Faced with the new resurgence in violence, France
recalls that the solution to the crisis in Ukraine cannot
be a military one; rather, it must be political. That is why

S/PV.7876

the implementation of the Minsk agreements remains
more than ever the only way forward for a peaceful
resolution to the conflict. France and Germany remain
fully engaged in their diplomatic efforts within the
framework of the Normandy format. Although we are
aware of the scale of the work that remains to be done
and the challenges to be overcome, we are convinced
that working in that format, the only one to bring
Ukraine and Russia together around the same table at
the political level, is necessary and must be continued.
In particular, work in the Normandy format has made it
possible in recent months to lessen the intensity of the
fighting and reduce the number of human casualties on
the ground, as well as to implement confidence-building
measures in the security and humanitarian spheres,
with respect to the re-establishment of the ceasefire,
the implementation of areas of disengagement or even
the carrying out of exchanges of prisoners.
Despite continued fighting, the number of civilian
casualties remains six times lower since the signing of
the package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, according to estimates by United
Nations agencies. Our efforts are currently focused
on developing a common road map that would enable
concomitant progress with respect to the security and
political aspects of the Minsk agreements. We can
make progress only by moving forward on those two
tracks. It is the shared belief of France and Germany
that this is now the only way forward and that the
European sanctions implemented at the beginning of
the crisis are linked to the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
For France, a resolution to the crisis in eastern
Ukraine is more than ever a major priority. Alongside
Germany, we will continue tirelessly in our efforts
to mediate within the framework of the Normandy
format, for there is currently no viable alternative and
because every result on the ground counts. Our goal
remains the restoration of Ukrainian control over all
of its internationally recognized borders, which, we
recall, can take place only via the re-establishment of
its authority over Crimea.
In this challenging environment, everyone must
now shoulder their responsibilities and fulfil their
commitments. In our view, that is the main message
the Council should send, and it is the spirit with which
we are prepared to consider any draft presidential
statement that may be adopted by the Council.

17-0281511/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me take this
opportunity to welcome you, Sir, in your role as President
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
commend you for the start that you have made, and I
support your proposal for a draft presidential statement
on this important issue.
As our briefersmade clear, Sir, we begin your
presidency — sadly — in troubling times for eastern
Ukraine. The worrying upsurge in fighting in that part
of your country should concern us all. It is claiming yet
more lives, both civilian and military. It is aggravating
the suffering of those living there, forcing more to flee
their homes. There is no end in sight. In cities such as
Avdiivka, people talk of an endless salvo of artillery
and rockets. They talk of failing electricity and falling
temperatures, of burying loved ones in the snow. And
those events have not come out of the blue. They are
not new. The Council knows all too well the root causes
of this violence and instability. This is what happens
when Russia disregards the sovereign right of Ukraine
to choose its own destiny. This is what happens when
Russia undermines the territorial integrity of Ukraine
by illegally annexing Crimea. This is what happens
when Russian military personnel stand side-by-side
with separatists whom they have equipped, armed and
trained. And, this is a reality that the Security Council
cannot, must not, accept. We need urgent action to
bring an end to this upsurge in violence before it spirals
out of control.
I want to pay tribute to the efforts of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination to bring
about a truce to allow crucial repairs. Theose efforts
will help to restore vital utilities and to allow for the
evacuation of civilians. I urge all parties to support
those efforts and to facilitate access to the area for
humanitarian actors.
But such actions are just a band-aid on a bullet
wound. For any fragile short-term truce to become a
comprehensive and sustained cease-fire, all parties
most show restraint. That means in particular ending
the extensive use of high-caliber indiscriminate
weapons, such as Grad rocket systems. The use of
those weapons, from and against civilian areas, is not
only in disregard of the Minsk agreement; it is also an
abhorrent rejection of the norms of conflict. They must
be withdrawn from the line of contact, as stipulated in
the Minsk agreements.
12/20

02/02/2017

We also need to tackle the underlying causes of the
fighting. It is clear that any solution to the Ukraine crisis
must be political, not military, as we all recognized in
resolution 2202 (2015). The Minsk agreements are the
only meaningful path to long-term peace in Ukraine.
Let us therefore urge all sides to recommit to meeting
their full obligations under the Minsk agreements. We
support the continued efforts of France and Germany
within the Normandy format towards securing full
implementation, and we are extremely grateful for
the enormous investment that they have made in the
process to date.
Let me conclude with this final thought. We
frequently hear from the Russian Government — as we
did today — that all the problems in eastern Ukraine
are the consequences of actions by the Ukrainian
Government. That is simply not the case; it is an
inversion of reality. The responsibility for the inception
and continuation of the conflict in eastern Ukraine lies
squarely with Russia and the separatists it supports. As
the British Prime Minister made clear in Washington,
D.C., last week, the United Kingdom will continue to
stand by Ukraine in full support of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Most recently, the international
community — through the General Assembly resolution
on the situation in Crimea in December — sent the same
clear message to Russia. And earlier this week, the
entire Security Council, including Russia, expressed
the very same thing in an agreed statement (SC/12700):
that we support the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine
But Russian words are not the same as Russian
deeds. We need to see Russia comply with its Minsk
commitments. We need to see Russia stop equipping
and arming the separatists and, instead, use its
influence to make sure the separatists meet their Minsk
obligations. And we need to see Russia withdrawing its
force from all of Ukraine. That includes Crimea, the
illegal annexation of which we do not, and will not,
recognize. Sanctions against Russia cannot be lifted
until that happens. It is for the people for Ukraine to
decide their country’s future. Ukraine must be allowed
to make its own sovereign decisions.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien and Ambassador Apakan for their
useful and comprehensive briefings today.
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

This is my first appearance in the Chamber as
the Permanent Representative of the United States. It
is an immense honour for me to sit behind the United
States placard and to follow in the footsteps of so many
giants of American diplomacy. It is humbling to be
part of a body whose responsibility is nothing less than
maintaining international peace and security. I look
forward to working closely with all Council members.
The United States is determined to push for action.
There is no time to waste.
I consider it unfortunate that the occasion of my
first appearance here is one in which I must condemn
the aggressive actions of Russia. It is unfortunate
because it is a replay of far too many instances over
many years in which United States representatives have
needed to do that. It should not have to be that way. We
do want to better our relations with Russia. However,
the dire situation in eastern Ukraine is one that demands
clear and strong condemnation of Russian actions.
The sudden increase in fighting in eastern Ukraine
has trapped thousands of civilians and destroyed vital
infrastructure. And the crisis is spreading, endangering
many thousands more. The escalation of violence
must stop.
The United States stands with the people of Ukraine,
who have suffered for nearly three years under Russian
occupation and military intervention. Until Russia and
the separatists it supports respect Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the crisis will continue.
Eastern Ukraine, of course, is not the only part of
the country suffering because of Russia’s aggressive
actions. The United States continues to condemn and
call for an immediate end to the Russian occupation
of Crimea. Crimea is a part of Ukraine. Our Crimearelated sanctions will remain in place until Russia
returns control of the peninsula to Ukraine.
The basic principle of the United Nations is that
States should live side by side in peace. There is a clear
path to restoring peace in eastern Ukraine — the full and
immediate implementation of the Minsk agreements,
which the United States continues to support. For the
people in eastern Ukraine, the stakes are high. With
each passing day, more people are at risk of freezing to
death or dying from a mortar blast.
The United States calls on Russia and the
combined Russian-backed separatist forces to fulfil
their commitments in the Minsk agreements and fully
restore and respect the ceasefire. The Minsk agreements

S/PV.7876

require the disengagement of forces and the withdrawal
of heavy weapons from both sides of the contact line.
That is the formula for a sustainable ceasefire. Pulling
back forces and taking heavy weapons out of the area
will save lives. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission must also be granted full, unfettered access.
The presence of OSCE monitors can help calm tensions.
Cooperation on this issue is possible. Earlier this
week, both Russia and Ukraine supported this Council’s
unanimous call (SC/12700) to return to a ceasefire. It
was the first time in years that the Council was able to
come together on Ukraine. The parties on the ground
should heed that signal and hold their fire. The United
States expects that those who can influence the groups
that are fighting — in particular Russia — will do
everything possible to support an end to the escalation
of violence.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman; Ambassador Apakan,
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine; and Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for
their briefings.
China has been following the situation in eastern
Ukraine closely, and is concerned about the recurring
hostilities that have resulted in civilian casualties.
We have taken note of the fact that the Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group in Minsk
held consultations on the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and promoting a peaceful resolution to the
Ukranian issue. We call on the parties to the conflict
to strictly abide by the ceasefire regime and remain
committed to a political solution. There must be a
fundamental and long-term solution to this conflict
that will both accommodate the legitimate rights and
aspirations of all regions and ethnic groups and address
the reasonable concerns of all the parties concerned, in
order to strike a balance among the interests of all sides.
China is of the view that all parties should fully
implement resolution 2202 (2015), enforce the cessation
of hostilities and violence and implement the Minsk
agreements. They must remain committed to seeking
a comprehensive, lasting and balanced solution to the
Ukranian issue through dialogue and consultation, so
as to help achieve peace, stability and development
in Ukraine, harmonious relations among all ethnic
groups and peaceful coexistence between Ukraine and

17-0281513/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

02/02/2017

countries of the region. The international community
should continue to support every diplomatic effort for
a political solution. Council discussions on the issue
should contribute to the easing of tensions on the
ground and a proper solution to the Ukranian question.

to bear to end the violence, should it wish to do so. In
that connection, we should not forget Russia’s illegal
annexation of Crimea and Sebastopol, in clear violation
of international law, including the rules and principles
of the United Nations Charter.

Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): Let me start by thanking
Under-Secretary-General
Feltman,
Ambassador
Apakan and Under-Secretary-General O’Brien for their
very useful briefings.

In line with consistent appeals from the
European Union, Sweden calls for an immediate and
lasting ceasefire. We reiterate our call for the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements. Sanctions
against Russia must remain in place until the Minsk
agreements are fully implemented. We commend and
support the efforts of France and Germany in the
Normandy format. Finally, we call for the rules and
principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law, to be fully respected.

As today’s briefings have reminded us, the conflict
in Donbas has now been ongoing for almost three years.
Each day that it continues to simmer without a solution
results in more deaths and injuries, as well as fear and
uncertainty for civilians. The humanitarian fallout of
the current deterioration in the region is particularly
alarming. Access to basic needs, including water,
electricity and heating, has been interrupted. Sixteen
thousand people are acutely affected, with reports of
2,000 children in need of assistance in Avdiivka.
We call on all parties to ensure that civilians are
protected in line with international humanitarian law.
Humanitarian actors must have access to the entirety
of the Ukranian territory, including the zones outside
the control of the Ukranian Government. The recent
escalation in violence is a clear breach of the first point
of the Minsk agreements, which call for an immediate
and full ceasefire. A cessation of hostilities is essential
for security, which, in turn, is a basic prerequisite for
finding a sustainable political solution to the conflict.
In that regard, we fully support the efforts of the
Organizaion for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the difficult work of its Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Safe, full and unhindered access for its
monitors must be guaranteed.
As a small country committed to a rules-based
international order, Sweden relies upon strict adherence
to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for international law. Violation of
those core principles and commitments poses a threat
to the European security order, and are therefore a
fundamental concern for all of us.
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
must be fully respected, as underlined by all of us in
the Security Council press statement of 31 January
(SC/12700). Let us not lose sight of who is the
aggressor and who is the victim in this conflict. We
highlight Russia’s particular responsibility in that
regard, and stress that Russia can bring its influence
14/20

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Feltman and
O’Brien and Ambassador Apakan for their detailed
briefings. What we heard from them has reinforced
our deep concerns about the escalation of tensions
in Donbas over the past few days. That is why we
urge all the parties involved to immediately end the
intense fighting that erupted around Avdiivka, which
involved the use of heavy weapons proscribed by
the Minsk agreements and inflicted suffering on the
civilian population. We urge them to agree on concrete
and immediate steps to reverse the deterioration of
the security situation. That includes a return to the
ceasefire without delay, to which they have repeatedly
committed, as well as to proceed with disengagement
in the areas specifically identified in September and to
withdraw heavy weaponry in line with the provisions of
the Minsk agreements.
Secondly, we are seriously concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in the area. In the current
harsh winter conditions, with freezing temperatures,
thousands of lives are at risk on both sides of the
contact line because of the destruction of the local
power and water filtration plants. Every action required
to restore full access to water, electricity and heating
should be put in place without delay to prevent further
suffering. We therefore call upon all the parties to allow
the urgent repair of critical infrastructure and to grant
safe, full, unrestricted access to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission and to humanitarian organizations.
The protection of the civilian population must remain
the highest priority for all sides. In that regard, my
country promptly responded to the humanitarian call
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

with a contribution of €1 million to the World Food
Programme and UNICEF programmes on food security
and mine-risk education in conflict-afflicted areas.
Thirdly, the blatant violation of the ceasefire we are
witnessing is not acceptable. The latest developments
represent a serious violation of the Minsk agreements.
We firmly believe that their implementation is the only
path to a political solution to the crisis. In that regard,
Italy reiterates its full support of the role played by the
Normandy group and the OSCE in facilitating dialogue.
We deem it to be necessary to relaunch negotiations
without delay and expect a constructive commitment
with tangible results to be made with the Trilateral
Contact Group. I would like to take this opportunity
to recall Italy’s well-known position in support of the
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that dialogue
and political will must prevail over a military solution.
All parties are encouraged to fully honour their
commitments in order to achieve an inclusive and
sustainable solution to the crisis in Ukraine.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the briefers for
providing us with a vivid update on the situation on the
ground. Japan is deeply concerned about the situation
in eastern Ukraine and its severe impact on the local
civilian population. We are disappointed that, as we
have just heard, the ceasefire is not being observed on
the ground, even as we speak.
Japan strongly calls for an immediate return to the
ceasefire regime, as expressed in the Security Council
press statement (SC/12700) issued on 31 January. Japan
takes note of the statement of the Trilateral Contact
Group yesterday calling for an immediate ceasefire,
the withdrawal of heavy weaponry from the contact
line and the provision of unhindered humanitarian
access to the affected population. The full and prompt
implementation of those measures is critical in order to
alleviate the suffering of the population and to prevent
a further escalation of the situation. Japan calls for all
the parties to act swiftly and in good faith.
Japan strongly believes that the situation in
Ukraine can be solved only by diplomatic means and
in full respect for international law, especially the legal
obligation to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence. The full implementation of
the Minsk agreements is the only way forward.

S/PV.7876

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan is gravely
concerned about the dangerously deteriorating situation
in eastern Ukraine and its severe impact on the local
civilian population, which results in death and injuries
and many humanitarian problems. We extend our sincere
and deep condolences following the civilian casualties,
which we consider to be unacceptable. We express our
appreciation to Under-Secretaries-General Feltman and
O’Brien and to Ambassador Apakan for their updates,
as well as their efforts to resolve the crisis.
My delegation would like to refer to some key
points. We are very much interested in the stability of
Ukraine, taking into account all that has transpired and
the current situation on the ground. We express sincere
concerns about the fate of young people, women and
all vulnerable groups in the crisis zone, as well as the
effect on future generations. Last March, my President,
who contributed to the launch of the Normandy
format, mentioned at the Nuclear Security Summit
that was held in Washington, D.C., that bringing an
end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine should be of
utmost common priority. Conflicts should be resolved
through negotiations.
Kazakhstan is firmly convinced that there is no
alternative to resolving the crisis in Ukraine other than
through peaceful means based on the observance by all
participants of their obligations, in accordance with the
norms and values of international law and key principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. We therefore call
for strict compliance with resolution 2202 (2015), on
the Minsk agreements.
Kazakhstan fully endorses the activities of the
Trilateral Contact Group and its working groups on
implementing confidence-building measures in the
four areas they cover. We welcome the results of the
Contact Group meeting held in Minsk on 1 February.
We also believe that any further escalation of tensions
should be prevented in order to avoid a worsening of the
situation. Any aggravation of the current circumstances
could have unpredictable consequences both regionally
and globally. We call upon the parties to withdraw their
heavy weapons from the contact line. We stand ready to
assist the population, support international mediation
efforts and facilitate the negotiation process among all
the parties and their leaders, with a view to resolving
this situation as soon as possible.
Kazakhstan continues to provide both bilateral and
multilateral aid. All parties must follow their obligations

17-0281515/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

to provide free access to humanitarian assistance in
the conflict zone. We believe that the full-fledged
normalization of the country’s situation can be achieved
only with the economic recovery of Ukraine, which
should be our primary and requisite consideration.
We therefore call for economic confidence-building
measures to be established. Kazakhstan intends to
work in a balanced and unbiased manner, on an equal
basis, with all Security Council members to promote
compromise and consensus in order to help achieve an
early solution to the crisis, keeping in mind the paramount
importance of maintaining and strengthening peace
and security. We call upon all parties to demonstrate
wisdom, responsibility and political will to ensure an
immediate return to a ceasefire regime.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): As this is the
first time that I take the floor, Sir, since your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council, I
would like to warmly congratulate you and to wish you
every success. Rest assured of the full support of the
Senegalese delegation. I would also like to commend
the skill, efficiency and the transparent manner in
which the Swedish delegation guided the work of the
Council last month.
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s briefing with Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman,
Ambassador
Apakan
and
Under-SecretaryGeneral Stephen O’Brien, whose updates are key to
our discussions.
Two years after the signing of the Minsk agreement
and the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015) by the
Security Council, by which the former was endorsed,
the situation in eastern Ukraine is still tense and has
suddenly worsened now that armed clashes have
resumed. The resurgence in hostilities has resulted in
a heavy death toll, left many wounded and exacerbated
the region’s dire humanitarian situation. As others have
mentioned, the fighting has disrupted electricity, water
and heating for thousands, at this time of year when
temperatures drop to as low as -20ºC during the night.
This alarming picture leads me to urge the protagonists
to think about the civilians and immediately cease
hostilities, respect the ceasefire and withdraw
heavy weapons.
I would like to commend the reiterated call by
the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, which
met yesterday in an emergency meeting, for an
16/20

02/02/2017

immediate cessation of hostilities. The withdrawal
of heavy weapons from the front lines and access for
the observers of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and for humanitarian assistance
to affected areas are all crucial.
In conclusion, I want to call for an intensification of
diplomatic efforts, in particular through the Normandy
format, by which France and Germany seek to support
Russia and Ukraine in fully implementing the Minsk
agreements for the good of the civilian population.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien, as well as the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission,
Ambassador Apakan, for their briefings on the most
recent developments in eastern Ukraine.
The deteriorating security situation in the region
and the use of weapons prohibited by the Minsk
agreements is a matter of concern. We also note the
consequences of the most recent violence in terms of
civilian casualties and damage to infrastructure. The
humanitarian situation requires an urgent response.
We believe there is a need to do everything possible
to de-escalate the situation. In that regard, we fully
support the call made by the Security Council two days
ago (SC/12700) for an immediate regurn to a ceasefire
regime. No doubt, a resolution of the situation in the
eastern region of Ukraine can be achieved only through
a peaceful settlement. That is why it is absolutely
imperative that the parties remain fully committed to
the implementation of the Minsk agreements and strictly
adhere to resolution 2202 (2015), which endorsed the
package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
takes note of what we have heard in the briefings by
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs; Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan,
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
We express our concern about the resurgence
of tension in Donbas. We deplore in particular the
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

non-compliance with the ban on the use of heavy
artillery, given the urgent need to maintain the ceasefire.
In that regard, we approve of the Council’s press
statement SC/12700, of 31 January, which condemns the
use of weapons banned by the Minsk agreements and
calls for full compliance with resolution 2202 (2015).
Bolivia calls upon the parties to respect the provisions
of the Minsk agreements, as endorsed by resolution
2202 (2015), which is essential to strengthen the efforts
the parties must make in the search for a peaceful and
political solution to the crisis.
We are particularly concerned about the impact
of the crisis on the civilian population. We therefore
urge the parties to strictly adhere to their obligations
in terms of protecting civilians, including the need to
guarantee access to humanitarian assistance and basic
medical services. With the support of the international
community, full compliance with the Minsk agreements
and the joint efforts of the Security Council it should be
possible in the short term to avoid a military escalation
and to reach a peaceful solution to this crisis with a
view to preventive diplomacy, which the SecretaryGeneral has called for. Every possible effort must be
made to achieve lasting peace, which in the long term
will be beneficial not only for the parties but also for
the region and the entire world. We also call for the
parties to not step up the rhetoric, for we do not think
it will contribute to a political solution to this very
difficult situation.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is grateful for the detailed briefings by
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman and UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien, as well as by
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan.
Uruguay continues to follow with great concern
the recent developments in Avdiivka and the recent
violations of the ceasefire. Uruguay thinks it is crucial
to step up efforts and dialogue to ensure the effective
implementation of the Minsk agreements, as they
constitute the right way to achieve a political and
peaceful solution to this conflict. Along those lines,
Uruguay calls on the parties to ensure the effective
protection of human rights of the residents of all regions,
in particular of the territories of Donetsk and Luhansk.
At the same time, it is also crucial for the parties
to the conflict to respect international humanitarian
law in all circumstances. This is critical to addressing
the situation of internally displaced persons and people

S/PV.7876

requiring humanitarian assistance, in particular in
terms of protection and given the current weather
conditions, the continuous supply of water, food, energy
and heat, emergency shelter and other critical services
in temperatures that drop to -20ºC
Uruguay recognizes the important work being
carried out by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine and believes that it is vital for the Mission to
be allowed access to all conflict areas in order to end
to fulfil its mandate. We urge a resumption of the spirit
with which the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2202 (2015). The parties must comply with
their obligatioons in that regard.
In conclusion, Uruguay hopes that the challenges in
implementing the Minsk agreements can be overcome
and that the disputes can be settled exclusively through
peaceful means, dialogue between the parties and with
full respect for international law and democratic values.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to join those who have spoken before me in thanking
you, Mr. President, as well as Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan and Mr. Stephen O’Brien for their
briefings to the Security Council on the worsening of
the situation in the Donbas region.
Egypt expresses its serious concern about the
continuation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine, and
especially with regard to the supplies of electricity,
water and heat, which have been cut off and which
affect a great number of civilians in very difficult
weather conditions in Ukraine. Egypt calls upon all the
parties to respect an immediate cessation of hostilities
and to fully implement the ceasefire and prevent any
provocation that could create further stress.
Furthermore, we must guarantee full access for
humanitarian assistance to the entire region affected
by the conflict with a view to improving the living
conditions of the citizens, above all in the light of the
worsening of the humanitarian situation in the region. In
that context, Egypt welcomes the agreement expressed
by the Council on press statement SC/12700, which was
issued on 31 January.
Egypt believes that we should seek a peaceful
solution to the conflict in keeping with international
commitments. We support the Minsk agreements
and believe that they are the appropriate framework
for dealing with this crisis, which must be resolved

17-0281517/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

in the context of the region, through mediation
efforts among the stakeholders and with respect and
appreciation for both parties to the conflict and the
entire international community. That is essential if we
are to reach the ultimate goal of a political solution to
the crisis in Ukraine and to achieve peace and stability
in the country and a lasting settlement of the conflict
in the region.
Egypt also urges full compliance with resolution
2202 (2015) and calls on all the parties involved
to implement the Minsk agreements’ package of
measures and procedures, particularly observance of
the ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the
institution of essential constitutional reforms and the
holding of elections in the Donbas region. Those should
be accompanied by a settlement of the military crisis
brought on by the conflict in coordination with all the
parties, without exception.
Egypt reaffirms its confidence in the various
formats for peaceful negotiations between the two
parties. We urge those parties to redouble their efforts
to reach a peaceful settlement of the crisis that can
fulfil the people’s aspirations within a framework of
international legitimacy, to show restraint and to avoid
any military escalation. We reiterate our firm support
for all efforts designed to achieve a political solution
to the crisis, including those in the Normandy format.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our meeting is drawing to a close, and I am
now perhaps within my rights, as doyen of the Security
Council, to welcome our new United States colleague,
Ambassador Nikki Haley. From time to time we may
have differences on particular issues, but her efforts
will greatly influence the Council’s ability to effectively
carry out its collective functions as the body with the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. I would therefore like to wish her
every success.
In her statement, Ambassador Haley touched on
the issue of Crimea. In that connection, I would like to
remind her that it was the United States Constitution
that proclaimed those marvellous, historic words “We
the people”. The people of Crimea clearly expressed
their will in a referendum in which 93 per cent of the
population voted for reunification with Russia, from
18/20

02/02/2017

which Crimea had been unjustly and unlawfully severed.
And, by the way, that expression of the people’s will
has subsequently been confirmed in a number of public
opinion surveys conducted by Western organizations.
Still on the issue of Crimea, however, it is the
representative of the United Kingdom, as aggressive as
ever, who for some reason persists in saying that the
crisis in Ukraine began with Crimea. I am compelled
yet again to recall that the whole thing began with
a coup that owed a great deal to external support.
Here is my advice to the representative of the United
Kingdom about his position. Give back the Malvinas;
give back Gibraltar; give back the part of Cyprus that
was annexed; give back the Chagos archipelago in
the Indian Ocean, which has been turned into a huge
military base. Perhaps then his conscience will be a
little clearer and he will be able to speak to other topics.
While we sometimes have to deal in controversy,
I believe nonetheless that our job as diplomats in the
Security Council is to adopt resolutions and see to it
that they are strictly implemented. Ten days from
now we will observe the second anniversary of the
adoption of the Minsk package of measures and the
corresponding agreements, while 17 February is
the second anniversary of the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2202 (2015), giving the Minsk agreements
international legal status. From time to time, we hear
that Russia is not fulfilling the Minsk agreements; but
the President of Ukraine says that the military provisions
of the Minsk agreements must be complied with before
the political ones are dealt with. It is not hard to figure
out who is right and who is wrong here. All we have
to do is look at a Security Council document — the
same resolution 2202 (2015), to which the package of
measures is attached as annex I. It contains some very
simple propositions that we can all understand.
Regarding the relationship between military and
political measures, paragraph 9 of the annex provides
for
“Reinstatement of full control over the State
border by the Government of Ukraine throughout
the conflict area, starting on day 1 after the local
elections and ending after the comprehensive
political settlement ... provided that paragraph
11 has been implemented in consultation with
and upon agreement by representatives of certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the
framework of the Trilateral Contact Group.”
17-02815

02/02/2017

Ukraine

That means that certain military steps should start only
after various political measures have been implemented.
Now, what are those conditions in paragraph 11 that
have to be implemented? Paragraph 11 provides for
“Carrying out constitutional reform in
Ukraine with a new constitution ... providing for
decentralization as a key element ... as well as
adopting permanent legislation on the special status
of certain areas in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
in line with measures as set out in the footnote”.
And the footnote clearly sets out the eight measures
that must be taken in order to ensure special status for
south-eastern Ukraine. They are extremely precise.
The President of France, who made a very active
and substantive contribution, and the Chancellor and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, who
made a number of proposals that were then agreed to
by everyone, did not spend 17 hours drafting them in
vain..
There can simply be no arguing here. And, logically,
who could suggest or expect that Donetsk and Luhansk
should close off their borders and allow themselves to
be walled in? And then what? Throw themselves on
the mercy of the Kyiv authorities? Can the citizens of
Donetsk and Luhansk trust the Kyiv authorities? At
one point — I believe it was 1 July 2014 — President
Poroshenko appeared on Ukrainian television and
said that the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk were so
beloved in Kyiv that there would be no heavy-artillery
shelling of residential areas during their anti-terrorism
operations. He said that his valiant warriors had other
ways of recovering those territories and that they would
not be shelling residential areas with heavy weapons.
Since then, Mr. Apakan can confirm that not a
single day has passed when residential areas have not
been shelled targets, while high-rise buildings are fired
on one day and then fired on again the next. Take the
photograph that Ambassador Yelchenko showed us
today. If it is a picture of a ruined building in Avdiivka,
of course it is terrible. But he could have brought similar
photos of other areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions, as many as you like. Why did he not do that?
Yes, of course, Ukrainian soldiers have died in the
fighting, and there is nothing good about that. But most
of those who have died on the Donetsk and Luhansk
side have been civilians, including women and children.
Why not talk about them? Of course we could draft some
document, but if we are serious people representing

S/PV.7876

serious Governments, especially the Governments
that have been directly involved in the process, by the
way, let me point out to dear Ambassador Haley that
we know how they respect the American authorities
in Kyiv, which means that in this regard the American
authorities can have some very serious influence on the
developing situation. All that is needed is to call for
the implementation of the relatively simple provisions
in the Minsk package in order to restore Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. And yet Kyiv’s
actions are in fact bringing about the destruction of
its territorial integrity. Ambassador Yelchenko says
that the local people cannot do this, cannot wreak such
destruction, and so forth. But can the local Ukrainians
on the Ukrainian side wreak such destruction on
Donetsk and Luhansk? It seems that they can. Do they
not consider these Ukrainian citizens their brethren?
While that would be very sad, we know that that is
exactly what some hotheads in Kyiv think and believe.
I would like to appeal to the common-sense section
of the Ukrainian political spectrum. But I repeat that,
needless to say, without major influence from those
on the external factor side, the Normandy format and
others, none of this will succeed. Because they will
simply deceive their own people with unsubstantiated
claims that own population that Kyiv has somehow
complied with the Minsk agreements. They say that
they are recapturing their country, metre by metre. How
many people will have to die as they progress metre
by metre from Avdiivka to the Ukrainian border? How
many Ukrainian soldiers and civilians will have to die?
And this at a time when a political alternative exists,
agreed to at the highest level, and including President
Poroshenko’s participation two years ago. While it is
therefore regrettable that what we heard today from
the Ukrainian delegation was totally irresponsible, I
hope that our frank discussion will still enable those
who really want to resolve the Ukrainian crisis to look
at things more objectively and push Kyiv into taking
the steps that are essential to establishing peace in
Ukraine. It would certainly be a tragedy if the situation
we have faced in the past two or three years should drag
on any longer.
The President: I shall now make a further statement
in my capacity as the representative of Ukraine.
Today is indeed Groundhog Day. The first statement
made by the Russian delegation repeats word for word
what was said in the consultations two days ago. As

17-0281519/20

S/PV.7876

Ukraine

far as the second statement is concerned, I do not even
wish to comment on that cocktail of demagogy.
I wish to stress that such frivolous interpretations
of the reports of the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) are more than ridiculous. There is no reference
to Ukrainian forces in OSCE reports; that is a known
fact. I would rather trust the assessment of Ambassador
Apakan, who is with us today.
The Russian Ambassador asserted that the coal
factory in Avdiivka was shelled by Ukrainian forces.
I have to clarify once again that this factory is located
on territory controlled by the Ukrainian Government,
so the shells that rained down on the factory were
propelled by Russian guns. This was reported by all
three briefers.
Russia blames President Poroshenko and other
high Ukrainian officials for stirring up the violence
around Avdiivka. However, it is not Poroshenko who is
supplying the terrorists with ammunition and armour.
Indeed, one of them, captured during the recent attack
on Avdiivka, already confessed, just yesterday, that the
Russian officers commanding his unit had given orders
to capture the town before the end of last week; this is
all documented.
The reality is very simple. It is Russian weapons
that are killing Ukrainians. It is Russian soldiers and

20/20

02/02/2017

mercenaries who have come to Ukraine to earn money
for murder. Recalling my remarks about the resumption
of shelling in Avdiivka about an hour ago, I would like
to inform my colleagues that, as a result, at least two
civilians were killed and another injured. The shelling
continues to batter residential areas even as we speak,
including the school building used for the distribution
of humanitarian supplies.
Thus, we do not exclude any escalation or
provocation in and around Donetsk, in further attempts
to discredit the Ukrainian armed forces and the
Ukrainian leadership. We have information about the
evacuation of civilians in Donetsk that we believe to
be a preparation for a possible provocation similar to
what happened in August 2008, when Russia prepared
to attack Georgia.
As I stated at the beginning of the meeting, we
expected a serious, professional dialogue that would put
an end to the violence and help to avert a humanitarian
disaster and save lives. Denying reality is not the
way to achieve this. It seems that Russia is living in a
parallel reality created by current Russian propaganda,
a parallel reality that becomes even more twisted when
Ambassador Churkin starts to talk about Crimea.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.

17-02815
