United Nations

A/RES/55/25

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/383)]

55/25. United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/111 of 9 December 1998, in which it decided to
establish an open-ended intergovernmental ad hoc committee for the purpose of
elaborating a comprehensive international convention against transnational
organized crime and of discussing the elaboration, as appropriate, of international
instruments addressing trafficking in women and children, combating the illicit
manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and
ammunition, and illegal trafficking in and transporting of migrants, including by sea,
Recalling also its resolution 54/126 of 17 December 1999, in which it
requested the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime to continue its work, in accordance with resolutions
53/111 and 53/114 of 9 December 1998, and to intensify that work in order to
complete it in 2000,
Recalling further its resolution 54/129 of 17 December 1999, in which it
accepted with appreciation the offer of the Government of Italy to host a high-level
political signing conference in Palermo for the purpose of signing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Palermo Convention)
and the protocols thereto, and requested the Secretary-General to schedule the
conference for a period of up to one week before the end of the Millennium
Assembly in 2000,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Poland for submitting to it at
its fifty-first session a first draft United Nations convention against transnational
organized crime 1 and for hosting the meeting of the inter-sessional open-ended
intergovernmental group of experts, established pursuant to resolution 52/85 of
12 December 1997, on the elaboration of a preliminary draft of a possible
comprehensive international convention against transnational organized crime, held
in Warsaw from 2 to 6 February 1998,

1

00 56089

A/C.3/51/7, annex.

A/RES/55/25

Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Argentina for hosting the
informal preparatory meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee, held in Buenos Aires from
31 August to 4 September 1998,
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Thailand for hosting the
Asia-Pacific Ministerial Seminar on Building Capacities for Fighting Transnational
Organized Crime, held in Bangkok on 20 and 21 March 2000,
Deeply concerned by the negative economic and social implications related to
organized criminal activities, and convinced of the urgent need to strengthen
cooperation to prevent and combat such activities more effectively at the national,
regional and international levels,
Noting with deep concern the growing links between transnational organized
crime and terrorist crimes, taking into account the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
Determined to deny safe havens to those who engage in transnational
organized crime by prosecuting their crimes wherever they occur and by cooperating
at the international level,
Strongly convinced that the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime will constitute an effective tool and the necessary legal framework
for international cooperation in combating, inter alia, such criminal activities as
money-laundering, corruption, illicit trafficking in endangered species of wild flora
and fauna, offences against cultural heritage and the growing links between
transnational organized crime and terrorist crimes,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 which carried out its work at
the headquarters of the United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention in Vienna, and commends the Ad Hoc Committee for its work;
2.
Adopts the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, and the Protocol against the Smuggling of
Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime annexed to the present resolution, and opens
them for signature at the High-level Political Signing Conference to be held in
Palermo, Italy, from 12 to 15 December 2000 in accordance with resolution 54/129;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive report on the
High-level Political Signing Conference to be held in Palermo in accordance with
resolution 54/129;
4.
Notes that the Ad Hoc Committee has not yet completed its work on the
draft Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime;
5.
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to continue its work in relation to this
draft Protocol, in accordance with resolutions 53/111, 53/114 and 54/126, and to
finalize such work as soon as possible;
2

2

A/AC.254/34.

A/RES/55/25

6.
Calls upon all States to recognize the links between transnational
organized criminal activities and acts of terrorism, taking into account the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, and to apply the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime in combating all forms of criminal activity, as
provided therein;
7.
Recommends that the Ad Hoc Committee established by the General
Assembly in its resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996, which is beginning its
deliberations with a view to developing a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, pursuant to resolution 54/110 of 9 December 1999, should
take into consideration the provisions of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime;
8.
Urges all States and regional economic organizations to sign and ratify
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
protocols thereto as soon as possible in order to ensure the speedy entry into force of
the Convention and the protocols thereto;
9.
Decides that, until the Conference of the Parties to the Convention
established pursuant to the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime decides otherwise, the account referred to in article 30 of the
Convention will be operated within the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Fund, and encourages Member States to begin making adequate
voluntary contributions to the above-mentioned account for the provision to
developing countries and countries with economies in transition of the technical
assistance that they might require for implementation of the Convention and the
protocols thereto, including for the preparatory measures needed for that
implementation;
10. Decides also that the Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime will complete its tasks arising
from the elaboration of the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime by holding a meeting well before the convening of the first session
of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, in order to prepare the draft text
of the rules of procedure for the Conference of the Parties and other rules and
mechanisms described in article 32 of the Convention, which will be communicated
to the Conference of the Parties at its first session for consideration and action;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to designate the Centre for International
Crime Prevention of the United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention to serve as the secretariat for the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention in accordance with article 33 of the Convention;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the Centre for
International Crime Prevention with the resources necessary to enable it to promote
in an effective manner the expeditious entry into force of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and to discharge the functions of
secretariat of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention, and to support the Ad
Hoc Committee in its work pursuant to paragraph 10 above.
62nd plenary meeting
15 November 2000

3

A/RES/55/25

Annex I
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
Article 1
Statement of purpose
The purpose of this Convention is to promote cooperation to prevent and
combat transnational organized crime more effectively.
Article 2
Use of terms
For the purposes of this Convention:
(a) “Organized criminal group” shall mean a structured group of three or
more persons, existing for a period of time and acting in concert with the aim of
committing one or more serious crimes or offences established in accordance with
this Convention, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other
material benefit;
(b) “Serious crime” shall mean conduct constituting an offence punishable
by a maximum deprivation of liberty of at least four years or a more serious penalty;
(c) “Structured group” shall mean a group that is not randomly formed for
the immediate commission of an offence and that does not need to have formally
defined roles for its members, continuity of its membership or a developed structure;
(d) “Property” shall mean assets of every kind, whether corporeal or
incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, and legal documents or
instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such assets;
(e) “Proceeds of crime” shall mean any property derived from or obtained,
directly or indirectly, through the commission of an offence;
(f) “Freezing” or “seizure” shall mean temporarily prohibiting the transfer,
conversion, disposition or movement of property or temporarily assuming custody
or control of property on the basis of an order issued by a court or other competent
authority;
(g) “Confiscation”, which includes forfeiture where applicable, shall mean
the permanent deprivation of property by order of a court or other competent
authority;
(h) “Predicate offence” shall mean any offence as a result of which proceeds
have been generated that may become the subject of an offence as defined in
article 6 of this Convention;
(i) “Controlled delivery” shall mean the technique of allowing illicit or
suspect consignments to pass out of, through or into the territory of one or more
States, with the knowledge and under the supervision of their competent authorities,
with a view to the investigation of an offence and the identification of persons
involved in the commission of the offence;
(j) “Regional economic integration organization” shall mean an organization
constituted by sovereign States of a given region, to which its member States have
transferred competence in respect of matters governed by this Convention and which

4

A/RES/55/25

has been duly authorized, in accordance with its internal procedures, to sign, ratify,
accept, approve or accede to it; references to “States Parties” under this Convention
shall apply to such organizations within the limits of their competence.
Article 3
Scope of application
1.
This Convention shall apply, except as otherwise stated herein, to the
prevention, investigation and prosecution of:
(a) The offences established in accordance with articles 5, 6, 8 and 23 of this
Convention; and
(b)

Serious crime as defined in article 2 of this Convention;

where the offence is transnational in nature and involves an organized criminal
group.
2.
For the purpose of paragraph 1 of this article, an offence is transnational
in nature if:
(a)

It is committed in more than one State;

(b) It is committed in one State but a substantial part of its preparation,
planning, direction or control takes place in another State;
(c) It is committed in one State but involves an organized criminal group that
engages in criminal activities in more than one State; or
(d)

It is committed in one State but has substantial effects in another State.

Article 4
Protection of sovereignty
1.
States Parties shall carry out their obligations under this Convention in a
manner consistent with the principles of sovereign equality and territorial integrity
of States and that of non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other States.
2.
Nothing in this Convention entitles a State Party to undertake in the
territory of another State the exercise of jurisdiction and performance of functions
that are reserved exclusively for the authorities of that other State by its domestic
law.
Article 5
Criminalization of participation in an organized criminal group
1.
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may
be necessary to establish as criminal offences, when committed intentionally:
(a) Either or both of the following as criminal offences distinct from those
involving the attempt or completion of the criminal activity:
(i) Agreeing with one or more other persons to commit a serious crime for a
purpose relating directly or indirectly to the obtaining of a financial or other
material benefit and, where required by domestic law, involving an act
undertaken by one of the participants in furtherance of the agreement or
involving an organized criminal group;

5

A/RES/55/25

(ii) Conduct by a person who, with knowledge of either the aim and general
criminal activity of an organized criminal group or its intention to commit the
crimes in question, takes an active part in:
a.

Criminal activities of the organized criminal group;

b.
Other activities of the organized criminal group in the knowledge
that his or her participation will contribute to the achievement of the abovedescribed criminal aim;
(b) Organizing, directing, aiding, abetting, facilitating or counselling the
commission of serious crime involving an organized criminal group.
2.
The knowledge, intent, aim, purpose or agreement referred to in
paragraph 1 of this article may be inferred from objective factual circumstances.
3.
States Parties whose domestic law requires involvement of an organized
criminal group for purposes of the offences established in accordance with
paragraph 1 (a) (i) of this article shall ensure that their domestic law covers all
serious crimes involving organized criminal groups. Such States Parties, as well as
States Parties whose domestic law requires an act in furtherance of the agreement
for purposes of the offences established in accordance with paragraph 1 (a) (i) of
this article, shall so inform the Secretary-General of the United Nations at the time
of their signature or of deposit of their instrument of ratification, acceptance or
approval of or accession to this Convention.
Article 6
Criminalization of the laundering of proceeds of crime
1.
Each State Party shall adopt, in accordance with fundamental principles
of its domestic law, such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to
establish as criminal offences, when committed intentionally:
(a) (i) The conversion or transfer of property, knowing that such property is the
proceeds of crime, for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin
of the property or of helping any person who is involved in the commission of
the predicate offence to evade the legal consequences of his or her action;
(ii) The concealment or disguise of the true nature, source, location,
disposition, movement or ownership of or rights with respect to property,
knowing that such property is the proceeds of crime;
(b)

Subject to the basic concepts of its legal system:

(i) The acquisition, possession or use of property, knowing, at the time of
receipt, that such property is the proceeds of crime;
(ii) Participation in, association with or conspiracy to commit, attempts to
commit and aiding, abetting, facilitating and counselling the commission of
any of the offences established in accordance with this article.
2.

For purposes of implementing or applying paragraph 1 of this article:

(a) Each State Party shall seek to apply paragraph 1 of this article to the
widest range of predicate offences;
(b) Each State Party shall include as predicate offences all serious crime as
defined in article 2 of this Convention and the offences established in accordance

6

A/RES/55/25

with articles 5, 8 and 23 of this Convention. In the case of States Parties whose
legislation sets out a list of specific predicate offences, they shall, at a minimum,
include in such list a comprehensive range of offences associated with organized
criminal groups;
(c) For the purposes of subparagraph (b), predicate offences shall include
offences committed both within and outside the jurisdiction of the State Party in
question. However, offences committed outside the jurisdiction of a State Party shall
constitute predicate offences only when the relevant conduct is a criminal offence
under the domestic law of the State where it is committed and would be a criminal
offence under the domestic law of the State Party implementing or applying this
article had it been committed there;
(d) Each State Party shall furnish copies of its laws that give effect to this
article and of any subsequent changes to such laws or a description thereof to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations;
(e) If required by fundamental principles of the domestic law of a State
Party, it may be provided that the offences set forth in paragraph 1 of this article do
not apply to the persons who committed the predicate offence;
(f) Knowledge, intent or purpose required as an element of an offence set
forth in paragraph 1 of this article may be inferred from objective factual
circumstances.
Article 7
Measures to combat money-laundering
1.

Each State Party:

(a) Shall institute a comprehensive domestic regulatory and supervisory
regime for banks and non-bank financial institutions and, where appropriate, other
bodies particularly susceptible to money-laundering, within its competence, in order
to deter and detect all forms of money-laundering, which regime shall emphasize
requirements for customer identification, record-keeping and the reporting of
suspicious transactions;
(b) Shall, without prejudice to articles 18 and 27 of this Convention, ensure
that administrative, regulatory, law enforcement and other authorities dedicated to
combating money-laundering (including, where appropriate under domestic law,
judicial authorities) have the ability to cooperate and exchange information at the
national and international levels within the conditions prescribed by its domestic law
and, to that end, shall consider the establishment of a financial intelligence unit to
serve as a national centre for the collection, analysis and dissemination of
information regarding potential money-laundering.
2.
States Parties shall consider implementing feasible measures to detect
and monitor the movement of cash and appropriate negotiable instruments across
their borders, subject to safeguards to ensure proper use of information and without
impeding in any way the movement of legitimate capital. Such measures may
include a requirement that individuals and businesses report the cross-border
transfer of substantial quantities of cash and appropriate negotiable instruments.
3.
In establishing a domestic regulatory and supervisory regime under the
terms of this article, and without prejudice to any other article of this Convention,

7

A/RES/55/25

States Parties are called upon to use as a guideline the relevant initiatives of
regional, interregional and multilateral organizations against money-laundering.
4.
States Parties shall endeavour to develop and promote global, regional,
subregional and bilateral cooperation among judicial, law enforcement and financial
regulatory authorities in order to combat money-laundering.
Article 8
Criminalization of corruption
1.
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may
be necessary to establish as criminal offences, when committed intentionally:
(a) The promise, offering or giving to a public official, directly or indirectly,
of an undue advantage, for the official himself or herself or another person or entity,
in order that the official act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her
official duties;
(b) The solicitation or acceptance by a public official, directly or indirectly,
of an undue advantage, for the official himself or herself or another person or entity,
in order that the official act or refrain from acting in the exercise of his or her
official duties.
2.
Each State Party shall consider adopting such legislative and other
measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences conduct referred to
in paragraph 1 of this article involving a foreign public official or international civil
servant. Likewise, each State Party shall consider establishing as criminal offences
other forms of corruption.
3.
Each State Party shall also adopt such measures as may be necessary to
establish as a criminal offence participation as an accomplice in an offence
established in accordance with this article.
4.
For the purposes of paragraph 1 of this article and article 9 of this
Convention, “public official” shall mean a public official or a person who provides a
public service as defined in the domestic law and as applied in the criminal law of
the State Party in which the person in question performs that function.
Article 9
Measures against corruption
1.
In addition to the measures set forth in article 8 of this Convention, each
State Party shall, to the extent appropriate and consistent with its legal system, adopt
legislative, administrative or other effective measures to promote integrity and to
prevent, detect and punish the corruption of public officials.
2.
Each State Party shall take measures to ensure effective action by its
authorities in the prevention, detection and punishment of the corruption of public
officials, including providing such authorities with adequate independence to deter
the exertion of inappropriate influence on their actions.
Article 10
Liability of legal persons
1.
Each State Party shall adopt such measures as may be necessary,
consistent with its legal principles, to establish the liability of legal persons for

8

A/RES/55/25

participation in serious crimes involving an organized criminal group and for the
offences established in accordance with articles 5, 6, 8 and 23 of this Convention.
2.
Subject to the legal principles of the State Party, the liability of legal
persons may be criminal, civil or administrative.
3.
Such liability shall be without prejudice to the criminal liability of the
natural persons who have committed the offences.
4.
Each State Party shall, in particular, ensure that legal persons held liable
in accordance with this article are subject to effective, proportionate and dissuasive
criminal or non-criminal sanctions, including monetary sanctions.
Article 11
Prosecution, adjudication and sanctions
1.
Each State Party shall make the commission of an offence established in
accordance with articles 5, 6, 8 and 23 of this Convention liable to sanctions that
take into account the gravity of that offence.
2.
Each State Party shall endeavour to ensure that any discretionary legal
powers under its domestic law relating to the prosecution of persons for offences
covered by this Convention are exercised to maximize the effectiveness of law
enforcement measures in respect of those offences and with due regard to the need
to deter the commission of such offences.
3.
In the case of offences established in accordance with articles 5, 6, 8
and 23 of this Convention, each State Party shall take appropriate measures, in
accordance with its domestic law and with due regard to the rights of the defence, to
seek to ensure that conditions imposed in connection with decisions on release
pending trial or appeal take into consideration the need to ensure the presence of the
defendant at subsequent criminal proceedings.
4.
Each State Party shall ensure that its courts or other competent
authorities bear in mind the grave nature of the offences covered by this Convention
when considering the eventuality of early release or parole of persons convicted of
such offences.
5.
Each State Party shall, where appropriate, establish under its domestic
law a long statute of limitations period in which to commence proceedings for any
offence covered by this Convention and a longer period where the alleged offender
has evaded the administration of justice.
6.
Nothing contained in this Convention shall affect the principle that the
description of the offences established in accordance with this Convention and of
the applicable legal defences or other legal principles controlling the lawfulness of
conduct is reserved to the domestic law of a State Party and that such offences shall
be prosecuted and punished in accordance with that law.
Article 12
Confiscation and seizure
1.
States Parties shall adopt, to the greatest extent possible within their
domestic legal systems, such measures as may be necessary to enable confiscation
of:

9

A/RES/55/25

(a) Proceeds of crime derived from offences covered by this Convention or
property the value of which corresponds to that of such proceeds;
(b) Property, equipment or other instrumentalities used in or destined for use
in offences covered by this Convention.
2.
States Parties shall adopt such measures as may be necessary to enable
the identification, tracing, freezing or seizure of any item referred to in paragraph 1
of this article for the purpose of eventual confiscation.
3.
If proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted, in part or in
full, into other property, such property shall be liable to the measures referred to in
this article instead of the proceeds.
4.
If proceeds of crime have been intermingled with property acquired from
legitimate sources, such property shall, without prejudice to any powers relating to
freezing or seizure, be liable to confiscation up to the assessed value of the
intermingled proceeds.
5.
Income or other benefits derived from proceeds of crime, from property
into which proceeds of crime have been transformed or converted or from property
with which proceeds of crime have been intermingled shall also be liable to the
measures referred to in this article, in the same manner and to the same extent as
proceeds of crime.
6.
For the purposes of this article and article 13 of this Convention, each
State Party shall empower its courts or other competent authorities to order that
bank, financial or commercial records be made available or be seized. States Parties
shall not decline to act under the provisions of this paragraph on the ground of bank
secrecy.
7.
States Parties may consider the possibility of requiring that an offender
demonstrate the lawful origin of alleged proceeds of crime or other property liable
to confiscation, to the extent that such a requirement is consistent with the principles
of their domestic law and with the nature of the judicial and other proceedings.
8.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prejudice the
rights of bona fide third parties.
9.
Nothing contained in this article shall affect the principle that the
measures to which it refers shall be defined and implemented in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of the domestic law of a State Party.
Article 13
International cooperation for purposes of confiscation
1.
A State Party that has received a request from another State Party having
jurisdiction over an offence covered by this Convention for confiscation of proceeds
of crime, property, equipment or other instrumentalities referred to in article 12,
paragraph 1, of this Convention situated in its territory shall, to the greatest extent
possible within its domestic legal system:
(a) Submit the request to its competent authorities for the purpose of obtaining
an order of confiscation and, if such an order is granted, give effect to it; or

10

A/RES/55/25

(b) Submit to its competent authorities, with a view to giving effect to it to
the extent requested, an order of confiscation issued by a court in the territory of the
requesting State Party in accordance with article 12, paragraph 1, of this Convention
insofar as it relates to proceeds of crime, property, equipment or other
instrumentalities referred to in article 12, paragraph 1, situated in the territory of the
requested State Party.
2.
Following a request made by another State Party having jurisdiction over
an offence covered by this Convention, the requested State Party shall take measures
to identify, trace and freeze or seize proceeds of crime, property, equipment or other
instrumentalities referred to in article 12, paragraph 1, of this Convention for the
purpose of eventual confiscation to be ordered either by the requesting State Party
or, pursuant to a request under paragraph 1 of this article, by the requested State
Party.
3.
The provisions of article 18 of this Convention are applicable, mutatis
mutandis, to this article. In addition to the information specified in article 18,
paragraph 15, requests made pursuant to this article shall contain:
(a) In the case of a request pertaining to paragraph 1 (a) of this article, a
description of the property to be confiscated and a statement of the facts relied upon
by the requesting State Party sufficient to enable the requested State Party to seek
the order under its domestic law;
(b) In the case of a request pertaining to paragraph 1 (b) of this article, a
legally admissible copy of an order of confiscation upon which the request is based
issued by the requesting State Party, a statement of the facts and information as to
the extent to which execution of the order is requested;
(c) In the case of a request pertaining to paragraph 2 of this article, a
statement of the facts relied upon by the requesting State Party and a description of
the actions requested.
4.
The decisions or actions provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article
shall be taken by the requested State Party in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of its domestic law and its procedural rules or any bilateral or multilateral
treaty, agreement or arrangement to which it may be bound in relation to the
requesting State Party.
5.
Each State Party shall furnish copies of its laws and regulations that give
effect to this article and of any subsequent changes to such laws and regulations or a
description thereof to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
6.
If a State Party elects to make the taking of the measures referred to in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article conditional on the existence of a relevant treaty,
that State Party shall consider this Convention the necessary and sufficient treaty
basis.
7.
Cooperation under this article may be refused by a State Party if the
offence to which the request relates is not an offence covered by this Convention.
8.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prejudice the
rights of bona fide third parties.
9.
States Parties shall consider concluding bilateral or multilateral treaties,
agreements or arrangements to enhance the effectiveness of international
cooperation undertaken pursuant to this article.

11

A/RES/55/25

Article 14
Disposal of confiscated proceeds of crime or property
1.
Proceeds of crime or property confiscated by a State Party pursuant to
articles 12 or 13, paragraph 1, of this Convention shall be disposed of by that State
Party in accordance with its domestic law and administrative procedures.
2.
When acting on the request made by another State Party in accordance
with article 13 of this Convention, States Parties shall, to the extent permitted by
domestic law and if so requested, give priority consideration to returning the
confiscated proceeds of crime or property to the requesting State Party so that it can
give compensation to the victims of the crime or return such proceeds of crime or
property to their legitimate owners.
3.
When acting on the request made by another State Party in accordance
with articles 12 and 13 of this Convention, a State Party may give special
consideration to concluding agreements or arrangements on:
(a) Contributing the value of such proceeds of crime or property or funds
derived from the sale of such proceeds of crime or property or a part thereof to the
account designated in accordance with article 30, paragraph 2 (c), of this
Convention and to intergovernmental bodies specializing in the fight against
organized crime;
(b) Sharing with other States Parties, on a regular or case-by-case basis, such
proceeds of crime or property, or funds derived from the sale of such proceeds of
crime or property, in accordance with its domestic law or administrative procedures.
Article 15
Jurisdiction
1.
Each State Party shall adopt such measures as may be necessary to
establish its jurisdiction over the offences established in accordance with articles 5,
6, 8 and 23 of this Convention when:
(a)

The offence is committed in the territory of that State Party; or

(b) The offence is committed on board a vessel that is flying the flag of that
State Party or an aircraft that is registered under the laws of that State Party at the
time that the offence is committed.
2.
Subject to article 4 of this Convention, a State Party may also establish
its jurisdiction over any such offence when:
(a)

The offence is committed against a national of that State Party;

(b) The offence is committed by a national of that State Party or a stateless
person who has his or her habitual residence in its territory; or
(c)

The offence is:

(i) One of those established in accordance with article 5, paragraph 1, of this
Convention and is committed outside its territory with a view to the
commission of a serious crime within its territory;
(ii) One of those established in accordance with article 6, paragraph 1 (b) (ii),
of this Convention and is committed outside its territory with a view to the

12

A/RES/55/25

commission of an offence established in accordance with article 6,
paragraph 1 (a) (i) or (ii) or (b) (i), of this Convention within its territory.
3.
For the purposes of article 16, paragraph 10, of this Convention, each
State Party shall adopt such measures as may be necessary to establish its
jurisdiction over the offences covered by this Convention when the alleged offender
is present in its territory and it does not extradite such person solely on the ground
that he or she is one of its nationals.
4.
Each State Party may also adopt such measures as may be necessary to
establish its jurisdiction over the offences covered by this Convention when the
alleged offender is present in its territory and it does not extradite him or her.
5.
If a State Party exercising its jurisdiction under paragraph 1 or 2 of this
article has been notified, or has otherwise learned, that one or more other States
Parties are conducting an investigation, prosecution or judicial proceeding in respect
of the same conduct, the competent authorities of those States Parties shall, as
appropriate, consult one another with a view to coordinating their actions.
6.
Without prejudice to norms of general international law, this Convention
does not exclude the exercise of any criminal jurisdiction established by a State
Party in accordance with its domestic law.
Article 16
Extradition
1.
This article shall apply to the offences covered by this Convention or in
cases where an offence referred to in article 3, paragraph 1 (a) or (b), involves an
organized criminal group and the person who is the subject of the request for
extradition is located in the territory of the requested State Party, provided that the
offence for which extradition is sought is punishable under the domestic law of both
the requesting State Party and the requested State Party.
2.
If the request for extradition includes several separate serious crimes,
some of which are not covered by this article, the requested State Party may apply
this article also in respect of the latter offences.
3.
Each of the offences to which this article applies shall be deemed to be
included as an extraditable offence in any extradition treaty existing between States
Parties. States Parties undertake to include such offences as extraditable offences in
every extradition treaty to be concluded between them.
4.
If a State Party that makes extradition conditional on the existence of a
treaty receives a request for extradition from another State Party with which it has
no extradition treaty, it may consider this Convention the legal basis for extradition
in respect of any offence to which this article applies.
5.
States Parties that make extradition conditional on the existence of a
treaty shall:
(a) At the time of deposit of their instrument of ratification, acceptance,
approval of or accession to this Convention, inform the Secretary-General of the
United Nations whether they will take this Convention as the legal basis for
cooperation on extradition with other States Parties to this Convention; and

13

A/RES/55/25

(b) If they do not take this Convention as the legal basis for cooperation on
extradition, seek, where appropriate, to conclude treaties on extradition with other
States Parties to this Convention in order to implement this article.
6.
States Parties that do not make extradition conditional on the existence of
a treaty shall recognize offences to which this article applies as extraditable offences
between themselves.
7.
Extradition shall be subject to the conditions provided for by the
domestic law of the requested State Party or by applicable extradition treaties,
including, inter alia, conditions in relation to the minimum penalty requirement for
extradition and the grounds upon which the requested State Party may refuse
extradition.
8.
States Parties shall, subject to their domestic law, endeavour to expedite
extradition procedures and to simplify evidentiary requirements relating thereto in
respect of any offence to which this article applies.
9.
Subject to the provisions of its domestic law and its extradition treaties,
the requested State Party may, upon being satisfied that the circumstances so
warrant and are urgent and at the request of the requesting State Party, take a person
whose extradition is sought and who is present in its territory into custody or take
other appropriate measures to ensure his or her presence at extradition proceedings.
10. A State Party in whose territory an alleged offender is found, if it does
not extradite such person in respect of an offence to which this article applies solely
on the ground that he or she is one of its nationals, shall, at the request of the State
Party seeking extradition, be obliged to submit the case without undue delay to its
competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution. Those authorities shall take
their decision and conduct their proceedings in the same manner as in the case of
any other offence of a grave nature under the domestic law of that State Party. The
States Parties concerned shall cooperate with each other, in particular on procedural
and evidentiary aspects, to ensure the efficiency of such prosecution.
11. Whenever a State Party is permitted under its domestic law to extradite
or otherwise surrender one of its nationals only upon the condition that the person
will be returned to that State Party to serve the sentence imposed as a result of the
trial or proceedings for which the extradition or surrender of the person was sought
and that State Party and the State Party seeking the extradition of the person agree
with this option and other terms that they may deem appropriate, such conditional
extradition or surrender shall be sufficient to discharge the obligation set forth in
paragraph 10 of this article.
12. If extradition, sought for purposes of enforcing a sentence, is refused
because the person sought is a national of the requested State Party, the requested
Party shall, if its domestic law so permits and in conformity with the requirements
of such law, upon application of the requesting Party, consider the enforcement of
the sentence that has been imposed under the domestic law of the requesting Party
or the remainder thereof.
13. Any person regarding whom proceedings are being carried out in
connection with any of the offences to which this article applies shall be guaranteed
fair treatment at all stages of the proceedings, including enjoyment of all the rights
and guarantees provided by the domestic law of the State Party in the territory of
which that person is present.

14

A/RES/55/25

14. Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as imposing an obligation
to extradite if the requested State Party has substantial grounds for believing that the
request has been made for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on
account of that person’s sex, race, religion, nationality, ethnic origin or political
opinions or that compliance with the request would cause prejudice to that person’s
position for any one of these reasons.
15. States Parties may not refuse a request for extradition on the sole ground
that the offence is also considered to involve fiscal matters.
16. Before refusing extradition, the requested State Party shall, where
appropriate, consult with the requesting State Party to provide it with ample
opportunity to present its opinions and to provide information relevant to its
allegation.
17. States Parties shall seek to conclude bilateral and multilateral agreements
or arrangements to carry out or to enhance the effectiveness of extradition.
Article 17
Transfer of sentenced persons
States Parties may consider entering into bilateral or multilateral agreements or
arrangements on the transfer to their territory of persons sentenced to imprisonment
or other forms of deprivation of liberty for offences covered by this Convention, in
order that they may complete their sentences there.
Article 18
Mutual legal assistance
1.
States Parties shall afford one another the widest measure of mutual legal
assistance in investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings in relation to the
offences covered by this Convention as provided for in article 3 and shall
reciprocally extend to one another similar assistance where the requesting State
Party has reasonable grounds to suspect that the offence referred to in article 3,
paragraph 1 (a) or (b), is transnational in nature, including that victims, witnesses,
proceeds, instrumentalities or evidence of such offences are located in the requested
State Party and that the offence involves an organized criminal group.
2.
Mutual legal assistance shall be afforded to the fullest extent possible
under relevant laws, treaties, agreements and arrangements of the requested State
Party with respect to investigations, prosecutions and judicial proceedings in
relation to the offences for which a legal person may be held liable in accordance
with article 10 of this Convention in the requesting State Party.
3.
Mutual legal assistance to be afforded in accordance with this article may
be requested for any of the following purposes:
(a)

Taking evidence or statements from persons;

(b)

Effecting service of judicial documents;

(c)

Executing searches and seizures, and freezing;

(d)

Examining objects and sites;

(e)

Providing information, evidentiary items and expert evaluations;

15

A/RES/55/25

(f) Providing originals or certified copies of relevant documents and records,
including government, bank, financial, corporate or business records;
(g) Identifying or tracing proceeds of crime, property, instrumentalities or
other things for evidentiary purposes;
(h)
Party;

Facilitating the voluntary appearance of persons in the requesting State

(i) Any other type of assistance that is not contrary to the domestic law of
the requested State Party.
4.
Without prejudice to domestic law, the competent authorities of a State
Party may, without prior request, transmit information relating to criminal matters to
a competent authority in another State Party where they believe that such
information could assist the authority in undertaking or successfully concluding
inquiries and criminal proceedings or could result in a request formulated by the
latter State Party pursuant to this Convention.
5.
The transmission of information pursuant to paragraph 4 of this article
shall be without prejudice to inquiries and criminal proceedings in the State of the
competent authorities providing the information. The competent authorities
receiving the information shall comply with a request that said information remain
confidential, even temporarily, or with restrictions on its use. However, this shall not
prevent the receiving State Party from disclosing in its proceedings information that
is exculpatory to an accused person. In such a case, the receiving State Party shall
notify the transmitting State Party prior to the disclosure and, if so requested,
consult with the transmitting State Party. If, in an exceptional case, advance notice is
not possible, the receiving State Party shall inform the transmitting State Party of
the disclosure without delay.
6.
The provisions of this article shall not affect the obligations under any
other treaty, bilateral or multilateral, that governs or will govern, in whole or in part,
mutual legal assistance.
7.
Paragraphs 9 to 29 of this article shall apply to requests made pursuant to
this article if the States Parties in question are not bound by a treaty of mutual legal
assistance. If those States Parties are bound by such a treaty, the corresponding
provisions of that treaty shall apply unless the States Parties agree to apply
paragraphs 9 to 29 of this article in lieu thereof. States Parties are strongly
encouraged to apply these paragraphs if they facilitate cooperation.
8.
States Parties shall not decline to render mutual legal assistance pursuant
to this article on the ground of bank secrecy.
9.
States Parties may decline to render mutual legal assistance pursuant to
this article on the ground of absence of dual criminality. However, the requested
State Party may, when it deems appropriate, provide assistance, to the extent it
decides at its discretion, irrespective of whether the conduct would constitute an
offence under the domestic law of the requested State Party.
10. A person who is being detained or is serving a sentence in the territory of
one State Party whose presence in another State Party is requested for purposes of
identification, testimony or otherwise providing assistance in obtaining evidence for
investigations, prosecutions or judicial proceedings in relation to offences covered
by this Convention may be transferred if the following conditions are met:

16

A/RES/55/25

(a)

The person freely gives his or her informed consent;

(b) The competent authorities of both States Parties agree, subject to such
conditions as those States Parties may deem appropriate.
11.

For the purposes of paragraph 10 of this article:

(a) The State Party to which the person is transferred shall have the authority
and obligation to keep the person transferred in custody, unless otherwise requested
or authorized by the State Party from which the person was transferred;
(b) The State Party to which the person is transferred shall without delay
implement its obligation to return the person to the custody of the State Party from
which the person was transferred as agreed beforehand, or as otherwise agreed, by
the competent authorities of both States Parties;
(c) The State Party to which the person is transferred shall not require the
State Party from which the person was transferred to initiate extradition proceedings
for the return of the person;
(d) The person transferred shall receive credit for service of the sentence
being served in the State from which he or she was transferred for time spent in the
custody of the State Party to which he or she was transferred.
12. Unless the State Party from which a person is to be transferred in
accordance with paragraphs 10 and 11 of this article so agrees, that person, whatever
his or her nationality, shall not be prosecuted, detained, punished or subjected to any
other restriction of his or her personal liberty in the territory of the State to which
that person is transferred in respect of acts, omissions or convictions prior to his or
her departure from the territory of the State from which he or she was transferred.
13. Each State Party shall designate a central authority that shall have the
responsibility and power to receive requests for mutual legal assistance and either to
execute them or to transmit them to the competent authorities for execution. Where
a State Party has a special region or territory with a separate system of mutual legal
assistance, it may designate a distinct central authority that shall have the same
function for that region or territory. Central authorities shall ensure the speedy and
proper execution or transmission of the requests received. Where the central
authority transmits the request to a competent authority for execution, it shall
encourage the speedy and proper execution of the request by the competent
authority. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be notified of the
central authority designated for this purpose at the time each State Party deposits its
instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval of or accession to this Convention.
Requests for mutual legal assistance and any communication related thereto shall be
transmitted to the central authorities designated by the States Parties. This
requirement shall be without prejudice to the right of a State Party to require that
such requests and communications be addressed to it through diplomatic channels
and, in urgent circumstances, where the States Parties agree, through the
International Criminal Police Organization, if possible.
14. Requests shall be made in writing or, where possible, by any means
capable of producing a written record, in a language acceptable to the requested
State Party, under conditions allowing that State Party to establish authenticity. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be notified of the language or
languages acceptable to each State Party at the time it deposits its instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval of or accession to this Convention. In urgent

17

A/RES/55/25

circumstances and where agreed by the States Parties, requests may be made orally,
but shall be confirmed in writing forthwith.
15.

A request for mutual legal assistance shall contain:

(a)

The identity of the authority making the request;

(b) The subject matter and nature of the investigation, prosecution or judicial
proceeding to which the request relates and the name and functions of the authority
conducting the investigation, prosecution or judicial proceeding;
(c) A summary of the relevant facts, except in relation to requests for the
purpose of service of judicial documents;
(d) A description of the assistance sought and details of any particular
procedure that the requesting State Party wishes to be followed;
(e) Where possible, the identity, location and nationality of any person
concerned; and
(f)

The purpose for which the evidence, information or action is sought.

16. The requested State Party may request additional information when it
appears necessary for the execution of the request in accordance with its domestic
law or when it can facilitate such execution.
17. A request shall be executed in accordance with the domestic law of the
requested State Party and, to the extent not contrary to the domestic law of the
requested State Party and where possible, in accordance with the procedures
specified in the request.
18. Wherever possible and consistent with fundamental principles of
domestic law, when an individual is in the territory of a State Party and has to be
heard as a witness or expert by the judicial authorities of another State Party, the
first State Party may, at the request of the other, permit the hearing to take place by
video conference if it is not possible or desirable for the individual in question to
appear in person in the territory of the requesting State Party. States Parties may
agree that the hearing shall be conducted by a judicial authority of the requesting
State Party and attended by a judicial authority of the requested State Party.
19. The requesting State Party shall not transmit or use information or
evidence furnished by the requested State Party for investigations, prosecutions or
judicial proceedings other than those stated in the request without the prior consent
of the requested State Party. Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent the requesting
State Party from disclosing in its proceedings information or evidence that is
exculpatory to an accused person. In the latter case, the requesting State Party shall
notify the requested State Party prior to the disclosure and, if so requested, consult
with the requested State Party. If, in an exceptional case, advance notice is not
possible, the requesting State Party shall inform the requested State Party of the
disclosure without delay.
20. The requesting State Party may require that the requested State Party
keep confidential the fact and substance of the request, except to the extent
necessary to execute the request. If the requested State Party cannot comply with the
requirement of confidentiality, it shall promptly inform the requesting State Party.

18

A/RES/55/25

21.
(a)
article;

Mutual legal assistance may be refused:
If the request is not made in conformity with the provisions of this

(b) If the requested State Party considers that execution of the request is
likely to prejudice its sovereignty, security, ordre public or other essential interests;
(c) If the authorities of the requested State Party would be prohibited by its
domestic law from carrying out the action requested with regard to any similar
offence, had it been subject to investigation, prosecution or judicial proceedings
under their own jurisdiction;
(d) If it would be contrary to the legal system of the requested State Party
relating to mutual legal assistance for the request to be granted.
22. States Parties may not refuse a request for mutual legal assistance on the
sole ground that the offence is also considered to involve fiscal matters.
23.

Reasons shall be given for any refusal of mutual legal assistance.

24. The requested State Party shall execute the request for mutual legal
assistance as soon as possible and shall take as full account as possible of any
deadlines suggested by the requesting State Party and for which reasons are given,
preferably in the request. The requested State Party shall respond to reasonable
requests by the requesting State Party on progress of its handling of the request. The
requesting State Party shall promptly inform the requested State Party when the
assistance sought is no longer required.
25. Mutual legal assistance may be postponed by the requested State Party on
the ground that it interferes with an ongoing investigation, prosecution or judicial
proceeding.
26. Before refusing a request pursuant to paragraph 21 of this article or
postponing its execution pursuant to paragraph 25 of this article, the requested State
Party shall consult with the requesting State Party to consider whether assistance
may be granted subject to such terms and conditions as it deems necessary. If the
requesting State Party accepts assistance subject to those conditions, it shall comply
with the conditions.
27. Without prejudice to the application of paragraph 12 of this article, a
witness, expert or other person who, at the request of the requesting State Party,
consents to give evidence in a proceeding or to assist in an investigation,
prosecution or judicial proceeding in the territory of the requesting State Party shall
not be prosecuted, detained, punished or subjected to any other restriction of his or
her personal liberty in that territory in respect of acts, omissions or convictions prior
to his or her departure from the territory of the requested State Party. Such safe
conduct shall cease when the witness, expert or other person having had, for a
period of fifteen consecutive days or for any period agreed upon by the States
Parties from the date on which he or she has been officially informed that his or her
presence is no longer required by the judicial authorities, an opportunity of leaving,
has nevertheless remained voluntarily in the territory of the requesting State Party
or, having left it, has returned of his or her own free will.
28. The ordinary costs of executing a request shall be borne by the requested
State Party, unless otherwise agreed by the States Parties concerned. If expenses of a
substantial or extraordinary nature are or will be required to fulfil the request, the

19

A/RES/55/25

States Parties shall consult to determine the terms and conditions under which the
request will be executed, as well as the manner in which the costs shall be borne.
29.

The requested State Party:

(a) Shall provide to the requesting State Party copies of government records,
documents or information in its possession that under its domestic law are available
to the general public;
(b) May, at its discretion, provide to the requesting State Party in whole, in
part or subject to such conditions as it deems appropriate, copies of any government
records, documents or information in its possession that under its domestic law are
not available to the general public.
30. States Parties shall consider, as may be necessary, the possibility of
concluding bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements that would serve the
purposes of, give practical effect to or enhance the provisions of this article.
Article 19
Joint investigations
States Parties shall consider concluding bilateral or multilateral agreements or
arrangements whereby, in relation to matters that are the subject of investigations,
prosecutions or judicial proceedings in one or more States, the competent authorities
concerned may establish joint investigative bodies. In the absence of such
agreements or arrangements, joint investigations may be undertaken by agreement
on a case-by-case basis. The States Parties involved shall ensure that the sovereignty
of the State Party in whose territory such investigation is to take place is fully
respected.
Article 20
Special investigative techniques
1.
If permitted by the basic principles of its domestic legal system, each
State Party shall, within its possibilities and under the conditions prescribed by its
domestic law, take the necessary measures to allow for the appropriate use of
controlled delivery and, where it deems appropriate, for the use of other special
investigative techniques, such as electronic or other forms of surveillance and
undercover operations, by its competent authorities in its territory for the purpose of
effectively combating organized crime.
2.
For the purpose of investigating the offences covered by this Convention,
States Parties are encouraged to conclude, when necessary, appropriate bilateral or
multilateral agreements or arrangements for using such special investigative
techniques in the context of cooperation at the international level. Such agreements
or arrangements shall be concluded and implemented in full compliance with the
principle of sovereign equality of States and shall be carried out strictly in
accordance with the terms of those agreements or arrangements.
3.
In the absence of an agreement or arrangement as set forth in paragraph 2
of this article, decisions to use such special investigative techniques at the
international level shall be made on a case-by-case basis and may, when necessary,
take into consideration financial arrangements and understandings with respect to
the exercise of jurisdiction by the States Parties concerned.

20

A/RES/55/25

4.
Decisions to use controlled delivery at the international level may, with
the consent of the States Parties concerned, include methods such as intercepting
and allowing the goods to continue intact or be removed or replaced in whole or in
part.
Article 21
Transfer of criminal proceedings
States Parties shall consider the possibility of transferring to one another
proceedings for the prosecution of an offence covered by this Convention in cases
where such transfer is considered to be in the interests of the proper administration
of justice, in particular in cases where several jurisdictions are involved, with a view
to concentrating the prosecution.
Article 22
Establishment of criminal record
Each State Party may adopt such legislative or other measures as may be
necessary to take into consideration, under such terms as and for the purpose that it
deems appropriate, any previous conviction in another State of an alleged offender
for the purpose of using such information in criminal proceedings relating to an
offence covered by this Convention.
Article 23
Criminalization of obstruction of justice
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may be
necessary to establish as criminal offences, when committed intentionally:
(a) The use of physical force, threats or intimidation or the promise, offering
or giving of an undue advantage to induce false testimony or to interfere in the
giving of testimony or the production of evidence in a proceeding in relation to the
commission of offences covered by this Convention;
(b) The use of physical force, threats or intimidation to interfere with the
exercise of official duties by a justice or law enforcement official in relation to the
commission of offences covered by this Convention. Nothing in this subparagraph
shall prejudice the right of States Parties to have legislation that protects other
categories of public officials.
Article 24
Protection of witnesses
1.
Each State Party shall take appropriate measures within its means to provide
effective protection from potential retaliation or intimidation for witnesses in
criminal proceedings who give testimony concerning offences covered by this
Convention and, as appropriate, for their relatives and other persons close to them.
2.
The measures envisaged in paragraph 1 of this article may include, inter alia,
without prejudice to the rights of the defendant, including the right to due process:
(a) Establishing procedures for the physical protection of such persons, such
as, to the extent necessary and feasible, relocating them and permitting, where
appropriate, non-disclosure or limitations on the disclosure of information
concerning the identity and whereabouts of such persons;

21

A/RES/55/25

(b) Providing evidentiary rules to permit witness testimony to be given in a
manner that ensures the safety of the witness, such as permitting testimony to be
given through the use of communications technology such as video links or other
adequate means.
3.
States Parties shall consider entering into agreements or arrangements with
other States for the relocation of persons referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4.
The provisions of this article shall also apply to victims insofar as they are
witnesses.
Article 25
Assistance to and protection of victims
1.
Each State Party shall take appropriate measures within its means to
provide assistance and protection to victims of offences covered by this Convention,
in particular in cases of threat of retaliation or intimidation.
2.
Each State Party shall establish appropriate procedures to provide access
to compensation and restitution for victims of offences covered by this Convention.
3.
Each State Party shall, subject to its domestic law, enable views and
concerns of victims to be presented and considered at appropriate stages of criminal
proceedings against offenders in a manner not prejudicial to the rights of the
defence.
Article 26
Measures to enhance cooperation with law enforcement authorities
1.
Each State Party shall take appropriate measures to encourage persons
who participate or who have participated in organized criminal groups:
(a) To supply information useful to competent authorities for investigative
and evidentiary purposes on such matters as:
(i) The identity, nature, composition, structure, location or activities of
organized criminal groups;
(ii) Links, including international links, with other organized criminal
groups;
(iii) Offences that organized criminal groups have committed or may commit;
(b) To provide factual, concrete help to competent authorities that may
contribute to depriving organized criminal groups of their resources or of the
proceeds of crime.
2.
Each State Party shall consider providing for the possibility, in
appropriate cases, of mitigating punishment of an accused person who provides
substantial cooperation in the investigation or prosecution of an offence covered by
this Convention.
3.
Each State Party shall consider providing for the possibility, in
accordance with fundamental principles of its domestic law, of granting immunity
from prosecution to a person who provides substantial cooperation in the
investigation or prosecution of an offence covered by this Convention.

22

A/RES/55/25

4.
Protection of such persons shall be as provided for in article 24 of this
Convention.
5.
Where a person referred to in paragraph 1 of this article located in one
State Party can provide substantial cooperation to the competent authorities of
another State Party, the States Parties concerned may consider entering into
agreements or arrangements, in accordance with their domestic law, concerning the
potential provision by the other State Party of the treatment set forth in paragraphs 2
and 3 of this article.
Article 27
Law enforcement cooperation
1.
States Parties shall cooperate closely with one another, consistent with
their respective domestic legal and administrative systems, to enhance the
effectiveness of law enforcement action to combat the offences covered by this
Convention. Each State Party shall, in particular, adopt effective measures:
(a) To enhance and, where necessary, to establish channels of
communication between their competent authorities, agencies and services in order
to facilitate the secure and rapid exchange of information concerning all aspects of
the offences covered by this Convention, including, if the States Parties concerned
deem it appropriate, links with other criminal activities;
(b) To cooperate with other States Parties in conducting inquiries with
respect to offences covered by this Convention concerning:
(i) The identity, whereabouts and activities of persons suspected of
involvement in such offences or the location of other persons concerned;
(ii) The movement of proceeds of crime or property derived from the
commission of such offences;
(iii) The movement of property, equipment or other instrumentalities used or
intended for use in the commission of such offences;
(c) To provide, when appropriate, necessary items or quantities of substances
for analytical or investigative purposes;
(d) To facilitate effective coordination between their competent authorities,
agencies and services and to promote the exchange of personnel and other experts,
including, subject to bilateral agreements or arrangements between the States Parties
concerned, the posting of liaison officers;
(e) To exchange information with other States Parties on specific means and
methods used by organized criminal groups, including, where applicable, routes and
conveyances and the use of false identities, altered or false documents or other
means of concealing their activities;
(f) To exchange information and coordinate administrative and other
measures taken as appropriate for the purpose of early identification of the offences
covered by this Convention.
2.
With a view to giving effect to this Convention, States Parties shall
consider entering into bilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements on direct
cooperation between their law enforcement agencies and, where such agreements or
arrangements already exist, amending them. In the absence of such agreements or

23

A/RES/55/25

arrangements between the States Parties concerned, the Parties may consider this
Convention as the basis for mutual law enforcement cooperation in respect of the
offences covered by this Convention. Whenever appropriate, States Parties shall
make full use of agreements or arrangements, including international or regional
organizations, to enhance the cooperation between their law enforcement agencies.
3.
States Parties shall endeavour to cooperate within their means to respond
to transnational organized crime committed through the use of modern technology.
Article 28
Collection, exchange and analysis of information on the nature of organized crime
1.
Each State Party shall consider analysing, in consultation with the
scientific and academic communities, trends in organized crime in its territory, the
circumstances in which organized crime operates, as well as the professional groups
and technologies involved.
2.
States Parties shall consider developing and sharing analytical expertise
concerning organized criminal activities with each other and through international
and regional organizations. For that purpose, common definitions, standards and
methodologies should be developed and applied as appropriate.
3.
Each State Party shall consider monitoring its policies and actual
measures to combat organized crime and making assessments of their effectiveness
and efficiency.
Article 29
Training and technical assistance
1.
Each State Party shall, to the extent necessary, initiate, develop or
improve specific training programmes for its law enforcement personnel, including
prosecutors, investigating magistrates and customs personnel, and other personnel
charged with the prevention, detection and control of the offences covered by this
Convention. Such programmes may include secondments and exchanges of staff.
Such programmes shall deal, in particular and to the extent permitted by domestic
law, with the following:
(a) Methods used in the prevention, detection and control of the offences
covered by this Convention;
(b) Routes and techniques used by persons suspected of involvement in
offences covered by this Convention, including in transit States, and appropriate
countermeasures;
(c)

Monitoring of the movement of contraband;

(d) Detection and monitoring of the movements of proceeds of crime,
property, equipment or other instrumentalities and methods used for the transfer,
concealment or disguise of such proceeds, property, equipment or other
instrumentalities, as well as methods used in combating money-laundering and other
financial crimes;

24

(e)

Collection of evidence;

(f)

Control techniques in free trade zones and free ports;

A/RES/55/25

(g) Modern law enforcement equipment and techniques, including electronic
surveillance, controlled deliveries and undercover operations;
(h) Methods used in combating transnational organized crime committed
through the use of computers, telecommunications networks or other forms of
modern technology; and
(i)

Methods used in the protection of victims and witnesses.

2.
States Parties shall assist one another in planning and implementing
research and training programmes designed to share expertise in the areas referred to
in paragraph 1 of this article and to that end shall also, when appropriate, use
regional and international conferences and seminars to promote cooperation and to
stimulate discussion on problems of mutual concern, including the special problems
and needs of transit States.
3.
States Parties shall promote training and technical assistance that will
facilitate extradition and mutual legal assistance. Such training and technical
assistance may include language training, secondments and exchanges between
personnel in central authorities or agencies with relevant responsibilities.
4.
In the case of existing bilateral and multilateral agreements or
arrangements, States Parties shall strengthen, to the extent necessary, efforts to
maximize operational and training activities within international and regional
organizations and within other relevant bilateral and multilateral agreements or
arrangements.
Article 30
Other measures: implementation of the Convention through economic development
and technical assistance
1.
States Parties shall take measures conducive to the optimal
implementation of this Convention to the extent possible, through international
cooperation, taking into account the negative effects of organized crime on society
in general, in particular on sustainable development.
2.
States Parties shall make concrete efforts to the extent possible and in
coordination with each other, as well as with international and regional
organizations:
(a) To enhance their cooperation at various levels with developing countries,
with a view to strengthening the capacity of the latter to prevent and combat
transnational organized crime;
(b) To enhance financial and material assistance to support the efforts of
developing countries to fight transnational organized crime effectively and to help
them implement this Convention successfully;
(c) To provide technical assistance to developing countries and countries
with economies in transition to assist them in meeting their needs for the
implementation of this Convention. To that end, States Parties shall endeavour to
make adequate and regular voluntary contributions to an account specifically
designated for that purpose in a United Nations funding mechanism. States Parties
may also give special consideration, in accordance with their domestic law and the
provisions of this Convention, to contributing to the aforementioned account a

25

A/RES/55/25

percentage of the money or of the corresponding value of proceeds of crime or
property confiscated in accordance with the provisions of this Convention;
(d) To encourage and persuade other States and financial institutions as
appropriate to join them in efforts in accordance with this article, in particular by
providing more training programmes and modern equipment to developing countries
in order to assist them in achieving the objectives of this Convention.
3.
To the extent possible, these measures shall be without prejudice to
existing foreign assistance commitments or to other financial cooperation
arrangements at the bilateral, regional or international level.
4.
States Parties may conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements or
arrangements on material and logistical assistance, taking into consideration the
financial arrangements necessary for the means of international cooperation
provided for by this Convention to be effective and for the prevention, detection and
control of transnational organized crime.
Article 31
Prevention
1.
States Parties shall endeavour to develop and evaluate national projects
and to establish and promote best practices and policies aimed at the prevention of
transnational organized crime.
2.
States Parties shall endeavour, in accordance with fundamental principles
of their domestic law, to reduce existing or future opportunities for organized
criminal groups to participate in lawful markets with proceeds of crime, through
appropriate legislative, administrative or other measures. These measures should
focus on:
(a) The strengthening of cooperation between law enforcement agencies or
prosecutors and relevant private entities, including industry;
(b) The promotion of the development of standards and procedures designed
to safeguard the integrity of public and relevant private entities, as well as codes of
conduct for relevant professions, in particular lawyers, notaries public, tax
consultants and accountants;
(c) The prevention of the misuse by organized criminal groups of tender
procedures conducted by public authorities and of subsidies and licences granted by
public authorities for commercial activity;
(d) The prevention of the misuse of legal persons by organized criminal
groups; such measures could include:
(i) The establishment of public records on legal and natural persons involved
in the establishment, management and funding of legal persons;
(ii) The introduction of the possibility of disqualifying by court order or any
appropriate means for a reasonable period of time persons convicted of
offences covered by this Convention from acting as directors of legal persons
incorporated within their jurisdiction;
(iii) The establishment of national records of persons disqualified from acting
as directors of legal persons; and

26

A/RES/55/25

(iv) The exchange of information contained in the records referred to in
subparagraphs (d) (i) and (iii) of this paragraph with the competent authorities
of other States Parties.
3.
States Parties shall endeavour to promote the reintegration into society of
persons convicted of offences covered by this Convention.
4.
States Parties shall endeavour to evaluate periodically existing relevant
legal instruments and administrative practices with a view to detecting their
vulnerability to misuse by organized criminal groups.
5.
States Parties shall endeavour to promote public awareness regarding the
existence, causes and gravity of and the threat posed by transnational organized
crime. Information may be disseminated where appropriate through the mass media
and shall include measures to promote public participation in preventing and
combating such crime.
6.
Each State Party shall inform the Secretary-General of the United
Nations of the name and address of the authority or authorities that can assist other
States Parties in developing measures to prevent transnational organized crime.
7.
States Parties shall, as appropriate, collaborate with each other and
relevant international and regional organizations in promoting and developing the
measures referred to in this article. This includes participation in international
projects aimed at the prevention of transnational organized crime, for example by
alleviating the circumstances that render socially marginalized groups vulnerable to
the action of transnational organized crime.
Article 32
Conference of the Parties to the Convention
1.
A Conference of the Parties to the Convention is hereby established to
improve the capacity of States Parties to combat transnational organized crime and
to promote and review the implementation of this Convention.
2.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall convene the
Conference of the Parties not later than one year following the entry into force of
this Convention. The Conference of the Parties shall adopt rules of procedure and
rules governing the activities set forth in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this article
(including rules concerning payment of expenses incurred in carrying out those
activities).
3.
The Conference of the Parties shall agree upon mechanisms for achieving
the objectives mentioned in paragraph 1 of this article, including:
(a) Facilitating activities by States Parties under articles 29, 30 and 31 of this
Convention, including by encouraging the mobilization of voluntary contributions;
(b) Facilitating the exchange of information among States Parties on patterns
and trends in transnational organized crime and on successful practices for
combating it;
(c) Cooperating with relevant international and regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations;
(d)

Reviewing periodically the implementation of this Convention;

27

A/RES/55/25

(e) Making
implementation.

recommendations

to

improve

this

Convention

and

its

4.
For the purpose of paragraphs 3 (d) and (e) of this article, the Conference
of the Parties shall acquire the necessary knowledge of the measures taken by States
Parties in implementing this Convention and the difficulties encountered by them in
doing so through information provided by them and through such supplemental
review mechanisms as may be established by the Conference of the Parties.
5.
Each State Party shall provide the Conference of the Parties with
information on its programmes, plans and practices, as well as legislative and
administrative measures to implement this Convention, as required by the
Conference of the Parties.
Article 33
Secretariat
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall provide the necessary
secretariat services to the Conference of the Parties to the Convention.
2.

The secretariat shall:

(a) Assist the Conference of the Parties in carrying out the activities set forth
in article 32 of this Convention and make arrangements and provide the necessary
services for the sessions of the Conference of the Parties;
(b) Upon request, assist States Parties in providing information to the
Conference of the Parties as envisaged in article 32, paragraph 5, of this
Convention; and
(c) Ensure the necessary coordination with the secretariats of relevant
international and regional organizations.
Article 34
Implementation of the Convention
1.
Each State Party shall take the necessary measures, including legislative
and administrative measures, in accordance with fundamental principles of its
domestic law, to ensure the implementation of its obligations under this Convention.
2.
The offences established in accordance with articles 5, 6, 8 and 23 of this
Convention shall be established in the domestic law of each State Party
independently of the transnational nature or the involvement of an organized
criminal group as described in article 3, paragraph 1, of this Convention, except to
the extent that article 5 of this Convention would require the involvement of an
organized criminal group.
3.
Each State Party may adopt more strict or severe measures than those
provided for by this Convention for preventing and combating transnational
organized crime.
Article 35
Settlement of disputes
l.
States Parties shall endeavour to settle disputes concerning the
interpretation or application of this Convention through negotiation.

28

A/RES/55/25

2.
Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of this Convention that cannot be settled through
negotiation within a reasonable time shall, at the request of one of those States
Parties, be submitted to arbitration. If, six months after the date of the request for
arbitration, those States Parties are unable to agree on the organization of the
arbitration, any one of those States Parties may refer the dispute to the International
Court of Justice by request in accordance with the Statute of the Court.
3.
Each State Party may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance or
approval of or accession to this Convention, declare that it does not consider itself
bound by paragraph 2 of this article. The other States Parties shall not be bound by
paragraph 2 of this article with respect to any State Party that has made such a
reservation.
4.
Any State Party that has made a reservation in accordance with
paragraph 3 of this article may at any time withdraw that reservation by notification
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 36
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval and accession
1.
This Convention shall be open to all States for signature from 12 to
15 December 2000 in Palermo, Italy, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters
in New York until 12 December 2002.
2.
This Convention shall also be open for signature by regional economic
integration organizations provided that at least one member State of such
organization has signed this Convention in accordance with paragraph 1 of this
article.
3.
This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. A regional economic integration
organization may deposit its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval if at
least one of its member States has done likewise. In that instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval, such organization shall declare the extent of its competence
with respect to the matters governed by this Convention. Such organization shall
also inform the depositary of any relevant modification in the extent of its
competence.
4.
This Convention is open for accession by any State or any regional
economic integration organization of which at least one member State is a Party to
this Convention. Instruments of accession shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. At the time of its accession, a regional economic
integration organization shall declare the extent of its competence with respect to
matters governed by this Convention. Such organization shall also inform the
depositary of any relevant modification in the extent of its competence.
Article 37
Relation with protocols
1.

This Convention may be supplemented by one or more protocols.

2.
In order to become a Party to a protocol, a State or a regional economic
integration organization must also be a Party to this Convention.

29

A/RES/55/25

3.
A State Party to this Convention is not bound by a protocol unless it
becomes a Party to the protocol in accordance with the provisions thereof.
4.
Any protocol to this Convention shall be interpreted together with this
Convention, taking into account the purpose of that protocol.
Article 38
Entry into force
1.
This Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date
of deposit of the fortieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession. For the purpose of this paragraph, any instrument deposited by a regional
economic integration organization shall not be counted as additional to those
deposited by member States of such organization.
2.
For each State or regional economic integration organization ratifying,
accepting, approving or acceding to this Convention after the deposit of the fortieth
instrument of such action, this Convention shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
after the date of deposit by such State or organization of the relevant instrument.
Article 39
Amendment
1.
After the expiry of five years from the entry into force of this
Convention, a State Party may propose an amendment and file it with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall thereupon communicate the proposed
amendment to the States Parties and to the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention for the purpose of considering and deciding on the proposal. The
Conference of the Parties shall make every effort to achieve consensus on each
amendment. If all efforts at consensus have been exhausted and no agreement has
been reached, the amendment shall, as a last resort, require for its adoption a twothirds majority vote of the States Parties present and voting at the meeting of the
Conference of the Parties.
2.
Regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their
competence, shall exercise their right to vote under this article with a number of
votes equal to the number of their member States that are Parties to this Convention.
Such organizations shall not exercise their right to vote if their member States
exercise theirs and vice versa.
3.
An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article is
subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States Parties.
4.
An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article
shall enter into force in respect of a State Party ninety days after the date of the
deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of an instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval of such amendment.
5.
When an amendment enters into force, it shall be binding on those States
Parties which have expressed their consent to be bound by it. Other States Parties
shall still be bound by the provisions of this Convention and any earlier amendments
that they have ratified, accepted or approved.

30

A/RES/55/25

Article 40
Denunciation
1.
A State Party may denounce this Convention by written notification to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Such denunciation shall become
effective one year after the date of receipt of the notification by the SecretaryGeneral.
2.
A regional economic integration organization shall cease to be a Party to
this Convention when all of its member States have denounced it.
3.
Denunciation of this Convention in accordance with paragraph 1 of this
article shall entail the denunciation of any protocols thereto.
Article 41
Depositary and languages
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is designated depositary of
this Convention.
2.
The original of this Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Convention.
Annex II
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime
Preamble
The States Parties to this Protocol,
Declaring that effective action to prevent and combat trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, requires a comprehensive international approach in
the countries of origin, transit and destination that includes measures to prevent such
trafficking, to punish the traffickers and to protect the victims of such trafficking,
including by protecting their internationally recognized human rights,
Taking into account the fact that, despite the existence of a variety of
international instruments containing rules and practical measures to combat the
exploitation of persons, especially women and children, there is no universal
instrument that addresses all aspects of trafficking in persons,
Concerned that, in the absence of such an instrument, persons who are
vulnerable to trafficking will not be sufficiently protected,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 53/111 of 9 December 1998, in which
the Assembly decided to establish an open-ended intergovernmental ad hoc
committee for the purpose of elaborating a comprehensive international convention
against transnational organized crime and of discussing the elaboration of, inter alia,
an international instrument addressing trafficking in women and children,

31

A/RES/55/25

Convinced that supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime with an international instrument for the prevention,
suppression and punishment of trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, will be useful in preventing and combating that crime,
Have agreed as follows:
I.

General provisions

Article 1
Relation with the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
1.
This Protocol supplements the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. It shall be interpreted together with the Convention.
2.
The provisions of the Convention shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to this
Protocol unless otherwise provided herein.
3.
The offences established in accordance with article 5 of this Protocol
shall be regarded as offences established in accordance with the Convention.
Article 2
Statement of purpose
The purposes of this Protocol are:
(a) To prevent and combat trafficking in persons, paying particular attention
to women and children;
(b) To protect and assist the victims of such trafficking, with full respect for
their human rights; and
(c) To promote cooperation among States Parties in order to meet those
objectives.
Article 3
Use of terms
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) “Trafficking in persons” shall mean the recruitment, transportation,
transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or
other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power
or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits
to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the
purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation
of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or
services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs;
(b) The consent of a victim of trafficking in persons to the intended
exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article shall be irrelevant where any
of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) have been used;
(c) The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a child
for the purpose of exploitation shall be considered “trafficking in persons” even if
this does not involve any of the means set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article;

32

A/RES/55/25

(d)

“Child” shall mean any person under eighteen years of age.

Article 4
Scope of application
This Protocol shall apply, except as otherwise stated herein, to the prevention,
investigation and prosecution of the offences established in accordance with
article 5 of this Protocol, where those offences are transnational in nature and
involve an organized criminal group, as well as to the protection of victims of such
offences.
Article 5
Criminalization
1.
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may
be necessary to establish as criminal offences the conduct set forth in article 3 of
this Protocol, when committed intentionally.
2.
Each State Party shall also adopt such legislative and other measures as
may be necessary to establish as criminal offences:
(a) Subject to the basic concepts of its legal system, attempting to commit an
offence established in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article;
(b) Participating as an accomplice in an offence established in accordance
with paragraph 1 of this article; and
(c) Organizing or directing other persons to commit an offence established in
accordance with paragraph 1 of this article.
II.

Protection of victims of trafficking in persons

Article 6
Assistance to and protection of victims of trafficking in persons
1.
In appropriate cases and to the extent possible under its domestic law,
each State Party shall protect the privacy and identity of victims of trafficking in
persons, including, inter alia, by making legal proceedings relating to such
trafficking confidential.
2.
Each State Party shall ensure that its domestic legal or administrative
system contains measures that provide to victims of trafficking in persons, in
appropriate cases:
(a)

Information on relevant court and administrative proceedings;

(b) Assistance to enable their views and concerns to be presented and
considered at appropriate stages of criminal proceedings against offenders, in a
manner not prejudicial to the rights of the defence.
3.
Each State Party shall consider implementing measures to provide for the
physical, psychological and social recovery of victims of trafficking in persons,
including, in appropriate cases, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
other relevant organizations and other elements of civil society, and, in particular,
the provision of:

33

A/RES/55/25

(a)

Appropriate housing;

(b) Counselling and information, in particular as regards their legal rights, in
a language that the victims of trafficking in persons can understand;
(c)

Medical, psychological and material assistance; and

(d)

Employment, educational and training opportunities.

4.
Each State Party shall take into account, in applying the provisions of
this article, the age, gender and special needs of victims of trafficking in persons, in
particular the special needs of children, including appropriate housing, education
and care.
5.
Each State Party shall endeavour to provide for the physical safety of
victims of trafficking in persons while they are within its territory.
6.
Each State Party shall ensure that its domestic legal system contains
measures that offer victims of trafficking in persons the possibility of obtaining
compensation for damage suffered.
Article 7
Status of victims of trafficking in persons in receiving States
1.
In addition to taking measures pursuant to article 6 of this Protocol, each
State Party shall consider adopting legislative or other appropriate measures that
permit victims of trafficking in persons to remain in its territory, temporarily or
permanently, in appropriate cases.
2.
In implementing the provision contained in paragraph 1 of this article,
each State Party shall give appropriate consideration to humanitarian and
compassionate factors.
Article 8
Repatriation of victims of trafficking in persons
1.
The State Party of which a victim of trafficking in persons is a national or
in which the person had the right of permanent residence at the time of entry into the
territory of the receiving State Party shall facilitate and accept, with due regard for
the safety of that person, the return of that person without undue or unreasonable
delay.
2.
When a State Party returns a victim of trafficking in persons to a State
Party of which that person is a national or in which he or she had, at the time of
entry into the territory of the receiving State Party, the right of permanent residence,
such return shall be with due regard for the safety of that person and for the status of
any legal proceedings related to the fact that the person is a victim of trafficking and
shall preferably be voluntary.
3.
At the request of a receiving State Party, a requested State Party shall,
without undue or unreasonable delay, verify whether a person who is a victim of
trafficking in persons is its national or had the right of permanent residence in its
territory at the time of entry into the territory of the receiving State Party.
4.
In order to facilitate the return of a victim of trafficking in persons who is
without proper documentation, the State Party of which that person is a national or
in which he or she had the right of permanent residence at the time of entry into the

34

A/RES/55/25

territory of the receiving State Party shall agree to issue, at the request of the
receiving State Party, such travel documents or other authorization as may be
necessary to enable the person to travel to and re-enter its territory.
5.
This article shall be without prejudice to any right afforded to victims of
trafficking in persons by any domestic law of the receiving State Party.
6.
This article shall be without prejudice to any applicable bilateral or
multilateral agreement or arrangement that governs, in whole or in part, the return of
victims of trafficking in persons.
III. Prevention, cooperation and other measures
Article 9
Prevention of trafficking in persons
1.
States Parties shall establish comprehensive policies, programmes and
other measures:
(a)

To prevent and combat trafficking in persons; and

(b) To protect victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, from revictimization.
2.
States Parties shall endeavour to undertake measures such as research,
information and mass media campaigns and social and economic initiatives to
prevent and combat trafficking in persons.
3.
Policies, programmes and other measures established in accordance with
this article shall, as appropriate, include cooperation with non-governmental
organizations, other relevant organizations and other elements of civil society.
4.
States Parties shall take or strengthen measures, including through
bilateral or multilateral cooperation, to alleviate the factors that make persons,
especially women and children, vulnerable to trafficking, such as poverty,
underdevelopment and lack of equal opportunity.
5.
States Parties shall adopt or strengthen legislative or other measures,
such as educational, social or cultural measures, including through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, to discourage the demand that fosters all forms of
exploitation of persons, especially women and children, that leads to trafficking.
Article 10
Information exchange and training
1.
Law enforcement, immigration or other relevant authorities of States
Parties shall, as appropriate, cooperate with one another by exchanging information,
in accordance with their domestic law, to enable them to determine:
(a) Whether individuals crossing or attempting to cross an international
border with travel documents belonging to other persons or without travel
documents are perpetrators or victims of trafficking in persons;
(b) The types of travel document that individuals have used or attempted to
use to cross an international border for the purpose of trafficking in persons; and

35

A/RES/55/25

(c) The means and methods used by organized criminal groups for the
purpose of trafficking in persons, including the recruitment and transportation of
victims, routes and links between and among individuals and groups engaged in
such trafficking, and possible measures for detecting them.
2.
States Parties shall provide or strengthen training for law enforcement,
immigration and other relevant officials in the prevention of trafficking in persons.
The training should focus on methods used in preventing such trafficking,
prosecuting the traffickers and protecting the rights of the victims, including
protecting the victims from the traffickers. The training should also take into
account the need to consider human rights and child- and gender-sensitive issues
and it should encourage cooperation with non-governmental organizations, other
relevant organizations and other elements of civil society.
3.
A State Party that receives information shall comply with any request by
the State Party that transmitted the information that places restrictions on its use.
Article 11
Border measures
1.
Without prejudice to international commitments in relation to the free
movement of people, States Parties shall strengthen, to the extent possible, such
border controls as may be necessary to prevent and detect trafficking in persons.
2.
Each State Party shall adopt legislative or other appropriate measures to
prevent, to the extent possible, means of transport operated by commercial carriers
from being used in the commission of offences established in accordance with
article 5 of this Protocol.
3.
Where appropriate, and without prejudice to applicable international
conventions, such measures shall include establishing the obligation of commercial
carriers, including any transportation company or the owner or operator of any
means of transport, to ascertain that all passengers are in possession of the travel
documents required for entry into the receiving State.
4.
Each State Party shall take the necessary measures, in accordance with its
domestic law, to provide for sanctions in cases of violation of the obligation set
forth in paragraph 3 of this article.
5.
Each State Party shall consider taking measures that permit, in
accordance with its domestic law, the denial of entry or revocation of visas of
persons implicated in the commission of offences established in accordance with
this Protocol.
6.
Without prejudice to article 27 of the Convention, States Parties shall
consider strengthening cooperation among border control agencies by, inter alia,
establishing and maintaining direct channels of communication.
Article 12
Security and control of documents
Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary, within
available means:

36

A/RES/55/25

(a) To ensure that travel or identity documents issued by it are of such
quality that they cannot easily be misused and cannot readily be falsified or
unlawfully altered, replicated or issued; and
(b) To ensure the integrity and security of travel or identity documents issued
by or on behalf of the State Party and to prevent their unlawful creation, issuance
and use.
Article 13
Legitimacy and validity of documents
At the request of another State Party, a State Party shall, in accordance with its
domestic law, verify within a reasonable time the legitimacy and validity of travel or
identity documents issued or purported to have been issued in its name and
suspected of being used for trafficking in persons.
IV.

Final provisions

Article 14
Saving clause
1.
Nothing in this Protocol shall affect the rights, obligations and
responsibilities of States and individuals under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human rights law and, in particular,
where applicable, the 1951 Convention3 and the 1967 Protocol 4 relating to the Status
of Refugees and the principle of non-refoulement as contained therein.
2.
The measures set forth in this Protocol shall be interpreted and applied in
a way that is not discriminatory to persons on the ground that they are victims of
trafficking in persons. The interpretation and application of those measures shall be
consistent with internationally recognized principles of non-discrimination.
Article 15
Settlement of disputes
l.
States Parties shall endeavour to settle disputes concerning the
interpretation or application of this Protocol through negotiation.
2.
Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of this Protocol that cannot be settled through
negotiation within a reasonable time shall, at the request of one of those States
Parties, be submitted to arbitration. If, six months after the date of the request for
arbitration, those States Parties are unable to agree on the organization of the
arbitration, any one of those States Parties may refer the dispute to the International
Court of Justice by request in accordance with the Statute of the Court.
3.
Each State Party may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance or
approval of or accession to this Protocol, declare that it does not consider itself
bound by paragraph 2 of this article. The other States Parties shall not be bound by
paragraph 2 of this article with respect to any State Party that has made such a
reservation.
3
4

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.

37

A/RES/55/25

4.
Any State Party that has made a reservation in accordance with
paragraph 3 of this article may at any time withdraw that reservation by notification
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 16
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval and accession
1.
This Protocol shall be open to all States for signature from 12 to
15 December 2000 in Palermo, Italy, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters
in New York until 12 December 2002.
2.
This Protocol shall also be open for signature by regional economic
integration organizations provided that at least one member State of such
organization has signed this Protocol in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article.
3.
This Protocol is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. A regional economic integration
organization may deposit its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval if at
least one of its member States has done likewise. In that instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval, such organization shall declare the extent of its competence
with respect to the matters governed by this Protocol. Such organization shall also
inform the depositary of any relevant modification in the extent of its competence.
4.
This Protocol is open for accession by any State or any regional
economic integration organization of which at least one member State is a Party to
this Protocol. Instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. At the time of its accession, a regional economic integration
organization shall declare the extent of its competence with respect to matters
governed by this Protocol. Such organization shall also inform the depositary of any
relevant modification in the extent of its competence.
Article 17
Entry into force
1.
This Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of
deposit of the fortieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession,
except that it shall not enter into force before the entry into force of the Convention.
For the purpose of this paragraph, any instrument deposited by a regional economic
integration organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by
member States of such organization.
2.
For each State or regional economic integration organization ratifying,
accepting, approving or acceding to this Protocol after the deposit of the fortieth
instrument of such action, this Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
after the date of deposit by such State or organization of the relevant instrument or
on the date this Protocol enters into force pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article,
whichever is the later.
Article 18
Amendment
1.
After the expiry of five years from the entry into force of this Protocol, a
State Party to the Protocol may propose an amendment and file it with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall thereupon communicate the proposed

38

A/RES/55/25

amendment to the States Parties and to the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention for the purpose of considering and deciding on the proposal. The States
Parties to this Protocol meeting at the Conference of the Parties shall make every
effort to achieve consensus on each amendment. If all efforts at consensus have been
exhausted and no agreement has been reached, the amendment shall, as a last resort,
require for its adoption a two-thirds majority vote of the States Parties to this
Protocol present and voting at the meeting of the Conference of the Parties.
2.
Regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their
competence, shall exercise their right to vote under this article with a number of
votes equal to the number of their member States that are Parties to this Protocol.
Such organizations shall not exercise their right to vote if their member States
exercise theirs and vice versa.
3.
An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article is
subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States Parties.
4.
An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article
shall enter into force in respect of a State Party ninety days after the date of the
deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of an instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval of such amendment.
5.
When an amendment enters into force, it shall be binding on those States
Parties which have expressed their consent to be bound by it. Other States Parties
shall still be bound by the provisions of this Protocol and any earlier amendments
that they have ratified, accepted or approved.
Article 19
Denunciation
1.
A State Party may denounce this Protocol by written notification to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Such denunciation shall become effective
one year after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2.
A regional economic integration organization shall cease to be a Party to
this Protocol when all of its member States have denounced it.
Article 20
Depositary and languages
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is designated depositary of
this Protocol.
2.
The original of this Protocol, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Protocol.

39

A/RES/55/25

Annex III
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
Preamble
The States Parties to this Protocol,
Declaring that effective action to prevent and combat the smuggling of
migrants by land, sea and air requires a comprehensive international approach,
including cooperation, the exchange of information and other appropriate measures,
including socio-economic measures, at the national, regional and international
levels,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 54/212 of 22 December 1999, in which
the Assembly urged Member States and the United Nations system to strengthen
international cooperation in the area of international migration and development in
order to address the root causes of migration, especially those related to poverty, and
to maximize the benefits of international migration to those concerned, and
encouraged, where relevant, interregional, regional and subregional mechanisms to
continue to address the question of migration and development,
Convinced of the need to provide migrants with humane treatment and full
protection of their rights,
Taking into account the fact that, despite work undertaken in other
international forums, there is no universal instrument that addresses all aspects of
smuggling of migrants and other related issues,
Concerned at the significant increase in the activities of organized criminal
groups in smuggling of migrants and other related criminal activities set forth in this
Protocol, which bring great harm to the States concerned,
Also concerned that the smuggling of migrants can endanger the lives or
security of the migrants involved,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 53/111 of 9 December 1998, in which
the Assembly decided to establish an open-ended intergovernmental ad hoc
committee for the purpose of elaborating a comprehensive international convention
against transnational organized crime and of discussing the elaboration of, inter alia,
an international instrument addressing illegal trafficking in and transporting of
migrants, including by sea,
Convinced that supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime with an international instrument against the
smuggling of migrants by land, sea and air will be useful in preventing and
combating that crime,

40

A/RES/55/25

Have agreed as follows:
I.

General provisions

Article 1
Relation with the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
1.
This Protocol supplements the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. It shall be interpreted together with the Convention.
2.
The provisions of the Convention shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to this
Protocol unless otherwise provided herein.
3.
The offences established in accordance with article 6 of this Protocol
shall be regarded as offences established in accordance with the Convention.
Article 2
Statement of purpose
The purpose of this Protocol is to prevent and combat the smuggling of
migrants, as well as to promote cooperation among States Parties to that end, while
protecting the rights of smuggled migrants.
Article 3
Use of terms
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a) “Smuggling of migrants” shall mean the procurement, in order to obtain,
directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a
person into a State Party of which the person is not a national or a permanent
resident;
(b) “Illegal entry” shall mean crossing borders without complying with the
necessary requirements for legal entry into the receiving State;
(c) “Fraudulent travel or identity document” shall mean any travel or identity
document:
(i) That has been falsely made or altered in some material way by anyone
other than a person or agency lawfully authorized to make or issue the travel or
identity document on behalf of a State; or
(ii) That has been improperly issued or obtained through misrepresentation,
corruption or duress or in any other unlawful manner; or
(iii) That is being used by a person other than the rightful holder;
(d) “Vessel” shall mean any type of water craft, including non-displacement
craft and seaplanes, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on
water, except a warship, naval auxiliary or other vessel owned or operated by a
Government and used, for the time being, only on government non-commercial
service.

41

A/RES/55/25

Article 4
Scope of application
This Protocol shall apply, except as otherwise stated herein, to the prevention,
investigation and prosecution of the offences established in accordance with
article 6 of this Protocol, where the offences are transnational in nature and involve
an organized criminal group, as well as to the protection of the rights of persons who
have been the object of such offences.
Article 5
Criminal liability of migrants
Migrants shall not become liable to criminal prosecution under this Protocol
for the fact of having been the object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this
Protocol.
Article 6
Criminalization
1.
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may
be necessary to establish as criminal offences, when committed intentionally and in
order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or other material benefit:
(a)

The smuggling of migrants;

(b)

When committed for the purpose of enabling the smuggling of migrants:

(i)

Producing a fraudulent travel or identity document;

(ii)

Procuring, providing or possessing such a document;

(c) Enabling a person who is not a national or a permanent resident to remain
in the State concerned without complying with the necessary requirements for
legally remaining in the State by the means mentioned in subparagraph (b) of this
paragraph or any other illegal means.
2.
Each State Party shall also adopt such legislative and other measures as
may be necessary to establish as criminal offences:
(a) Subject to the basic concepts of its legal system, attempting to commit an
offence established in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article;
(b) Participating as an accomplice in an offence established in accordance
with paragraph 1 (a), (b) (i) or (c) of this article and, subject to the basic concepts of
its legal system, participating as an accomplice in an offence established in
accordance with paragraph 1 (b) (ii) of this article;
(c) Organizing or directing other persons to commit an offence established in
accordance with paragraph 1 of this article.
3.
Each State Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may
be necessary to establish as aggravating circumstances to the offences established in
accordance with paragraph 1 (a), (b) (i) and (c) of this article and, subject to the
basic concepts of its legal system, to the offences established in accordance with
paragraph 2 (b) and (c) of this article, circumstances:
(a) That endanger, or are likely to endanger, the lives or safety of the
migrants concerned; or

42

A/RES/55/25

(b) That entail inhuman or degrading treatment, including for exploitation, of
such migrants.
4.
Nothing in this Protocol shall prevent a State Party from taking measures
against a person whose conduct constitutes an offence under its domestic law.
II.

Smuggling of migrants by sea

Article 7
Cooperation
States Parties shall cooperate to the fullest extent possible to prevent and
suppress the smuggling of migrants by sea, in accordance with the international law
of the sea.
Article 8
Measures against the smuggling of migrants by sea
1.
A State Party that has reasonable grounds to suspect that a vessel that is
flying its flag or claiming its registry, that is without nationality or that, though
flying a foreign flag or refusing to show a flag, is in reality of the nationality of the
State Party concerned is engaged in the smuggling of migrants by sea may request
the assistance of other States Parties in suppressing the use of the vessel for that
purpose. The States Parties so requested shall render such assistance to the extent
possible within their means.
2.
A State Party that has reasonable grounds to suspect that a vessel
exercising freedom of navigation in accordance with international law and flying the
flag or displaying the marks of registry of another State Party is engaged in the
smuggling of migrants by sea may so notify the flag State, request confirmation of
registry and, if confirmed, request authorization from the flag State to take
appropriate measures with regard to that vessel. The flag State may authorize the
requesting State, inter alia:
(a)

To board the vessel;

(b)

To search the vessel; and

(c) If evidence is found that the vessel is engaged in the smuggling of
migrants by sea, to take appropriate measures with respect to the vessel and persons
and cargo on board, as authorized by the flag State.
3.
A State Party that has taken any measure in accordance with paragraph 2
of this article shall promptly inform the flag State concerned of the results of that
measure.
4.
A State Party shall respond expeditiously to a request from another State
Party to determine whether a vessel that is claiming its registry or flying its flag is
entitled to do so and to a request for authorization made in accordance with
paragraph 2 of this article.
5.
A flag State may, consistent with article 7 of this Protocol, subject its
authorization to conditions to be agreed by it and the requesting State, including
conditions relating to responsibility and the extent of effective measures to be taken.
A State Party shall take no additional measures without the express authorization of

43

A/RES/55/25

the flag State, except those necessary to relieve imminent danger to the lives of
persons or those which derive from relevant bilateral or multilateral agreements.
6.
Each State Party shall designate an authority or, where necessary,
authorities to receive and respond to requests for assistance, for confirmation of
registry or of the right of a vessel to fly its flag and for authorization to take
appropriate measures. Such designation shall be notified through the SecretaryGeneral to all other States Parties within one month of the designation.
7.
A State Party that has reasonable grounds to suspect that a vessel is
engaged in the smuggling of migrants by sea and is without nationality or may be
assimilated to a vessel without nationality may board and search the vessel. If
evidence confirming the suspicion is found, that State Party shall take appropriate
measures in accordance with relevant domestic and international law.
Article 9
Safeguard clauses
1.
Where a State Party takes measures against a vessel in accordance with
article 8 of this Protocol, it shall:
(a)

Ensure the safety and humane treatment of the persons on board;

(b) Take due account of the need not to endanger the security of the vessel or
its cargo;
(c) Take due account of the need not to prejudice the commercial or legal
interests of the flag State or any other interested State;
(d) Ensure, within available means, that any measure taken with regard to the
vessel is environmentally sound.
2.
Where the grounds for measures taken pursuant to article 8 of this
Protocol prove to be unfounded, the vessel shall be compensated for any loss or
damage that may have been sustained, provided that the vessel has not committed
any act justifying the measures taken.
3.
Any measure taken, adopted or implemented in accordance with this
chapter shall take due account of the need not to interfere with or to affect:
(a) The rights and obligations and the exercise of jurisdiction of coastal
States in accordance with the international law of the sea; or
(b) The authority of the flag State to exercise jurisdiction and control in
administrative, technical and social matters involving the vessel.
4.
Any measure taken at sea pursuant to this chapter shall be carried out
only by warships or military aircraft, or by other ships or aircraft clearly marked and
identifiable as being on government service and authorized to that effect.
III. Prevention, cooperation and other measures
Article 10
Information
1.
Without prejudice to articles 27 and 28 of the Convention, States Parties,
in particular those with common borders or located on routes along which migrants

44

A/RES/55/25

are smuggled, shall, for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Protocol,
exchange among themselves, consistent with their respective domestic legal and
administrative systems, relevant information on matters such as:
(a) Embarkation and destination points, as well as routes, carriers and means
of transportation, known to be or suspected of being used by an organized criminal
group engaged in conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol;
(b) The identity and methods of organizations or organized criminal groups
known to be or suspected of being engaged in conduct set forth in article 6 of this
Protocol;
(c) The authenticity and proper form of travel documents issued by a State
Party and the theft or related misuse of blank travel or identity documents;
(d) Means and methods of concealment and transportation of persons, the
unlawful alteration, reproduction or acquisition or other misuse of travel or identity
documents used in conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol and ways of
detecting them;
(e) Legislative experiences and practices and measures to prevent and
combat the conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol; and
(f) Scientific and technological information useful to law enforcement, so as
to enhance each other’s ability to prevent, detect and investigate the conduct set
forth in article 6 of this Protocol and to prosecute those involved.
2.
A State Party that receives information shall comply with any request by
the State Party that transmitted the information that places restrictions on its use.
Article 11
Border measures
1.
Without prejudice to international commitments in relation to the free
movement of people, States Parties shall strengthen, to the extent possible, such
border controls as may be necessary to prevent and detect the smuggling of
migrants.
2.
Each State Party shall adopt legislative or other appropriate measures to
prevent, to the extent possible, means of transport operated by commercial carriers
from being used in the commission of the offence established in accordance with
article 6, paragraph 1 (a), of this Protocol.
3.
Where appropriate, and without prejudice to applicable international
conventions, such measures shall include establishing the obligation of commercial
carriers, including any transportation company or the owner or operator of any
means of transport, to ascertain that all passengers are in possession of the travel
documents required for entry into the receiving State.
4.
Each State Party shall take the necessary measures, in accordance with its
domestic law, to provide for sanctions in cases of violation of the obligation set
forth in paragraph 3 of this article.
5.
Each State Party shall consider taking measures that permit, in
accordance with its domestic law, the denial of entry or revocation of visas of
persons implicated in the commission of offences established in accordance with
this Protocol.

45

A/RES/55/25

6.
Without prejudice to article 27 of the Convention, States Parties shall
consider strengthening cooperation among border control agencies by, inter alia,
establishing and maintaining direct channels of communication.
Article 12
Security and control of documents
Each State Party shall take such measures as may be necessary, within
available means:
(a) To ensure that travel or identity documents issued by it are of such
quality that they cannot easily be misused and cannot readily be falsified or
unlawfully altered, replicated or issued; and
(b) To ensure the integrity and security of travel or identity documents issued
by or on behalf of the State Party and to prevent their unlawful creation, issuance
and use.
Article 13
Legitimacy and validity of documents
At the request of another State Party, a State Party shall, in accordance with its
domestic law, verify within a reasonable time the legitimacy and validity of travel or
identity documents issued or purported to have been issued in its name and
suspected of being used for purposes of conduct set forth in article 6 of this
Protocol.
Article 14
Training and technical cooperation
1.
States Parties shall provide or strengthen specialized training for
immigration and other relevant officials in preventing the conduct set forth in
article 6 of this Protocol and in the humane treatment of migrants who have been the
object of such conduct, while respecting their rights as set forth in this Protocol.
2.
States Parties shall cooperate with each other and with competent
international organizations, non-governmental organizations, other relevant
organizations and other elements of civil society as appropriate to ensure that there
is adequate personnel training in their territories to prevent, combat and eradicate
the conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol and to protect the rights of migrants
who have been the object of such conduct. Such training shall include:
(a)

Improving the security and quality of travel documents;

(b)

Recognizing and detecting fraudulent travel or identity documents;

(c) Gathering criminal intelligence, relating in particular to the identification
of organized criminal groups known to be or suspected of being engaged in conduct
set forth in article 6 of this Protocol, the methods used to transport smuggled
migrants, the misuse of travel or identity documents for purposes of conduct set
forth in article 6 and the means of concealment used in the smuggling of migrants;
(d) Improving procedures for detecting smuggled persons at conventional
and non-conventional points of entry and exit; and
(e) The humane treatment of migrants and the protection of their rights as set
forth in this Protocol.

46

A/RES/55/25

3.
States Parties with relevant expertise shall consider providing technical
assistance to States that are frequently countries of origin or transit for persons who
have been the object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol. States Parties
shall make every effort to provide the necessary resources, such as vehicles,
computer systems and document readers, to combat the conduct set forth in article 6.
Article 15
Other prevention measures
1.
Each State Party shall take measures to ensure that it provides or
strengthens information programmes to increase public awareness of the fact that the
conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol is a criminal activity frequently
perpetrated by organized criminal groups for profit and that it poses serious risks to
the migrants concerned.
2.
In accordance with article 31 of the Convention, States Parties shall
cooperate in the field of public information for the purpose of preventing potential
migrants from falling victim to organized criminal groups.
3.
Each State Party shall promote or strengthen, as appropriate,
development programmes and cooperation at the national, regional and international
levels, taking into account the socio-economic realities of migration and paying
special attention to economically and socially depressed areas, in order to combat
the root socio-economic causes of the smuggling of migrants, such as poverty and
underdevelopment.
Article 16
Protection and assistance measures
1.
In implementing this Protocol, each State Party shall take, consistent with
its obligations under international law, all appropriate measures, including
legislation if necessary, to preserve and protect the rights of persons who have been
the object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol as accorded under
applicable international law, in particular the right to life and the right not to be
subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
2.
Each State Party shall take appropriate measures to afford migrants
appropriate protection against violence that may be inflicted upon them, whether by
individuals or groups, by reason of being the object of conduct set forth in article 6
of this Protocol.
3.
Each State Party shall afford appropriate assistance to migrants whose
lives or safety are endangered by reason of being the object of conduct set forth in
article 6 of this Protocol.
4.
In applying the provisions of this article, States Parties shall take into
account the special needs of women and children.
5.
In the case of the detention of a person who has been the object of
conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol, each State Party shall comply with its
obligations under the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations,5 where applicable,
including that of informing the person concerned without delay about the provisions
concerning notification to and communication with consular officers.
5

Ibid., vol. 596, Nos. 8638–8640.

47

A/RES/55/25

Article 17
Agreements and arrangements
States Parties shall consider the conclusion of bilateral or regional agreements
or operational arrangements or understandings aimed at:
(a) Establishing the most appropriate and effective measures to prevent and
combat the conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol; or
(b)

Enhancing the provisions of this Protocol among themselves.

Article 18
Return of smuggled migrants
1.
Each State Party agrees to facilitate and accept, without undue or
unreasonable delay, the return of a person who has been the object of conduct set
forth in article 6 of this Protocol and who is its national or who has the right of
permanent residence in its territory at the time of return.
2.
Each State Party shall consider the possibility of facilitating and
accepting the return of a person who has been the object of conduct set forth in
article 6 of this Protocol and who had the right of permanent residence in its
territory at the time of entry into the receiving State in accordance with its domestic
law.
3.
At the request of the receiving State Party, a requested State Party shall,
without undue or unreasonable delay, verify whether a person who has been the
object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol is its national or has the right
of permanent residence in its territory.
4.
In order to facilitate the return of a person who has been the object of
conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol and is without proper documentation,
the State Party of which that person is a national or in which he or she has the right
of permanent residence shall agree to issue, at the request of the receiving State
Party, such travel documents or other authorization as may be necessary to enable
the person to travel to and re-enter its territory.
5.
Each State Party involved with the return of a person who has been the
object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol shall take all appropriate
measures to carry out the return in an orderly manner and with due regard for the
safety and dignity of the person.
6.
States Parties may cooperate with relevant international organizations in
the implementation of this article.
7.
This article shall be without prejudice to any right afforded to persons
who have been the object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol by any
domestic law of the receiving State Party.
8.
This article shall not affect the obligations entered into under any other
applicable treaty, bilateral or multilateral, or any other applicable operational
agreement or arrangement that governs, in whole or in part, the return of persons
who have been the object of conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol.

48

A/RES/55/25

IV.

Final provisions

Article 19
Saving clause
1.
Nothing in this Protocol shall affect the other rights, obligations and
responsibilities of States and individuals under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international human rights law and, in particular,
where applicable, the 1951 Convention3 and the 1967 Protocol4 relating to the Status
of Refugees and the principle of non-refoulement as contained therein.
2.
The measures set forth in this Protocol shall be interpreted and applied in
a way that is not discriminatory to persons on the ground that they are the object of
conduct set forth in article 6 of this Protocol. The interpretation and application of
those measures shall be consistent with internationally recognized principles of nondiscrimination.
Article 20
Settlement of disputes
l.
States Parties shall endeavour to settle disputes concerning the
interpretation or application of this Protocol through negotiation.
2.
Any dispute between two or more States Parties concerning the
interpretation or application of this Protocol that cannot be settled through
negotiation within a reasonable time shall, at the request of one of those States
Parties, be submitted to arbitration. If, six months after the date of the request for
arbitration, those States Parties are unable to agree on the organization of the
arbitration, any one of those States Parties may refer the dispute to the International
Court of Justice by request in accordance with the Statute of the Court.
3.
Each State Party may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance or
approval of or accession to this Protocol, declare that it does not consider itself
bound by paragraph 2 of this article. The other States Parties shall not be bound by
paragraph 2 of this article with respect to any State Party that has made such a
reservation.
4.
Any State Party that has made a reservation in accordance with
paragraph 3 of this article may at any time withdraw that reservation by notification
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 21
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval and accession
1.
This Protocol shall be open to all States for signature from 12 to
15 December 2000 in Palermo, Italy, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters
in New York until 12 December 2002.
2.
This Protocol shall also be open for signature by regional economic
integration organizations provided that at least one member State of such
organization has signed this Protocol in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article.
3.
This Protocol is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. A regional economic integration

49

A/RES/55/25

organization may deposit its instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval if at
least one of its member States has done likewise. In that instrument of ratification,
acceptance or approval, such organization shall declare the extent of its competence
with respect to the matters governed by this Protocol. Such organization shall also
inform the depositary of any relevant modification in the extent of its competence.
4.
This Protocol is open for accession by any State or any regional
economic integration organization of which at least one member State is a Party to
this Protocol. Instruments of accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. At the time of its accession, a regional economic integration
organization shall declare the extent of its competence with respect to matters
governed by this Protocol. Such organization shall also inform the depositary of any
relevant modification in the extent of its competence.
Article 22
Entry into force
1.
This Protocol shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after the date of
deposit of the fortieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession,
except that it shall not enter into force before the entry into force of the Convention.
For the purpose of this paragraph, any instrument deposited by a regional economic
integration organization shall not be counted as additional to those deposited by
member States of such organization.
2.
For each State or regional economic integration organization ratifying,
accepting, approving or acceding to this Protocol after the deposit of the fortieth
instrument of such action, this Protocol shall enter into force on the thirtieth day
after the date of deposit by such State or organization of the relevant instrument or
on the date this Protocol enters into force pursuant to paragraph 1 of this article,
whichever is the later.
Article 23
Amendment
1.
After the expiry of five years from the entry into force of this Protocol, a
State Party to the Protocol may propose an amendment and file it with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, who shall thereupon communicate the proposed
amendment to the States Parties and to the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention for the purpose of considering and deciding on the proposal. The States
Parties to this Protocol meeting at the Conference of the Parties shall make every
effort to achieve consensus on each amendment. If all efforts at consensus have been
exhausted and no agreement has been reached, the amendment shall, as a last resort,
require for its adoption a two-thirds majority vote of the States Parties to this
Protocol present and voting at the meeting of the Conference of the Parties.
2.
Regional economic integration organizations, in matters within their
competence, shall exercise their right to vote under this article with a number of
votes equal to the number of their member States that are Parties to this Protocol.
Such organizations shall not exercise their right to vote if their member States
exercise theirs and vice versa.
3.
An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article is
subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by States Parties.

50

A/RES/55/25

4.
An amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article
shall enter into force in respect of a State Party ninety days after the date of the
deposit with the Secretary-General of the United Nations of an instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval of such amendment.
5.
When an amendment enters into force, it shall be binding on those States
Parties which have expressed their consent to be bound by it. Other States Parties
shall still be bound by the provisions of this Protocol and any earlier amendments
that they have ratified, accepted or approved.
Article 24
Denunciation
1.
A State Party may denounce this Protocol by written notification to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Such denunciation shall become effective
one year after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2.
A regional economic integration organization shall cease to be a Party to
this Protocol when all of its member States have denounced it.
Article 25
Depositary and languages
1.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is designated depositary of
this Protocol.
2.
The original of this Protocol, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned plenipotentiaries, being duly
authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Protocol.

51
