A /72/PV.61

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

61st plenary meeting

Friday, 1 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Hilale
(Morocco), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 15
Culture of peace
Draft resolution A/72/L.20
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before we
proceed to take action on draft resolution A/72/L.20,
I should like to inform members that, as indicated in
the schedule of plenary meetings and announced in the
Journal of the United Nations, the General Assembly
will hold a debate on this agenda item on Wednesday,
6 December 2017, as originally scheduled.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt
to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.20.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my delegation would like to warmly thank the
President and his Office for their unstinting efforts
since the beginning of the week to prepare draft
resolution A/72/L.20, which has been submitted for our
consideration today, and which is of crucial importance.
We also wish to express our gratitude to all members of
the international community for their continued support
to Egypt in its fight against terrorism.
The brutal terrorist attack on innocent worshippers
Al-Rawdag mosque in the Egyptian city of El Arish last
Friday claimed the lives of 310 martyrs, including 27
children, and injured hundreds of others. Although it

was not the first terrorist attack on a place of worship,
whether Muslim or Christian, it was the most brutal and
egregious attacks to occur in Egypt’s modern history.
Regrettably, historic holy sites and other places
of worship have been subject to terrorist attacks in
other countries of our region. In view of that sad
reality, we are more convinced than ever of the need
for the international community to make an immediate,
unequivocal and united appeal for the categorical
rejection of such criminal acts. Furthermore, we must
emphasize the need to preserve the inviolability of
religious sites and holy places and take all the necessary
measures to protect places of worship against malicious
terrorist attacks.
As a part of fostering a culture of peace, human
values — the values of tolerance, moderation, the
rejection of violence, and peaceful coexistence — must
be promoted across the globe. The various components
of today’s draft resolution, entitled “Effects of
terrorist acts directed against religious sites on the
culture of peace”, are based on paragraphs that were
agreed on by consensus in various earlier General
Assembly resolutions. I shall now present some of
those components.
Drawing on resolution 55/254, entitled “Protection
of religious sites”, we affirm that it is the basic
responsibility of the State to protect its people on its
own territory. Furthermore, we must condemn all
acts or threats of violence, destruction or sabotage
against religious sites. Acts of this type continue to be
perpetrated throughout the world. But we must also

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40514 (E)

*1740514*

A/72/PV.61

unequivocally condemn all terrorist acts, methods
and practices, in all of their facets and manifestations,
wherever such attacks take place and regardless of who
perpetrates them and regardless of their motivation, as
they are crimes that can never be justified.
We must also condemn any and all advocacy of
religious hatred, discrimination and acts of violence,
regardless of the means or medium employed, while
reaffirming the importance of strengthening the
national capacities of States to fight all forms of
international terrorism. Today’s draft resolution also
urges States to promote the values of tolerance and
understanding and reject extremism, while respecting
freedom and freedom of belief.
Finally, I wish to thank all the countries of every
continent of the world that have expressed their support
for the draft resolution, in particular the Group of
African States and the brotherly Arab States, in the
wake of a terrorist attack that was extraordinary by
any measure. This increases our confidence that the
Assembly will understand the reasons behind Egypt’s
introduction of the draft resolution and request for its
speedy adoption so that we can send a direct message
to terrorists that the world is determined to eliminate
terrorism and not surrender to its base goals and
targets or its inhumane practices, particularly when it
comes to sacred sites and places of worship. We call
on the civilized world and all people who love peace
and believe in the principles and meaning of peaceful
coexistence to unite with us today.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/72/L.20.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of position before the adoption of the draft resolution,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): On behalf of the Group
of African States, I have the honour to deliver this
statement in explanation of position in support of the
draft resolution introduced by the Egyptian delegation,
entitled “Effects of terrorist acts directed against
religious sites on the culture of peace” (A/72/L.20).
The African Group is of the considered view that
the draft resolution is an affirmation of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, whose core purposes
2/7

01/12/2017

are to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war and maintain international peace and security,
which are fundamental prerequisites for nurturing
inclusive and peaceful societies that can guarantee
the fundamental rights of every individual, as well as
the survival of humankind. Sadly, far from achieving
that universal goal, our world today is experiencing
increasing numbers of acts of terrorism, extremism
and fundamentalism, all of which threaten the values,
attitudes, traditions, modes of behaviour and ways of
life conducive to a culture of peace. These enduring
values, as clearly outlined by the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session in the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace, and subsequently pursued
during the ensuing International Decade for a Culture of
Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World,
include respect for life, the commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflicts and the elimination
of all forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, as well as the advancement of
mutual respect, understanding, tolerance and solidarity
among civilizations, peoples and cultures, including for
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities.
While the effects of terrorism in terms of economic
costs and lives lost are devastating, its impact on the
culture of peace is of equal concern and must be carefully
evaluated and duly addressed by the international
community. The draft resolution under consideration
sends a strong message of condemnation of all acts of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
such acts occur and without exception. It renews the
commitment of the United Nations to strengthening
international cooperation to prevent and effectively
combat this scourge.
The heinous terrorist acts on places of worship,
religious sites and communities around the world, such
as the recent attacks in Egypt and Nigeria, and the
resulting loss of innocent lives, should be of concern
to the international community, as they are likely to
breed further hatred, intolerance and violence if they
go unchecked. It is critical that Member States commit
to appropriate measures to safeguard the sanctity of
places of worship and promote measures that will foster
understanding, tolerance and mutual respect in matters
relating to religion and religious beliefs. The African
Group therefore supports the call for strengthening
international cooperation in order to enhance the
national capacities of States to prevent and effectively
suppress international terrorism.
17-40514

01/12/2017

We reaffirm the decision taken by the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session encouraging
Member States to consider initiatives for practical
action in all sectors and at all levels of society for the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
tolerance, understanding and cooperation. We must
devote sufficient attention to this matter and support the
inclusion of the question of the effects of terrorist acts
directed against religious sites on a culture of peace and
in the Secretary-General’s forthcoming reports relevant
to this issue.
It is often said — and it is worth repeating — that
peace is not just the absence of conflict. Peace is
more than that, and it requires a positive and dynamic
participatory process in all societies, where dialogue is
encouraged and conflict resolved in a spirit of mutual
understanding and cooperation.
For the reasons I have mentioned, the African
Group wishes to urge all delegations to give their full
support to the adoption by consensus of this timely
draft resolution.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the only speaker in explanation of position before
the adoption of the draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/72/L.20, entitled “Effects of terrorist acts
directed against religious sites on the culture of peace”.
I should inform the Assembly that the draft resolution
is closed for sponsorship on the e-sponsorship platform.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/72/L.20: Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Cambodia, Comoros, Cuba, Gabon, on
behalf of the States Members of the United Nations
that are members of the Group of African States, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Thailand, the United Arab
Emirates, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and the State of Palestine.

A/72/PV.61

The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/72/L.20?
Draft resolution A/72/L.20 was adopted (resolution
72/17).
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
giving the floor to those wishing to speak in explanation
of position on the resolution just adopted, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to deliver this explanation of position.
Canada would first like to reiterate its deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of Egypt
for the attack that took place at the Al-Rawdah mosque
on 24 November. We condemn it in the strongest
terms and stand shoulder to shoulder with Egypt at
this difficult time. We will continue to work with the
international community to counter terrorism and
violent extremism.
We do, however, wish to express reservations with
the manner in which resolution 72/17 was submitted
and fast-tracked for adoption. Canada was ready
to participate in a series of informal consultations
to negotiate a consensus text on a critical issue at a
critical time, which we believe was the overall goal.
However, the consultation process did not unfold in a
manner conducive to such an outcome. Although we
did indeed join the consensus today, we would like to
note the following.
We expressed concern about the fact that the
current text removes critical references to human rights
from agreed language and instead draws on non-agreed
and outdated language and leaves aside key references
to human rights. In paragraph 6 in particular, we are
concerned about the inclusion of a reference to religious
extremism alone. The 2016 resolution on strengthening
the ability of the United Nations system to assist
Member States in implementing the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy recognizes the
commitment of all religions to peace and determines
to condemn acts of violent extremism conducive to
terrorism and incitement to commit terrorist acts that
spread hate and threaten lives. The use of religious
extremism in resolution 72/17 contradicts that more
recently agreed recognition of the shared commitment

17-405143/7

A/72/PV.61

to peace on the part of all religions. We therefore cannot
in good faith consider the resolution just adopted or its
language as precedent.
Mr. Kravik (Norway): Like other delegations,
Norway would like to express its deepest sympathies
and heartfelt condolences to Egypt in the wake of
the recent horrific terrorist attack that took place at
the Al-Rawdah mosque on 24 November. Norway
fully shares Egypt’s determination and commitment
to combating terrorism and violent extremism. That
is why we support today’s resolution 72/17, which
includes a number of important measures. However, our
efforts to eliminate terrorism cannot succeed without
a strong human rights framework. We would have
appreciated seeing that dimension properly reflected in
the resolution.
Mr. Black (United States of America): A week
ago, more than 300 Egyptians, including women, men
and children, were killed while they prayed at the
Al-Rawdah mosque in north Sinai, Egypt. The United
States condemns that attack in the strongest possible
terms. We were shocked, and we continue to extend our
deepest sympathies and condolences to the families of
the victims and to the Government and the people of
Egypt. We reiterate that the international community
cannot tolerate the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
or any other barbaric terrorist group or ideology. Today
the United States stands in solidarity with Egypt as we
reaffirm our shared, unshakable resolve to rid the world
of terrorism.
The only way to do that is through unified action.
That is why we supported a consensus Security Council
press statement in the aftermath of this heinous attack,
and that is why we join the consensus today in a
demonstration of our commitment to Egypt and to
ending terrorism. However, we are disappointed that
resolution 72/17 was adopted without the consultations
that could have strengthened it and led to broader
support. Such consultations could have allowed us
to address important issues, such as recognizing and
reaffirming that States’ counter-terrorism efforts must
be carried out in accordance with their international
legal obligations, including human rights obligations.
While we understand the desire to move quickly
to address that appalling attack, the failure to hold
consultations to solicit feedback and the inclusion
of unbalanced and non-agreed language means that
the United States cannot consider this resolution,
4/7

01/12/2017

its language or the process by which it was drafted
as precedents. Nonetheless, we reiterate our firm
solidarity with Egypt and all countries that have
suffered from terrorism.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation joined the consensus on resolution 72/17,
on the effects of terrorist acts directed against religious
sites on a culture of peace, based on my country’s
principled and clear position of firm support for all
efforts and resolutions aimed at countering terrorism.
We have considered the fact that since the crisis began
in Syria, seven years ago, it has been one of the very
first countries to suffer from the heinous and painful
consequences of a phenomenon that some countries
are unfortunately confronting today. Terrorist groups
have targeted all Syrian institutions, in addition to its
infrastructure. They have attacked Syrians in their
hospitals, places of worship, including churches and
mosques, and educational establishments. They have
targeted every ethnic and religious group. Islamist
groups have tried to impose their own extremist radical
interpretations, practices and ideologies — which have
nothing to do with humanity — on the Syrian people,
who reject such ideologies and extremist thought.
The escalation of brutal and painful incidents such
as the terrorist attacks carried out by Da’esh and the
Al-Nusra Front, which is affiliated with Al-Qaida in
Syria and other parts of the Arab world and beyond, is
proof of the lack of political will to end this scourge.
The international community does not have the
strength necessary to face those challenges and halt
terrorism. Instead, it has adopted double standards
in addressing such issues. Many other nations, in
particular Western countries and their well-known
proxies, have not tried hard enough to put an end to
terrorism. We must therefore spare no effort to stop
terrorism, extremism and narratives of hatred. We
must adopt and implement resolutions and strategies to
counter terrorism, including the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We must avoid politicization and
double standards. We must coordinate all counterterrorism efforts with the countries concerned, because
the absence of such cooperation is a violation of their
sovereignty, an interference in States’ internal affairs
and a violation of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We must promote a
culture of peaceful coexistence and an understanding
of the other and other civilizations.
17-40514

01/12/2017

My delegation condemns in the strongest terms
the heinous attack and massacre launched by terrorist
groups in the Sinai, which claimed the lives of dozens
of martyrs and injured hundreds of innocent Egyptians.
We would also like to express our sincere condolences
to the families and friends of the victims and to the
people of Egypt. We reaffirm our strong commitment
to countering terrorism, which has become a direct
challenge to our struggle to remain steadfast in
standing up to Western schemes supported by certain
countries in the region. We stress the need to make
concerted efforts to confront terrorism, which is
targeting the present and future of our Arab country,
so as to maintain peace and promote the development
and advancement of our peoples and nations. In that
regard, we stress that all Syrians will continue on the
path of combating terrorism. We are determined more
than ever to defeat terrorism in every corner of our
country. We will rebuild our country so that it is better
than before, as we are fully cognizant that it will not
prevail unless we defeat terrorism.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland condemns in the strongest terms the
horrendous attack in Bir al-Abd, which cost the lives
of many innocent victims and wounded many others.
We support Egypt in its time of pain and express our
most sincere condolences to the families and friends
of the victims, and to the Government and the people
of Egypt. It is of the utmost importance that those
responsible for those crimes be held accountable for
their actions. Switzerland fully shares Egypt’s pain and
indignation in confronting the scourge of terrorism,
which the particularly repulsive nature of that cowardly
and barbarous attack exemplifies.
Owing to its complexity, the phenomenon of
terrorism does not lend itself well to hasty responses.
Accordingly, Switzerland regrets that the text of
resolution 72/17 did not undergo a consultation
process. Switzerland also regrets that much of the
language formulated by the international community
with regard to combating terrorism was not reflected
in the resolution as submitted. That is particularly
the case with regard to obligations imposed under
international law, including international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law, for which respect is essential to ensuring
the prevention of violent extremism. For those reasons,
Switzerland was not in a position to sponsor the text.

A/72/PV.61

Switzerland will persevere in its commitment to
preventing and combating all forms of terrorism in
accordance with international law, in particular human
rights law.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): First and
foremost, on behalf of the people and the Government of
Brazil, I would like to express our deepest condolences
to the families and friends of those who lost their lives
in the terrorist attack in northern Sinai, Egypt, on
24 November. This heinous, criminal and unjustifiable
act directed at persons during a moment of congregation
and prayer runs contrary to the shared values of peace,
tolerance and respect that constitute the very pillars of
the United Nations, and therefore should be condemned
and deplored by all countries of the world. Based on
that primary concern, Brazil joined the consensus on
the adoption of resolution 72/17.
Nevertheless, on behalf of Brazil, I would like to
make a few remarks in explanation of my country’s
position regarding resolution 72/17. We would like to
point out that despite the seriousness of the situation
that motivated the Egyptian text, it does not seem to be
in the best interests of the General Assembly to endorse
draft resolutions that are submitted for action by the
plenary without providing any opportunity for informal
consultations and the indispensable exchange of views
and ideas among Member States, which is the very core
of multilateralism and essential to the promotion of a
culture of peace.
Finally, Brazil regrets that the text of the resolution
does not include any reference to fundamentally
important concepts related to the promotion of a
culture of peace, such as the right to peace, the
obligation of States to refrain from the threat or use
of force, and the recognition that States must ensure
that any measure taken to combat terrorism complies
with their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law, while
recognizing that peace is not only the absence of conflict,
but also requires a positive, dynamic and participatory
process in which dialogue is encouraged and conflicts
are resolved in a spirit of mutual understanding and
cooperation. In our view, those elements would have
provided more balance to the resolution, strengthened
its contents and reinforced its message.
Brazil reaffirms its commitment to working
constructively with all delegations in order to address

17-405145/7

A/72/PV.61

any issues of concern. We firmly believe that future
initiatives under this agenda item would benefit from
a more open and inclusive approach, in line with the
idea that dialogue is the essence of a culture of peace
and prosperity.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): The Islamic
Republic of Iran condemns in the strongest possible
terms all acts of terrorism, including the recent heinous
crime committed during Friday prayers in Egypt. As
the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Mr. Zarif, stated in his message on the incident,
“[o]nce again the cowardly hand of terrorism
targeted the beloved nation of Egypt and proved
one more time that terrorism considers no
difference between divine and human values as it
does not differentiate between places even if they
are mosques and place of worship”.
Such a callous attempt by terrorists to prove their
continued existence after severe defeats have been
inflicted on them in the region doubles the responsibility
of the Governments of the region to gain a real and
accurate understanding of terrorism and requires their
collective efforts to combat it. The Islamic Republic
of Iran calls on all Governments to be more vigilant
against new plots by defeated terrorists.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): Israel would first like to
express its deep condolences to the Egyptian people for
the heinous terrorist attack that took place. As a country
that is not only a neighbour of Egypt, but also one that
has unfortunately experienced years of terror from
different terrorist groups, such as Hamas and others,
we understand and stress once again that we need to
stand united against the terrorist threat and combat it
together. That is why, once again, we have also joined
the consensus on resolution 72/17. Israel would again
like to express our condolences to the Egyptian people.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear a statement following the
adoption of resolution 72/17. I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I am speaking
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

6/7

01/12/2017

The EU and its member States are appalled by the
atrocious terrorist attack that took place in northern
Sinai on the 24 November, taking the lives of more than
300 innocent people. We want to send once more our
deepest condolences to the victims — may they rest
in peace — their families, and the Egyptian people,
and we condemn in the strongest terms this attack that
targeted the Friday prayers, which a sacred moment for
Muslim believers. As Federica Mogherini, the EU High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
recalled in her statement following the attack, no one
should be killed because of their religion and no sacred
place should be profaned by violence and terrorism. The
EU and its member States will continue to stand with
the Egyptian authorities and people, including through
capacity-building, in confronting the threats that come
from terrorism, and we reiterate that the perpetrators
of such unconscionable acts must be held responsible.
With regard to resolution 72/17, which was just
adopted, we regret that there was no discussion of the
text. We do not want this approach to be repeated or
this text to create a precedent. We emphasize that the
values of transparency and inclusiveness must guide
the preparation of resolutions at the United Nations.
On the substance, the text omits important references
to international law and human rights, in particular in
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6, and is thus unbalanced.
The EU and its member States would like to
reiterate that any counter-terrorism activity must be
carried out with respect for international law, including
international human rights law, and, indeed, this is
how we read the text before us. As the recently adopted
Human Rights Council resolution 34/8 on the effects of
terrorism on the enjoyment of all human rights recalls,
the promotion and the protection of human rights for
all and the rule of law are essential to the fight against
terrorism, and effective counter-terrorism measures
and the protection of human rights are not conflicting
goals but complementary and mutually reinforcing.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
We have heard the last speaker for this item. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 15.

17-40514

01/12/2017

A/72/PV.61

Reports of the Fifth Committee

Agenda items 134 and 145

The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now consider the reports of the
Fifth Committee on agenda items 134, 139 and 145.

Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the reports of the Fifth Committee that are before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote. May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.

Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/610)
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Report on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services”, recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/18).
The Acting President (spoke in French):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 134 and 145.
Agenda item 139
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/611)
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The text of the draft resolution, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/72/L.6.
We will now take action on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution
(resolution 72/19).

A/C.5/72/L.6

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in French):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 139.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

17-405147/7
