General Auembl:r-Foarteenth Seuion

32

former Trust Territories which have become independent, within the spheres and in the framework of
programmes of international assistance;
2. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council, in its study of this problem, should seek the cooperation of such internationoal, governmental and
non-governmental organizations as the Council may
deem it advisable to approach;
3. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council should consult with the Governments of countries
which were formerly under trusteeship and which have
become independent, for the purpose of ascertaining
their views with respect to these questions;
4. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council should report to the General Assembly, at its fifteenth
session, concerning the results of this study and also
concerning any conclusions and recommendations which
it deems appropriate.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1415 (XIV). Assistance to territories emerging
from a trust status and to newly independent

States
The General Assembly,
Welcoming the forthcoming independence of the Trust
Territories of the Cameroons under French administration, Togoland under French administration and
Somaliland under Italian administration during 1960,
Recalling the basic objectives of the Trusteeship
System as set forth in Article 76 of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recognizing the many problems with which the
emerging Trust Territories and newly independent
States must inevitably be faced upon their attainment
of independence, particularly in the economic and social
fields,
Desiring that all possible aid in the field of technical
assistance be available from the existing facilities in the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to those
emerging Trust Territories and newly independent
States which might request it,
Invites the Secretary-General and the executive heads
of the specialized agencies concerned to give urgent and
sympathetic consideration, without prejudice in any
way to present assistance being given to other States
Members of the United Nations, to all requests which
they might receive to provide Territories emerging
from a trust status or newly independent States with:
(a) Such high-level technical experts as they might
desire;
( b) All other forms of technical aid required by the
special circumstances in which they have acceded to
independence.
846th pli'nary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1416 (XIV). Date of the independence of the
Trust Territory of Togoland under French.
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1253 (XIII) of 14 November
1958, by which it was decided, in agreement with the
Administering Authority, that on the day which would
be agreed upon between the Government of France and

the Government of Togo!and and on which the Republic
of Togoland is to become independent in 1960, the
Trusteeship Agreement approved by the General Assembly on 13 December 1946 shall cease to he in force,
in accordance with Article 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations,
l-l aving considered the communication of 13 July
1959 sent to the Secretary-General by the representative of France to the Trusteeship Council, 18 Trusteeship
Council resolution 1950 (XXIV) of 14 July 1959,
and the statements made at the 933rd and 935th meetings of the Fourth Committee on 30 October and
2 November 1959 by the representative of France and by
the representative of Togoland, duly accredited as a
member of the delegation of France,
1. Notes that the Governments of France and of
Togoland have agreed that the date on which the
Republic of Togoland shall become independent is to
be 27 April 1960;
2. Expresses it. satisfaction with the terms and spirit
in which this agreement has been concluded ;
3. Reiterates its decision that, on the date of the
independence of Togoland, which has now been established as 27 April 1960, the Trusteeship Agreement
for Togoland under French administration, approved by
the General Assembly on 13 December 1946, shall
cease to be in force ;
4. Recommends that, upon the attainment of independence on 27 April 1960, Togoland shall be admitted
w membership in the United Nations in accordance
with Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations.

846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1417 (XIV). Assistance to the Trust Territory of
Togoland under French administration

The General Assemhly.
Recalling its resolution 1254 (XIII) of 14 November
I q5:,s relating to assistance to Togoland under French
.Hln11nistration,
C.msidcriny that requests for a..5sistance to Trust
f'erritories deserve sympathetic consideration by the
lJ nite<l Nations,
Considering further that Togoland under French administration is about to attain the objectives of the
l nternational Trusteeship System, and that 27 April
1960 has now been established as the date of the independence of the Republic of Togoland, 10
Having considered part II, chapter VI, of the report
qf the Trusteeship Council1 8 in connexion with the
development of Togoland under French administration
and the assistance given to it by the Administering
\nthority and by agencies of the United Nations,
H m-ing heard the statement made at the 935th meetmg of the Fourth Committee on 2 November 1959 by
the :'vlinister of State of the Republic of Togoland as
a member of the delegation of France,
1. Notes with satisfaction the assistance given to this
date to Togoland under French administration by
agencies of the United Nations;
2. Trusts that the Administering Authority will
continue to transmit without delay requests for assist18 0 fficia/ Records of the General Assembly, p014,-teenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4138.
19 See resolution 1416 (XIV).

33

Resolutions adopted on the reporte of the Foarth Committee

ance that may be made by the Government of Togoland,
and that the Secretary-General, the Special Fund, the
Technical Assistance Board and the specialized agencies
will give urgent and sympathetic consideration to these
requests.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1418 (XIV). Date of the independence of the
Trust Territory of Sor.1aliland under Italian
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of article 24 of the Trusteeship
Agreement with respect to the Trust Territory of
Somaliland under Italian administration (hereinafter
referred to as Somalia) which provides that the Agreement shall cease to be in force ten years after the date
of the approval of the Trusteeship Agreement by the
General Assembly, at the conclusion of which the
Territory shall become an independent sovereign State,
Recalling its resolution 442 (V) of 2 December 1950,
by which it approved the Trusteeship Agreement,
Having considered the information submitted by the
Administering Authority 20 to the effect that the Government of Somalia has conveyed the wish expressed
by the Legislative Assembly that the Trusteeship Agreement be terminated as soon as possible so that the
Trust Territory may achieve independence at a date
earlier than 2 December 1960, as well as the statement
of the representative of the Italian Government that
the Administering Authority is prepared to support
this wish,
Having heard the statements made by the Chairman
of the United Nations Advisory Council for Somalia,
Having heard the views of the petitioners,
Noting the wish expressed by the Government of
Somalia that, as soon as possible after the date of
attainment of its independence, Somalia should be admitted to membership in the United Nations, and
noting further that the Government of Italy has expressed its readiness to sponsor the application that
will be made by the Government of Somalia to be
admitted to membership in the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the statements made by the representative of Italy and the representative of the Government of Somalia that the preparations for independence
will be completed by 1 July 1960 and that independence
will be proclaimed on that date;
2. Congratulates the Government of Italy, as Administering Authority, and the Government and the
people of Somalia on taking steps in order to attain
the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship
System in advance of 2 December 1960;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the aid and advice
provided by the United Nations Advisory Council for
Somalia to the Administering Authority and also to the
Government and the people of Somalia in their progress
towards independence ;
4. Expresses its confidence that the recommendations
and observations of the Trusteeship Council, which
have been accepted by the Administering Authority and
by the Government of Somalia, concerning the broadening of the composition of the Political Committee and
the Constituent Assembly, a popular confirmation of
2 0 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourteenth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4262.

the constitution now under preparation through a referendum, and a modification of the existing electoral law
will be implemented before the date on which the
Trusteeship Agreement is terminated, and that the
Administering Authority will furnish a report on the
implementation of these recommendations to the Trusteeship Council at its twenty-sixth session ;
S. Resolves accordingly, in agreement with the Administering Authority, that on 1 July 1960, when
Somalia shall become independent, the Trusteeship
Agreement approved by the General Assembly on
2 December 1950 shall cease to be in force, the basic
objectives of trusteeship having been attained;
6. Recommends that, upon the attainment of independence, Somalia shall be admitted to membership
in the United Nations in accordance with Article 4 of
the Charter of the United Nations.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1419 (XIV). Plans of political reforms for the
Trust Territory of Ruanda-Urundi

The General Assembly.
Having taken note of the statement of the Administering Authority 21 concerning the political reforms envisaged for the Trust Territory of Ruanda-Urundi under
Belgian administration,
H a·ving taken note of the petitions and communications dealing with the recent outbreak of violence in
the Territory, 22
Having taken note also of the statement of the AJministering Authority on the incidents leading to the
outbreak of violence which have resulted in the sending
of troops to the Territory,
Having heard the views of the petitioners,
1. Draws the attention of the Trusteeship Council
to the statements of the petitione1s on the Trust Territory of Ruanda-Urundi;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to consider in
detail the plans of political reforms envisaged for the
Territory by the Administering Authority and to indude the Council's observations and recommendations
on the plans in its report to the General Assembly at
its fifteenth session, taking into account the provisions of
Assembly resolution 1413 (XIV) on the attainment of
self-government or independence by Trust Territories;
3. Further requests the Trusteeship Council to dispatch its 1960 visiting mission to Trust Territories in
East Africa early in 1960 so as to make it possible for
the mission to report to the Council, at its twenty-sixth
session, on the conditions and causes of the recent
disturbances in the Territory.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December 1959.

1461 (XIV). Progress achieved by the Non-Self•
Governing Te~ritories in
Chapter XI of the Charter

pursuance

of

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 932 (X) of 8 November 1955,
in which it expressed the opinion that an examination
21 See Official Records of the General A.rsembly, Fourteenth
Session, Fourth Committee, 947th meeting.
22 T /PET.3/95, T /PET.3/96 and Add.I, T /PET.3/97-99:
T /COM.3/L.32.
