S/PRST/2007/36*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 October 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5754th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 October 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts”, the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns the 3 October attack in Baghdad against
the Polish Ambassador to Iraq, which resulted in the wounding of the
Ambassador and the killing of one member of his personal security detachment
team and injuries to two others. The attack also killed at least one Iraqi civilian.
“The Security Council expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the victims of this attack and to their families, and to the Government of the
Republic of Poland.
“The Security Council underlines the need to bring the perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of this act to justice and urges all States, in
accordance with their obligations under international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to cooperate with the Governments of Poland and Iraq in
this regard.
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security and that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.
“The Security Council also calls on the international community to
support the Government of Iraq in exercising its responsibility in providing
protection to the diplomatic community in Iraq, United Nations staff and other
foreign civilian personnel working in Iraq.
“The Security Council further reaffirms the need to combat by all means,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all
their obligations under international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.
“The Security Council reiterates its determination to combat all forms of
terrorism, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.”

* Reissued for technical reasons.

07-53079* (E) 081007

*0753079*
