UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/2000/7*
13 March 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4110th meeting of the Security Council, held on 9 March 2000 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Maintaining
peace and security: Humanitarian aspects of issues before the Security
Council", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the humanitarian aspects of
issues before the Council.
"The Security Council recalls its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and reaffirms the Purposes and Principles of the United
Nations Charter. The Council also reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of the political independence, sovereign equality and
territorial integrity of all States.
"The Security Council recognizes the importance of the humanitarian
dimension to the maintenance of international peace and security and to its
consideration of humanitarian issues relating to the protection of all
civilians and other non-combatants in situations of armed conflict. The
Council recognizes that humanitarian crises can be both causes and
consequences of conflicts and that they can affect the Council’s efforts to
prevent and end conflicts, and to deal with other threats to international
peace and security.
"The Security Council affirms that timely consideration of the
following humanitarian issues contributes to the prevention of escalation
of conflicts and to the maintenance of international peace and security:
access for United Nations and associated personnel, other humanitarian
personnel and humanitarian supplies to the war-affected civilians;
humanitarian components in peace agreements and peacekeeping operations;
coordination between the Council and the relevant United Nations organs and
agencies and regional bodies; and resource constraints.

* Reissued for technical reasons.
00-34073 (E)

130300

/...

S/PRST/2000/7
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reaffirms its concern for the well-being and
rights of war-affected civilians and reiterates its call to all parties to
a conflict to ensure safe and unimpeded access in accordance with
international law by humanitarian personnel to such civilians. The Council
recognizes that cooperation of all parties concerned is vital for
effectiveness and safety in providing humanitarian assistance. In this
regard, the Council reiterates its call for combatants to ensure the
safety, security and freedom of movement of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian personnel. The Council stresses the importance
of providing assistance to all those in need, with particular emphasis on
women and children and other vulnerable groups affected by armed conflict,
in accordance with the principle of impartiality.
"The Security Council notes that full and timely support for
humanitarian components can be critical in ensuring and enhancing the
sustainability of any peace agreement and post-conflict peace-building. It
emphasizes the importance of inclusion of humanitarian elements in peace
negotiations and agreements, including the issue of prisoners of war,
detainees and missing persons and others protected by international
humanitarian law. The Council invites the Secretary-General to encourage
the early consideration of such humanitarian elements in peace negotiations
sponsored or supported by the United Nations, as appropriate. In cases of
peace negotiations sponsored or supported directly by Member States, the
Council calls on Member States to draw, as appropriate, upon the capacity
of United Nations funds, programmes and specialized agencies as well as
other relevant international humanitarian organizations and regional
bodies.
"The Security Council also notes that in some instances the
integration of humanitarian components into peacekeeping operations would
contribute effectively to their carrying out their mandate. In this
regard, the Council notes the importance of adequate training for
peacekeeping personnel in international humanitarian law and human rights
and with regard to the special situations of women and children as well as
vulnerable population groups. The Council notes with appreciation the
inclusion of personnel to handle child protection issues in some recent
peacekeeping operations, and encourages the inclusion of such personnel in
future operations, particularly in the context of demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers and where there are large number of
displaced and other war-affected children. The Council welcomes and
encourages efforts by the United Nations to sensitize peacekeeping
personnel in the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS and other communicable
diseases.
"The Security Council underlines the importance of effective
coordination among relevant United Nations organs and agencies, regional
bodies, other intergovernmental and international organizations and other
humanitarian actors in the field in situations of ongoing conflict and
peace-building through, inter alia, the development of strategic
frameworks, and expresses its willingness to consider ways to improve such
coordination. In this regard, the Council notes the need for further
improvement of communication, information flows and coordination between
/...

S/PRST/2000/7
English
Page 3

the peacekeeping, humanitarian and development aspects of United Nations
action.
"The Security Council recognizes the role played by international
humanitarian organizations and non-governmental organizations in providing
humanitarian assistance and alleviating the impact of humanitarian crises,
and further recognizes the specific mandate of the International Committee
of the Red Cross in this regard. It emphasizes the importance for these
organizations to uphold the principles of neutrality, impartiality and
humanity in their humanitarian activities.
"The Security Council notes with concern that inadequate financial
support can undermine efforts to address human suffering in certain
contexts. The Council recognizes the need for appropriate financial
support for humanitarian activities, and calls for adequate funding of
humanitarian activities, bilateral or otherwise, in particular in support
of multilateral efforts. The Council notes the importance of early
engagement and dispersal of funds from the international financial
institutions. The Council also notes with satisfaction that its previous
statements calling for full support to the United Nations Consolidated
Appeals have had a positive impact, and expresses its willingness to
continue to encourage a generous response to such appeals.
"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue to
include the humanitarian situation in his regular briefing to the Council
on countries under review, including on the funding status of the United
Nations Consolidated Appeals, where appropriate. It further requests the
Secretary-General to ensure that his regular country reports continue to
include a substantive, analytical section on humanitarian issues and their
impact on international efforts to implement United Nations mandated
activities.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
