A /71/PV.23

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

23rd plenary meeting

Monday, 3 October 2016, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda item 138
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/414)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, may I take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the report of the Fifth
Committee that is before the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President: Before we begin to take action
on the recommendation contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee (A/71/414), I should like to advise
representatives that we are going to proceed to take
a decision in the same manner as was done in the
Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations”, without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 71/2).

16-29829 (E)

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees
The President: Members will recall that for
the seventy-first session, the President, the 21
Vice-Presidents and the Chairpersons of the First
Committee, the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee and the Second, Third and Sixth Committees
were elected on 13 June. There remained the election of
the Chairperson of the Fifth Committee, to take place
at a later date.
I should now like to inform members that Her
Excellency Ms. Inga Rhonda King of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines was elected Chairperson of the
Fifth Committee on 29 September and is accordingly
a member of the General Committee for the seventyfirst session. I congratulate the Chairperson of the Fifth
Committee on her election.
The Chairpersons of the six Main Committees
and the 21 Vice-Presidents having been elected, the
General Committee of the General Assembly for the
seventy-first session has thus been fully constituted in
accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1629829*
