S/PV.8830

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8830th meeting

Wednesday, 4 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 July 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/692)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-21566 (E)
*2121566*

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab
Republic in that regard.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 29 July 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/692)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
Syrian Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thomas
Markram, Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/692, which contains the text of a
letter dated 29 July 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Markram.
Mr. Markram: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to brief them again on the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the
chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I am conducting this briefing on behalf of
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, who is currently away from
the Office.
Since the previous Security Council meeting on
resolution 2118 (2013), held on 12 July, the Office
for Disarmament Affairs has maintained regular
contact with its counterparts at the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its
activities related to this matter. As I have previously
informed the Council, the ongoing coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has affected the OPCW
Technical Secretariat’s ability to deploy to the Syrian
Arab Republic. Nevertheless, the Secretariat maintains
its readiness for deployments, which are being
conducted subject to the evolution of the pandemic.
Despite the travel restrictions, the Technical Secretariat
continues to undertake its mandated activities related
2/17

04/08/2021

Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team are still ongoing to clarify all outstanding issues
regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the OPCW. In that context, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat remains of the position that the
Syrian Arab Republic must declare all chemical warfare
agents produced and/or weaponized at the former
chemical weapons production facility that was declared
by the Syrian Arab Republic as never having been used
to produce and/or weaponize chemical weapons.
As previously reported, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat intended to deploy the Declaration
Assessment Team to Damascus in May to conduct the
twenty-fifth round of consultations with the Syrian
National Authority. However, in the absence of a
response from the Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCW
Secretariat informed the Syrian Arab Republic that
the deployment was postponed until further notice.
As a result of the identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies that remained unresolved, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
I reiterate my call to the Syrian Arab Republic to extend
its full cooperation to the OPCW Technical Secretariat
to resolve all outstanding issues. As noted on many
prior occasions, the confidence of the international
community in the complete elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme depends on such issues
being finalized.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat still plans to conduct two rounds of
inspections of the Barzah and Jamraya facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC)
in 2021. I am also advised that the Syrian Arab Republic
has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the detection
of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facility of the
SSRC in 2018. I note that the OPCW Director-General
sent a letter to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Fayssal
Mekdad, proposing an in-person meeting to discuss
relevant developments and the way forward regarding
the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s mandated activities
21-21566

04/08/2021

S/PV. 8830

The situation in the Middle East

in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 7 July, Mr. Mekdad
agreed to the OPCW Director-General’s proposal. As
noted in the monthly report (S/2021/692, annex), the
OPCW Technical Secretariat stands ready to engage
for the Syrian Arab Republic to initiate preparations
for the meeting and will update the OPCW Executive
Council in due course.
I have been advised that, on 9 July, the Syrian
National Authority sent to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat a note verbale reporting an attack that
had taken place on 8 June targeting a military facility
that housed a declared former chemical weapons
production facility. On 15 July, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat requested further information regarding
the damage caused to the declared site given that it
was related to an outstanding issue recently opened by
data assessment team. In its note verbale, the Syrian
National Authority also reported the destruction of
two chlorine cylinders related to the chemical weapons
incident that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018. In
its reply, the OPCW Technical Secretariat recalled the
last inspection of those cylinders in November 2020, for
which the inspection team was mandated to transport
the cylinders to the OPCW headquarters.
During that deployment, the Syrian Arab Republic
notified the inspection team that the cylinders could not
be shipped outside its territory. The OPCW Technical
Secretariat recalled that the cylinders were stored
and inspected at another declared site, approximately
60 kilometres from the location at which they had
reportedly been destroyed on 8 June. In addition, the
Technical Secretariat recalled that it had previously
advised the Syrian Arab Republic that it was not to
open, move or alter the containers or the contents in
any way without seeking the prior written consent of
the Technical Secretariat. I understand that the Syrian
National Authority did not notify the OPCW Technical
Secretariat that the cylinders had been moved to a new
location until it reported their destruction. Accordingly,
in its note verbale dated 15 July, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat requested Syria to provide all relevant
information regarding the movement of the two
cylinders and any remains of their destruction.
With regard to the work of the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM), I note
that the FFM remains in the process of studying all
available information related to allegations of the use
of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. It
also continues to engage with the Syrian Government

and other States parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention with regard to “a variety of incidents”. As
previously reported, further FFM deployments will be
subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I understand that, following the issuance of its second
report, in April, the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I take this
opportunity to reiterate the Secretary-General’s full
support for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality,
objectivity and independence of the work of the OPCW.
As I informed the Council, on 21 April 2021
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, at its twenty-fifth session,
adopted decision C-25/Dec.9, entitled “Addressing the
Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic”, suspending the rights and privileges
of the Syrian Arab Republic under the Convention.
According to paragraph 8 of that decision, the rights
and privileges of the Syrian Arab Republic will be
reinstated by the Conference of the States Parties
once the OPCW Director-General has reported to the
Executive Council that the Syrian Arab Republic has
completed all the measures contained in paragraph 5
of Executive Council decision EC-94/Dec.2. I have
been advised that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to
complete all of those measures. I therefore reiterate my
call to the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat in that regard.
Although almost eight years have now passed since
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), there is still work
to be done before that resolution can be considered to
be fully implemented. Moreover, as long as the use of
chemical weapons continues or the threat of their use
remains, we must maintain our focus on preventing
those threats. Unity in the Security Council is required
to re-establish the norm against chemical weapons. The
use of such weapons must always be seen as a clear
violation of a deeply held taboo. Accordingly, the
identification and accountability of those responsible
are imperative.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Markram

for

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

21-215663/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to start today by congratulating
France on its successful presidency of the Security
Council in July and to wish India and its team
success during the month of August. I also wish to
thank Mr. Thomas Markram for his briefing and for
the extraordinary work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Later this month, on 21 August, we will mark eight
years since the Al-Assad regime horrifically attacked and
killed hundreds of Syrian men, women and children in
Ghouta with sarin gas. That terrible attack is not the only
one. The Al-Assad regime’s appalling use of chemical
weapons against the Syrian people is well documented.
The OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team
has attributed four separate chemical-weapons attacks
in Syria to the Al-Assad regime. Those incidents
are in addition to the four chemical-weapons attacks
attributed to the Al-Assad regime by the former OPCW
Joint Investigative Mechanism.
The OPCW earnestly attempts to engage the
Al-Assad regime and assist it with complying with its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Sadly, the Al-Assad regime, supported by Russia,
continues to ignore calls from the international
community to fully disclose and verifiably destroy its
chemical-weapons programmes. Instead, the Al-Assad
regime continues to deliberately delay and obstruct the
work of the OPCW’s Declaration Assessment Team.

04/08/2021

and Al-Assad disinformation, including as propagated
here in the Security Council every month, is failing to
persuade most States. The United States, along with
an overwhelming number of responsible nations, will
continue to support the work of the OPCW in carrying
out its critical mandate against the backdrop of the
continued threat of chemical-weapons use.
The Security Council must unite to forcefully
condemn this method of warfare, and the international
community must identify and hold accountable all those
who use such weapons in violation of international
law. There simply cannot be impunity for the use of
chemical weapons.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like our American colleague, we would like
to thank France for its successful presidency in July, and
we wish you, Mr. President, the very best during your
presidency this month. We stand ready to cooperate and
pledge our help. We are especially grateful to you and
your team for convening the Security Council today to
discuss the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) in
person. We are convinced that this is the most effective
way to organize such a discussion. In the context of the
Syrian chemical dossier, we believe that transparency
is of fundamental importance, particularly given
the line being pursued over the past few years by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) Technical Secretariat.

The Security Council must call out atrocities and
hold those who use chemical weapons accountable.
Without accountability for the atrocities committed
against the Syrian people, lasting peace in Syria will
remain out of reach. It is disappointing that the use of
a weapon of mass destruction by a Government against
its own people could possibly be a source of political
conflict in the Council. Fortunately, more and more
members of the international community want to hold
the Al-Assad regime accountable.

We also thank Mr. Thomas Markram for presenting
the ninety-fourth regular report (S/2021/692, annex) of
the OPCW Director-General. Unfortunately, as is the
case for previous reports, we cannot agree with many
of the assessments contained in it. We were particularly
surprised by the positive assessment of the June briefing
by Mr. Fernando Arias, OPCW Director-General at the
Security Council June briefing (see S/PV.8785). The
report claims that Mr. Arias provided detailed answers
to questions asked during the meeting.

The April decision of the OPCW Conference of
the State Parties to condemn Syria’s use of chemical
weapons and suspend certain rights and privileges of
Syria under the Chemical Weapons Convention sent a
clear and unequivocal message — the use of chemical
weapons has consequences. Nearly 90 nations supported
such actions. Only a small number of Al-Assad enablers,
including Russia, sadly, stood in opposition. Given the
voting trends at the OPCW, it is clear that the Russian

It is difficult to imagine a more absurd statement
that would be further from the truth. There were so
many inconsistencies and outright distortions in the
responses of Mr. Arias to the questions of Security
Council members, and they were so blatant that we
were forced to respond by circulating our arguments as
an official Security Council document (S/2021/641). A
similar step had to be taken by the Syrian delegation,
in document S/2021/588. We call on all delegations

4/17

21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

interested in forming an objective view on the matter to
study those materials.
I will not go into detail now on all the contradictions
we noticed in the statement of Mr. Arias. We expect to
do that during the next briefing by OPCW leadership in
the Security Council, which we hope will not be long
in coming. I will mention only the most egregious ones.
The Director-General was bold enough to assert
that the Russian Federation initially agreed with the
findings of the Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic (FFM) regarding the April 2018 Douma
incident. In doing so, he selectively cited note No. 759
of the Russian Federation’s Permanent Mission to the
OPCW, dated 26 April 2019.
This is blatant fraud and misinformation because,
in doing so, he omitted the main conclusion drawn in
that note — that Russia insists on the staged nature of
the incident because the analysis presented in the FFM
report (S/1731/2019) does not allow for the conclusion
that toxic chemicals were used as weapons.

S/PV. 8830

the OPCW or, of course, to its Technical Secretariat.
It is not surprising that the reports of the illegitimate
IIT were prepared in violation of CWC norms regarding
methodology and data collection. They are biased in
nature and pursue just one goal: not to paint a real
picture of events but, rather, to make the facts fit the
conclusions about Damascus’s guilt — in other words,
essentially to carry out a political order.
We therefore reject the conclusions on both the
already issued reports of the IIT on Lataminah and
Saraqib as well as any of its future so-called products. It
is shocking that Mr. Arias essentially openly admitted
that the OPCW technical criteria do not follow the
CWC chain-of-custody methodology when conducting
investigations and that instead it uses its own innovative
methods of some sort. That is being presented not as a
direct violation of the Convention but, rather, as a point
of pride.

We believe that it is at the very least inappropriate
for the Director-General to state that the calls contained
in resolution 2118 (2013) to prosecute those responsible
for the use of chemical weapons allegedly give
legitimacy to the work of the so-called Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT) established by the
OPCW, in violation of article XV of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

We deplore Mr. Arias’s outright dismissive attitude
shown during the June briefing towards two now
former staff members of the Technical Secretariat,
who, as fair and impartial civil servants should, were
not able to accept outright forgeries and decided to shed
light on the glaring manipulations in the conclusions of
the Douma report. Contrary to Mr. Arias’s claims, both
inspectors are highly qualified experts with a great
amount of experience in the OPCW and were directly
involved in the investigation of the Douma incident, of
which we have documentary evidence.

The decision of the fourth special session of the
OPCW Executive Council in June 2018 only asked the
Director-General of the Technical Secretariat to submit
considerations for the involvement of external qualified
experts with the relevant professional experience in
OPCW investigations at the request of a CWC State
party and in general to strengthen the secretariat’s
capacity and means in order to better implement the
Convention’s verification regime.

We have yet to receive clear explanations from the
Director-General about why the Technical Secretariat’s
approach to the initial declaration of Syria is much
stricter than towards other countries such as Libya or
Iraq, which encountered similar problems yet were not
barraged by the same amount of criticism as Syria,
which joined the OPCW in exceptionally complicated
circumstances of military and political instability and
externally fuelled terrorism.

In practice, however, Mr. Arias and his team have
essentially created the IIT themselves and developed
its terms of reference. The OPCW Executive Council,
in violation of paragraph 35 of article VIII, did not
even consider any preliminary considerations in that
regard. It was presented as a fact. What, then, is the
strictly technical role of the Technical Secretariat
of which Mr. Arias speaks? I want to emphasize that
the Security Council has never delegated its exclusive
attribution powers, as defined by the Charter, either to

The Technical Secretariat does not have any
special prerogatives with regard to Syria’s initial
declaration in accordance with article IV, paragraph 8,
of the Convention. Contrary to Mr. Arias’s claims, the

Despite that, Syria complied with all its obligations
in good faith, as the Secretary-General reported
to the Security Council in June 2014. The fact that
Syria’s chemical-warfare stockpiles were limited was
confirmed by the Executive Council and the OPCW
Conference of the State Parties in 2016.

21-215665/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

Convention does not grant the Technical Secretariat any
right to apply more complex and politically motivated
requirements regarding verification. However, that
is what we are actually seeing. The more Syrians try
to meet the Technical Secretariat halfway, hosting
inspection teams in good faith and accepting intrusive
verifications, the more criticism they receive.
I would like to particularly touch upon something
mentioned in the report (S/2021/692, annex), namely,
an air strike on a former declared chemical-weapons
production facility in Syria on 8 June during which two
cylinders connected to the Douma incident in April
2018 were destroyed. It is very strange, at the very
least, to see the report focus on the fact that the Syrian
party moved those cylinders without any assessment
of the very fact of that air strike. Even if the Syrian
party did move them within its own territory, which
as we understand, Syria has full rights to do, does that
mean that the air strike, which is essentially an act of
aggression against a sovereign State, was justified?
And yet this is exactly how some of these paragraphs in
the report currently read.
We believe that we should now be concerned
by another issue entirely. Whom did this air strike
really benefit? It certainly did not benefit the Syrians
themselves. It is difficult to imagine that they would
seek such a complicated way to rid themselves of those
cylinders. It seems much likely that this was an attempt
by external forces to cover up their tracks in the light of
the many public discussions regarding the manipulations
in the Douma report. We have repeatedly warned about
the destructive impact that the punitive decision to strip
the Syrian Arab Republic of its rights — which the
delegations of the Western States pushed for — could
undermine the authority of the OPCW, as we know it
was not considered in the Executive Council and violates
the principle of consensus. I should like to recall that
less than half of Member States voted in favour of it and
only the six Western States in the current Council voted
in favour. The others either voted against or abstained,
and a number of former Council members took the
same position. That is an obviously unjust decision
whose only goal is to make Damascus an outcast and
destroy the motivation for any other State to cooperate
with the OPCW.
However, despite all that, Syria is continuing to
pursue cooperation and is showing openness to dialogue
between the leadership of the Technical Secretariat at
the highest level, as confirmed in the current report
6/17

04/08/2021

of the Director-General. In our view, that is the best
illustration of the fact that any claims about the dialogue
between Syria and the OPCW faltering are completely
untrue and unfounded.
In conclusion, I would like to note that all that
Russia is calling for is strict compliance with the CWC,
both by Member States and the Technical Secretariat,
along with the Director-General. He is called upon to
act as a fair broker together with the OPCW. Instead,
we see a paradoxical situation where the Technical
Secretariat itself violates it, and the Director-General,
instead of clamping down on such violations, seems to
boast about them. We are seeing increasingly dangerous
politicization in the OPCW, which is growing every
month, turning the OPCW from an unbiased and
independent guardian into an instrument for punishing
undesirable Governments in order to pursue and
advance the geopolitical aims of certain States. All
of this creates a serious threat to the organization
and casts a shadow on one of the main pillars of the
weapons of mass destruction non-proliferation regime
and undermines the effectiveness of the realization of
the OPCW’s mandate.
Unfortunately, it seems that the situation is
something that Mr. Arias is quite happy with; otherwise,
it is very difficult to explain his behaviour, which has
already worsened the situation when it comes to the
OPCW implementing its mandate, and, unfortunately,
we do not see any further reasons for optimism at
this time.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Council and to wish you and your
team every success. I should like also to thank France
for its excellent presidency of the Council last month.
I also thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing, and I welcome the participation of the
representatives of Syria and Iran in this meeting.
At the outset, Tunisia reaffirms its adherence to the
prohibition and non-proliferation regime on chemical
weapons. It is a regime based on rules, agreements and
multilateralism in order to put an end to the threat to
humankind from chemical weapons. In that context,
Tunisia supports the vital mandate of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to carry out independent and impartial verification
responsibilities, including in the Syrian Arab Republic.
21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The OPCW is also a forum for discussion and
cooperation among States on relevant issues.
We have taken note of the ninety-fourth monthly
report (S/2021/692, annex) of the OPCW DirectorGeneral pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013). We
welcome the initial agreement between the OPCW
Director-General and the Syrian Foreign Minister and
Expatriates on holding an in-person meeting in the
upcoming period. We hope that the meeting will make
progress on the Syrian chemical dossier and that the
Technical Secretariat of the OPCW will continue its
activities on the ground in the Syrian Arab Republic as
well as building mutual trust and understanding through
a structured, constructive and transparent dialogue
between the two parties. We also call for restoring
engagement, coordination and cooperation between the
OPCW and the Syrian Government, without ignoring
the limitations and challenges posed by coronavirus
disease pandemic. That would lead to swiftly resolving
the outstanding and emerging issues and ensuring that
Syria fulfils its contractual commitments.
Finally, Tunisia reiterates our steadfast condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons wherever, by
whomsoever, in any circumstances and under any
motives and justifications. We stress the need to fully,
transparently and impartially investigate the allegations
of the use of toxic chemical materials as weapons by
any party and to hold accountable the perpetrators of
such horrible crimes.
The international community and the Security
Council need to make concerted and coordinated
efforts while taking responsibility to monitor the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013) in order to end the chemical
threat, ensure the rule of law and accountability and
strengthen trust in the effectiveness of the prohibition
and non-proliferation regime for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to joint others in thanking France for its
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July
and in wishing India every success during its presidency
this month. I would also like to thank Mr. Thomas
Markram, Deputy to the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing.
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
requires Member States to accept and carry out the
decisions of the Security Council. In resolution 2118

S/PV. 8830

(2013), the Security Council decided that Syria would
not use, produce or retain chemical weapons and that
it would cooperate fully with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
its personnel, providing them with immediate and
unfettered access.
By using chemical weapons throughout the
conflict and failing to comply fully with the OPCW
and its various teams, Syria has repeatedly breached
its obligations under the Charter, Security Council
resolutions, the Chemical Weapons Convention and
decisions of the OPCW. Unfortunately, the DirectorGeneral’s monthly report (S/2021/692, annex) provides
further ongoing evidence of non-compliance.
First, there has been no progress in resolving the
20 outstanding issues in Syria’s chemical weapons
declaration. In the light of Syria’s willingness to
use chemical weapons throughout the conflict, that
represents an ongoing threat to international peace
and security.
Secondly, we note the ongoing failure to grant visas
to members of the Declaration Assessment Team. That
is unacceptable. Syria is required to give immediate
and unfettered access to OPCW personnel, including
members of the Declaration Assessment Team.
Thirdly, we note the alleged destruction of two
chlorine cylinders connected to the 2018 Douma
chemical weapons attack in a strike on a former
chemical weapons production facility. We understand
that the OPCW was in the process of attempting to take
those cylinders to The Hague for further investigation.
As the OPCW observes, if the cylinders were destroyed
at that facility, it means that Syria had moved the
cylinders from another facility 60 kilometres away,
against the express instructions of the OPCW. That
incident represents not only a highly concerning failure
by Syria to comply with important OPCW requests, but
also unauthorized interference with evidence central to
an ongoing high-profile investigation.
We yet again urge Syria to comply with its
obligations and refrain from actions not consistent
with them. We note the proposed meeting between the
OPCW’s Director-General and Mr. Fayssal Mekdad.
We hope that that will be an opportunity for renewed
commitment by Syria to compliance and set it on the
path towards restoring its rights and privileges under
the Chemical Weapons Convention.

21-215667/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

Lastly, we once again commend the OPCW
Technical Secretariat’s professionalism, integrity
and tireless efforts to support Syria on the road
to compliance.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish you every success, Mr. President,
during your presidency this month, and we thank
France very much for its leadership last month.
I am grateful for the briefing by Mr. Thomas
Markram and express our concern about what happened
on 8 July when, as reported by the Syrian National
Authority, one of its declared former chemical weapons
production facilities was attacked, which contained
two chlorine cylinders, related to the incident that
took place in Douma in April 2018. The latter chain
of events is alarming, especially given the fact that, in
addition to being yet another sign of the violence in the
region, those materials were a core part of the evidence
in the investigations of the Fact-Finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). It is necessary to clarify the facts and for Syria
to provide details on the damage caused to the cylinders
and the whereabouts of their remnants, as requested
by the OPCW Technical Secretariat. It would also be
desirable to clarify the reason that those cylinders
were relocated without prior notification to the OPCW.
Nonetheless, we believe it to be a positive sign that the
Director-General of the OPCW and the Syrian Foreign
Minister have agreed to hold an in-person meeting to
discuss the mandate of the OPCW Technical Secretariat
in Syria. We trust that meeting will be productive so
as to move forward the dialogue required to resolve
outstanding issues and restore trust among the parties.
We take note that, once again, the report
(S/2021/692, annex) indicates that, according to
the OPCW Technical Secretariat, the declaration
submitted by Syria cannot be considered complete,
given that the Declaration Assessment Team continues
to await information from the Syrian Government on
outstanding issues and inconsistencies in the initial
declaration. One of them is the technical clarification
with regard to the chemical that was detected during
the third round of inspections conducted at the Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre in Barzah. In
addition, two rounds of inspections are still pending at
the Centre, which have not been carried out because of
the pandemic.
8/17

04/08/2021

We urge Syria to comply with its obligations as a
party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, as well
as with decisions taken by the Security Council and
the OPCW Executive Council, so as to cooperate with
investigations conducted by the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission and its Investigation and Identification Team,
whose objective is to shed light on the origin of the
chemical weapons used in incidents in Syria.
Mexico commends the professionalism with which
the OPCW conducts its work and investigation and
verification tasks. We also reiterate that we believe that
it is important for the Council to have more direct and
constant contact with the OPCW, including with the
heads of investigation teams.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates that chemical
weapons are banned under international law and
their use by any actor under any circumstances is
unacceptable. Similarly, we underscore that dialogue
and the quest for political solutions is the only path to
resolving the issue that brings us together today.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate France on a successful
presidency in July and to wish you, Mr. President, every
success in guiding our work in the month of August.
I would also like to thank Mr. Thomas Markram for
his briefing.
We reiterate that the solution to the issue of chemical
weapons in Syria requires the members of the Security
Council to be united in their views on the direction
and objectives of the work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in Syria.
The lack of consensus on how to address or interpret
incidents that have occurred and on the identification
of the perpetrators of those incidents is an impediment
to ensuring accountability for those responsible, much
to the detriment of the victims waiting for justice to be
served. Nevertheless, let me underscore the following
three points.
First, all incidents of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria should be given the same attention and
be addressed with the same rigour to ensure that
perpetrators are held responsible. Differences of
opinion among Security Council members must give
way to a steady and technical analysis of the findings
of investigations so as to guarantee the integrity of the
OPCW, which is key for my country.
21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

My delegation would like to reiterate that any
action other than that aimed at the full implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), the report of the OPCW
(S/2021/692, annex) and its findings must be avoided.
It is therefore crucial that the OPCW continue to work
towards that goal, while ensuring that it enjoys the full
confidence of Member States, through transparency and
by fostering a spirit of consensus in its deliberations.
Similarly, the Technical Secretariat must adopt a more
inclusive and rigorous approach to ensure that the
findings of its work are accepted by everyone.
Secondly, we call on the Syrian Government
to enhance its cooperation with OPCW teams
concerning the request for additional information
on outstanding items in the initial declaration and
on the issuance of visas to experts, so as to turn the
controversial page of finalizing the initial declaration.
In addition, my delegation welcomes the efforts of
the Syrian Government to provide more information
via ongoing communications with the OPCW and the
Security Council.

S/PV. 8830

(OPCW) bears a great responsibility as the guardian of
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We acknowledge the efforts to continue work on this
file, despite the impediments created by the coronavirus
disease pandemic. However, we remain concerned
about the continued long-term lack of movement.
Gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in the initial
declaration remain unresolved and engagement is
strained. Undoubtedly, there are many diverging views
and trust deficits exist. It is therefore imperative that all
parties prioritize dialogue and technical consultations
to chart a practical and constructive way forward to
make tangible progress. In that regard, we welcome the
agreement between the OPCW and Syria to convene an
in-person meeting to discuss relevant developments.
That is indeed a positive and important step to bridge
the gaps and to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). It is our hope that preparations
will be finalized soon.

Thirdly, allegations that armed terrorist groups in
Syria are, or would like to be, in possession of chemical
substances, as well as of the possible threat of their
use, should not be taken lightly. My delegation calls
on the United Nations, the OPCW and the Syrian Arab
Republic to pay special attention to such allegations.

We reiterate the importance of pursuing consensusbased decisions to thwart further polarization and
foster cooperation among States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Political differences ought to
be set aside in favour of a commitment to working
together to realize our collective goal of a world free of
chemical weapons.

In conclusion, the Niger reiterates its categorical
rejection of any use of chemical weapons by any actor
under any circumstances, as such acts are a serious
violation of international law. They cannot be tolerated
or go unpunished.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains in
support of the mandate of the OPCW, and we encourage
all efforts aimed at strengthening its capacity to
ensure that it always functions as an effective
multilateral institution.

Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We join others in congratulating India on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We wish the
members of the Indian delegation the very best. They
can count on our support. We also commend France for
a well-organized and successful presidency last month.

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Let me join other speakers
in commending France for its leadership during its justconcluded Security Council presidency in the month of
July. I also congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of August and assure you of Kenya’s support and
cooperation. Let me thank Mr. Markram for his briefing
and welcome the participation of the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

Chemical weapons do not discriminate between
combatants and civilians, and their effects are
horrifying. Their development and use remain a threat
to international peace and security and constitute
a grave violation of international law. Allegations
of the use chemical weapons therefore ought to be
given immediate attention, and investigations must
be comprehensive, impartial, transparent and in
keeping with international best practices. As such, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

I take note of the ninety-fourth monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/692, annex), as
well as the submission by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic of its ninety-second monthly report.

21-215669/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

At the beginning of every month, the Security
Council has to consider the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). Unfortunately, there is hardly
ever any significant positive movement to talk about.
I reaffirm Kenya’s firm conviction and belief that
the use of chemical weapons anywhere and by anyone
constitutes an unacceptable violation of international
law. Indeed, no cause can ever justify the use of a
weapon of mass destruction under any circumstance
whatsoever. Resolution 2118 (2013) is clear: the use
of chemical weapons anywhere constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.
Kenya supports the mandate of the OPCW and
its responsibility as the technical body overseeing the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We note its continued efforts to execute its mandated
activities pertaining to the elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme in the face of the
challenges related to the coronavirus disease. In that
regard, we encourage enhanced cooperation between
the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, including through the use of modern
technology for continued engagement.
We believe that an expeditious closure of
investigations into the use of chemical weapons in Syria
will allow the Council to support the Syrian people
meaningfully in their quest for peace and stability. For
that to happen, cooperation and collaboration in an
open and transparent manner is critical to resolving the
outstanding issues.
In addition, the Security Council should support
efforts to strengthen the OPCW to ensure that the
investigations are conducted comprehensively and
conclusively, based on substantiated and reliable sources.
The sensitive nature of its important work is reflected
in the expectation of the international community that
its work always remains above reproach.
Finally, Kenya reiterates its solidarity with, and
support for, the people of Syria as they continue to seek
a sustainable solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at a political solution that is genuinely
responsive to the will and the needs of the millions of
the Syrian people, who have endured suffering for far
too long.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I join other speakers in
congratulating France on its successful presidency of
the Security Council last month and in wishing you,
10/17

04/08/2021

Mr. President, all the best for this month. I would
like to thank Mr. Markham for his comprehensive
briefing today.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere,
at any time is abhorrent and unacceptable. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) plays an essential role as the impartial
and technical body mandated by the international
community to address such weapons.
The absence of progress by Syria in addressing
the serious and growing list of issues under its initial
declaration remains a matter of serious concern. Syria’s
lack of meaningful cooperation with the OPCW, as set
out most recently in the Director-General’s report of
23 July (S/2021/692, annex), is also a significant concern.
The fundamental question is whether Syria is
willing to cooperate meaningfully with the OPCW
to resolve these issues and to provide assurance that
they have met their commitments under the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC).
The issues are deeply troubling, and the significant
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies in Syria’s
explanations cannot simply be dismissed. Syria’s
failure to issue visas in a timely manner and to grant
full access to sites and documents related to its
chemical weapons programme hampers the OPCW’s
work to investigate these issues. As other speakers
mentioned, the destruction of chlorine cylinders from
the incident at Douma is disturbing and symptomatic of
the difficulties that the OPCW faces in Syria. The fact
that the cylinders had been moved to a new location
without informing the OPCW is also troubling.
The failure to meaningfully address these issues
is all the more important given that eight instances of
chemical weapons use in Syria have been attributed
to the Syrian authorities by the United Nations and
the OPCW.
We welcome and support the initiative by DirectorGeneral Arias to reach out to Syrian Foreign Minister
Mekdad about a possible meeting to find a way to break
the impasse. We encourage Syria to engage seriously
with Director-General Arias’s offer, and hope that
this can contribute to much-needed progress. Syria
has stated that it is willing to fully cooperate. Now
is the time to back that up with meaningful action.
The OPCW’s strong professionalism, impartiality and
21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

integrity in handling the Syrian file has been clear
throughout the process.
Syria must fulfil its legal obligations under the
CWC and resolution 2118 (2013). It must cooperate
fully with the OPCW. It must resolve the serious issues
with its declaration. Finally, it must ensure that its
entire stocks of chemical weapons are declared and
verifiably destroyed.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I join the other speakers
in thanking France for its excellent presidency of the
Security Council in July, and my congratulations go
to India on its presidency in August. We assure you,
Mr. President, of our full support for your success this
month. I also thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
for his briefing. I welcome the participation of the
representatives of Syria and Iran in our meeting today.
It has always been Viet Nam’s consistent policy to
strongly support non-proliferation and disarmament
of weapons of mass destruction, including chemical
weapons. We unequivocally condemn uses of those
weapons. The obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) must be fully respected to prevent
all inhumane effects of such weapons on human life
and the environment.
In that regard, my delegation would like to
reiterate its support for the role of the Organization
for
the
Prohibition
of
Chemical
Weapons
(OPCW) — a body tasked with assisting Member States
in the implementation of the CWC.
At the same time, to achieve the goal of ridding the
world of chemical weapons, it is also imperative that the
Organization’s work strictly abide by the Convention.
Its work, including investigations of alleged uses of
chemical weapons, must be carried out in the most
comprehensive, objective and impartial manner.

S/PV. 8830

of the National Authority of Syria and the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW. We hope that this important
meeting could be considered a chance to narrow the
differences and step up efforts towards finding a
lasting solution.
We call on the Syrian National Authority and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to deepen their technical
cooperation in the most constructive and non-politicized
manner possible. The settlement of the remaining issues
relating to the initial declaration — the first obligation
of a State party under the CWC — continues to be one
of the determining factors.
The international community should support efforts
to promote dialogue, as well as efforts to realize the full
implementation of the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013).
Unity is required in order to do so. With constructive
engagement, the Council reached a unanimous decision
on a Syria cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism
(resolution 2585 (2021)). We hope that this spirit
continues and brings about further progress in settling
this issue conclusively.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to join my colleagues in wishing
you, Mr. President, every success in your presidency
of the Council for the month of August. We pledge our
full support and I thank all the members of the Council
for their support of the French presidency during the
month of July.
I would also like to thank Mr. Markram for his
briefing and would like to make three points on
this issue.

My delegation shares the concerns over the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria. It is also troubling to
see the reported information on the possession and use
of chemical weapons by armed groups. To find a longterm solution to this protracted dossier, we believe that
there is no other viable way than to promote dialogue
and cooperation between the OPCW and Syria.

First, I note from the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) DirectorGeneral’s ninety-fourth report (S/2021/692, annex) that
Syria continues to evade its international obligations.
No answers have been given to the 20 outstanding
questions related to Syria’s initial declaration and
additional questions continue to accumulate. The
unauthorized movement and destruction of two
chlorine cylinders linked to the Douma attacks is of
great concern. The regime must promptly provide the
OPCW Technical Secretariat with accurate information
on this incident.

In the ninety-fourth monthly report of the OPCW
Director-General (S/2021/692, annex), we note with
encouragement that there will be an in-person meeting
to be scheduled between the Foreign Minister and Head

Secondly, I wish to recall that the decision taken in
April by the OPCW Conference of the States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention is not irreversible,
as noted by Mr. Markram. It is up to the regime to act if

21-2156611/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

it wishes to regain its rights and privileges. Without its
cooperation, the measures taken will remain in force.
In that regard, I note that the two most recent requests
for the deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team
have gone unanswered. The Syrian regime is expected
to issue the visas for the OPCW Director-General’s
next deployment request. We hope that the upcoming
meeting between the Director-General and the Syrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs will resolve that issue and
restore dialogue.
Finally, the use of these shocking weapons cannot
go unpunished. Legal proceedings will take place,
including before national courts. Evidence is still
being collected and will be used. This is about respect
for the victims, for whom justice must be done. This
is the message we are delivering with our partners, in
particular within the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I join others in thanking
France for their presidency of the Security Council in
July and wish India all the best with its presidency now
in August.
I would like to thank Mr. Markram for his briefing
and for the opportunity to discuss the latest updates
on progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme. Unfortunately, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
Director-General’s ninety-fourth report (S/2021/692,
annex) on progress in the elimination of the chemical
weapons in Syria does not, in fact, reflect much progress.
The deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team
was scheduled to take place in May, but is, regrettably,
still on hold due to the lack of response by Syria.
The steps taken by the Syrian regime in addressing
the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
in the initial declaration remain clearly unsatisfactory.
This lack of progress continues to pose a threat to the
Syrian people and to international peace and security.
I would like to reiterate the importance of
accountability. It is of the utmost importance for the
Security Council to provide a clear and united response
to the outcomes of the independent and professional
investigations by the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and the Investigation and Identification Team. Holding
those responsible to account and ensuring justice to
the victims is needed to prevent such attacks from
happening again. The Security Council needs to take
12/17

04/08/2021

clear steps in fulfilling its mandate and implementing its
resolutions. The use of a weapon of mass destruction by
anyone, anywhere is not and cannot become acceptable.
I would also like to reiterate Estonia’s full support
to the professional and impartial work of the OPCW
and its Technical Secretariat. The organization has
demonstrated full dedication and integrity in fulfilling
its task of upholding the norm against the use of
chemical weapons. We call on the Syrian regime to
cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and its investigative mechanisms.
Finally, 20 August will mark one year since
the poisoning of Mr. Navalny with a chemical nerve
agent of the Novichok group. It is unacceptable that
the circumstances of this poisoning still remain
unclear. We continue to call on the Russian Federation
to disclose, fully and in a transparent manner, all
circumstances of the incident and to inform the Security
Council accordingly.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, the Chinese delegation would like to thank
France for the important work done during its presidency
of the Security Council in July, and I congratulate India
on assuming the presidency of the Council this month. I
would also like to thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
for his briefing.
China took note of the ninety-fourth monthly report
(S/2021/692, annex) submitted by the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Regrettably, like numerous
previous reports, this report has yet to provide a
professional, scientific and convincing response to
the issue of technical gaps in investigative procedures
and the chain of custody in relevant reports on the
Syrian chemical-weapons issue. That will inevitably
damage the professional image of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and the impartiality and credibility
of relevant reports. China once again calls on the
Technical Secretariat to use science and facts as the
criteria for the Syrian chemical-weapons investigation,
maintain a comprehensive, objective and impartial
attitude, demonstrate professionalism and expertise
and provide a clear and direct response to the concerns
of the international community as soon as possible.
Recently, consensus has been reached between
Syrian Foreign Minister Mekdad and DirectorGeneral Arias on holding in-person meetings, and the
21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

OPCW Damascus office has also completed a staff
rotation. China welcomes these positive developments
and supports the two sides in conducting in-depth
discussions on working methods and procedures during
face-to-face meetings to create conditions for more
effective cooperation going forward.
China expresses serious concerns about the air
strike on a declared chemical-weapons facility in
Syria by a relevant country, thereby damaging the
physical evidence of the Douma incident. Currently, the
Technical Secretariat is communicating with the Syrian
authorities with regard to such issues as the movement
of two chlorine cylinders. Until the investigation on the
movement of those cylinders reaches clear results, China
calls on all parties to remain calm, exercise restraint
and avoid recriminations and political interference.
In recent years, the OPCW has continued to show
a worrying tendency towards increased politicization.
Division and confrontation are replacing consultation
and cooperation. There are more and more votes driven
by political motives, and the spirit of consensus has
been depleted. That does not help the OPCW perform
its functions under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
China calls on the United Nations Secretariat and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to take effective measures
as soon as possible in order to push the parties to
strengthen dialogue and cooperation, return to the
tradition of consensus and putting true multilateralism
into practice in order to effectively safeguard the
authority and integrity of the Convention and advance the
final resolution of the Syrian chemical-weapons issue.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I will start by joining
others in thanking France for an excellent presidency
of the Security Council in the month of July. I wish
India every success in its presidency for the month of
August. You can count on our support, Mr. President,
for your work.
I would also like to thank the Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Markram,
for his briefing on the monthly report towards the full
elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons programme.
It is discouraging to note yet again that very little
progress has been made regarding the elimination
of chemical weapons in Syria. The Syrian Arab
Republic must fulfil its obligations in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013).

S/PV. 8830

We note the recent exchange of correspondence
between Director-General Arias and Syrian Foreign
Minister Mekdad regarding a proposed in-person
meeting to discuss relevant developments and a way
forward regarding the Secretariat’s mandated activities
in the Syrian Arabic Republic. Furthermore, we are
pleased to see that the issue of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) staff
member’s visa has been resolved. We regret, however,
that it took so long to do so.
It is troubling to note that two chlorine cylinders
related to the chemical-weapon incident that took
place in Douma in 2018 have been moved from where
investigators last inspected them. That is despite
the Secretariat’s advice to not open, move or alter
the containers or their contents without the consent
of the Secretariat. We echo the OPCW in requesting
the Syrian Arab Republic to provide all relevant
information regarding the movement, and any remains
of, the cylinders.
Similarly, it is disappointing to hear that the
deployment of the Declaration Assessment Team has
been postponed for nearly three months now. Regular
consultations are vital to maintaining consistent
cooperation, exchanges of information and technical
assistance. It is urgent that this issue be resolved.
Norway urges Syria to fully cooperate with the
OPCW and provide sufficient technical information or
explanations to close out the 20 outstanding issues. It is
critical that Syria complete the necessary measures in
order to lift the suspension of its rights and privileges
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We cannot continue to allow the international norm
against the use of chemical weapons to erode.
Let me conclude by reiterating Norway’s steadfast
confidence in the work of Director-General Arias,
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and their
commitment to ensuring that upholding this vital norm
is a priority.
The President: I shall now deliver this statement in
my capacity as the representative of India.
I thank the Deputy to the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Thomas Markram, for
today’s briefing. I also welcome the representatives of
Syria and Iran to today’s meeting.

21-2156613/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

We have taken note of the contents of the latest,
ninety-fourth monthly report of the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (S/2021/692, annex). We note that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria has agreed
to the proposal of the Director-General on convening
an in-person meeting, which will help in addressing
and clarifying concerns with regard to the OPCW’s
mandated activities. In that context, Syria’s positive
response to that proposal is a step in the right direction.
We also take note of the fact that the twenty-fifth
round of the Declaration Assessment Team related
bilateral consultations, originally scheduled to take
place on 18 May in Damascus, has not yet taken place.
We encourage Syria to continue its engagement and
cooperation with the OPCW so as to resolve all pending
issues expeditiously.
India views the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) as a unique, non-discriminatory disarmament
instrument that serves as a model for the elimination of
an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. We
attach high importance to the CWC and stand for its
full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation.
We support collective efforts by all to ensure that the
credibility and integrity of the Convention is maintained
to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstances. India has consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective, following
scrupulously the provisions and procedures embedded
in the Convention, and in conformity with the delicate
balance of power and responsibility enshrined
under it to establish facts and reach evidence-based
conclusions. We encourage the OPCW to strictly adhere
to those parameters.
Since we joined the Council in January, India
has been repeatedly cautioning against the possibility
of terrorist entities and individuals gaining access to
chemical weapons. We are concerned at the frequent
reports of the resurgence of terrorist groups in the
region. As we have learned from the consequences
of complacency against terrorism in the past, the
international community cannot afford to ignore
terrorist activities in Syria and the region.
When the Council came together last month by
unanimously voting in favour of resolution 2585 (2021),
14/17

04/08/2021

we showed the world that progress on the Syria file,
even after a decade of conflict and impasse, is still
possible, provided we were all willing to take that extra
step and work in tandem while taking cognizance of
each other’s concerns. Let us show the same resolve
with regard to the chemical-weapons discussions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement,
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have asked for the floor once again only to
express my surprise at the stance taken by our Western
colleagues in connection with the incident involving an
air strike and cylinders related to the incident in Douma.
I already spoke about this in my main statement, so I just
want to once again say that as we expected, a number
of Council members are disregarding the fact that a
certain third party destroyed that evidence and that
there were many questions in that respect concerning
the quality of the work being done by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Syria had no reason to seek their destruction, not if we
view the matter following basic common sense.
In fact, Damascus had every reason to be concerned
about the integrity of those cylinders if they were
transferred to The Hague after OPCW experts failed to
protect the phosphorus trichloride samples during the
twenty-second round of consultations, in October 2019.
Those samples mysteriously vanished; that happened in
a certified OPCW laboratory. I want to remind everyone
of that and note that the Secretariat never found out the
reason for the disappearance; in fact, it covered up that
disappearance for several months.
I wish also to touch on the statement of my Estonian
colleague, who mentioned the so-called poisoning of
Mr. Navalny. We are already used to the fact that our
Estonian colleagues sometimes have delayed reactions
to certain facts and events, so I should like to recall,
if he has not yet noticed, that the story concerning the
so-called poisoning of Mr. Navalny long ago became
toxic not for Russia but for our Western colleagues,
who continue to fail to respond to all of our questions.
Therefore, raising this issue, I think, does not work to
his advantage at this point, and I would advise him to
tell his colleagues in Tallinn to update their playbooks.
Time marches on.
21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country on presiding
over the Council this month. We are fully confident that
your wise stewardship will bring success to the work of
the Council.
It is deplorable that the Council’s debates have
become a platform for some Member States to level
false and misleading accusations against my country,
which we totally reject. We have repeatedly stressed
our condemnation of the use of chemical weapons and
note that we have fulfilled our obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. My delegation notes
the total disregard on the part of those countries of the
fact that the Syrian Arab Republic voluntarily joined
the Chemical Weapons Convention in 2013 and that
it has worked seriously, honestly and transparently to
fulfil its obligations under the Convention. That has led
to unprecedented success in the total destruction of its
stockpile of chemical weapons and production facilities.
It has become clear that those countries seek to
ignore the cooperation of recent years between Syria
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the close consultations with
its Technical Secretariat that have led to important
progress, demonstrating that Syria has fulfilled its
obligations under the Convention. Only a few technical
aspects remain outstanding in this process. However,
we continue to witness repeated attempts by the same
countries to use those technical aspects to serve their
own political purposes.
In its ninety-second monthly report (EC-98/P/NAT.1,
dated 16 July 2021), Syria reiterates that, since joining
the OPCW, it has been keen to cooperate with the
Technical Secretariat. Regrettably, Syria’s eight years
of cooperation have been totally disregarded by the
Technical Secretariat.
In that regard, I would like to point out that the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the
Syrian Arab Republic welcomed the 24 June invitation
by the Director-General of the OPCW to a highlevel meeting for an exchange of views. I would also
like to state that, on 6 July, the Minister expressed a
willingness to meet with him in person in Damascus,
at a date convenient for the Director-General. The
goal would be to exchange views, discuss the relevant

S/PV. 8830

developments pertaining to mechanisms and working
methods and agree on the way forward, in line with
Syria’s upholding its obligations under the Convention.
Syria fully rejects the campaigns launched by some
countries that call into question its cooperation with
the OPCW while they level false accusations against
Syria’s initial declaration. We condemn the fact that
those countries jump to false conclusions, especially
as some of the technical aspects being discussed are
related to divergent scientific interpretations, which
cannot be resolved swiftly or selectively.
My delegation condemns allegations in the
statements of the representatives of certain States
that Syria denied entry visas to the members of the
Declaration Assessment Team. My delegation notes
that the Team has conducted 24 rounds of consultations
in Syria so far. In none of those rounds has there ever
been an issue related to entry visas. We would like
members to know that, so far, the two parties have not
agreed on a date for the next visit of the Declaration
Assessment Team. It was so regrettable to hear the
Director-General of the OPCW say, in his June briefing
in this Chamber (see S/PV.8785), that the deployment
of the Team would be postponed, owing to the elevated
summer temperatures in Syria.
Addressing chemical terrorism presents a real
challenge. However, it begs the question as to why that
challenge is of no interest to some Western countries.
The increased number of attempts by some terrorist
groups, including Da’esh, Al-Nusra and other terrorist
groups affiliated with Al-Qaida, such as the White
Helmets, to use toxic chemical weapons and materials
in Syria is not of concern to any of these countries.
The same holds true with regard to those groups’ new
charade, whereby they use chemical weapons and
accuse the Syrian Arab Army of using them. That
does not seem to warrant action by those States. In that
regard, I note that the armed terrorist groups continue
their attacks every now and then against civilians and
the Syrian Arab Army forces in rural Homs, Hama,
Latakia and Idlib through the use of missiles, artillery
and drones, which makes the security situation in those
areas relatively unstable.
We daily continue to learn facts pertaining to the
OPCW report about the alleged Douma incident, which
clearly demonstrate that the high-level officials of the
OPCW have distorted the facts to correspond to the
narrative of the United States, France and Britain in

21-2156615/17

S/PV.8830

The situation in the Middle East

order to justify their tripartite aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial Integrity of Syria.
In his June briefing before the Council, the
Director-General of the OPCW, Mr. Arias, attempted
to undermine the credibility of the work done in the
original report about the investigation of the Douma
incident, where no evidence was found proving that
there was a chemical attack there. His attempt will not
succeed in restoring the credibility of the reports of the
Fact-Finding Mission. The Director-General’s dodging
and ignoring information and facts will not invalidate
the truth that there are questions that must be answered
and that there is a need to fixing deficiencies in the
Mission’s working methods. The OPCW DirectorGeneral’s resolve to ignore many facts and substantiated
scientific observations made by recognized experts is
not the right way to demonstrate the professionalism of
the work of the OPCW teams.
Concerning the two cylinders related to the alleged
Douma incident mentioned in the latest report of the
Director-General (S/2021/692, annex) and noted in the
statements of certain representatives, I would like to
clarify the following points.
First, on 8 June, one of the previously declared
sites was subjected to a brutal Israeli attack, which
led to the complete destruction of many rooms, fire
extinguishers, vehicles and the two chlorine cylinders
involved in the alleged Douma incident. Unfortunately,
the report of the Director-General and the statements
made by representatives of certain countries here
have ignored and failed to condemn that attack, while
remaining focused only on some technical aspects
Secondly, in November 2020, the OPCW
investigative team requested that the cylinders be
relocated to the OPCW headquarters. At the time, the
Syrian National Authority indicated that they could not
be shipped outside Syrian territory, as they are subject
to a judicial investigation. The two cylinders constitute
legal physical evidence in connection with the alleged
incident in which terrorists used chemical weapons,
resulting in the killing of innocent civilians.
Thirdly, in its note dated 18 May 2018, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat informed the Syrian Arab
Republic that the two cylinders should be preserved
pending a scientific and technical examination.
In November 2020, a group of experts from the
Technical Secretariat conducted such an assessment,
which sought to determine measurements, content,
16/17

04/08/2021

quantity, metal density, chemical stability, radiography
and photography. Syria has therefore fully upheld
its obligations in compliance with the Technical
Secretariat note. The Technical Secretariat has not
requested Syria to do any further action.
The disease of politicization suffered by the OPCW
has alienated it from the technical nature of its work and
made it lose much of its credibility. Instead of being an
honest guardian of the implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, it has become a tool for some
countries to target a State party to the Convention. It
must therefore be restored to the right track and return
to play its normal role as a key and unbiased pillar in
the non-proliferation regime of chemical weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I sincerely
congratulate you, Mr. President, on presiding over the
Security Council this month, and assure you of our
full support.
The Islamic Republic of Iran once again reaffirms
the importance of preserving the authority of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
That, indeed, requires the full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention,
as well as the impartial, independent and professional
work of the OPCW. Those are of extreme importance
with regard to the application of the Convention to Syria.
As we have said time and again, the issue has
unfortunately been politicized by a certain group
of countries, resulting in the undermining of the
Convention and its effective implementation, as well as
of the credibility of the OPCW. In addition, we missed
the opportunity to properly address the issue over the
past several years. Nevertheless, it is never too late to
mend. In that context, we positively note the invitation
extended by the OPCW Director-General to the Foreign
Minister of Syria to communicate at a high level. We
also acknowledge the fact that the Syrian Foreign
Minister has welcomed that invitation and expressed
his readiness to meet with the Director-General of the
OPCW in Damascus at any time he deems appropriate.
The objective of such a high-level meeting would be to
discuss relevant working methods and modalities and,
ultimately, to agree on the steps that must be taken by
the Syrian Arab Republic in the implementation of its
obligations under the Convention.
21-21566

04/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The Islamic Republic of Iran once again recognizes
the very serious efforts made by the Syrian Arab
Republic over the past several years in implementing
its obligations as a State party to the Convention. We
also acknowledge the cooperation of that country
with the OPCW, despite restrictions imposed by war
and threats by terrorist groups, not to mention the
coronavirus disease pandemic. Supporting the new
approach of the OPCW and Syria to conducting highlevel dialogue, we encourage both sides to engage
constructively in the process. It is also obvious that
the success of the process requires a calm political
atmosphere, whose preservation is the responsibility of
international community. Furthermore, supporting the
process can ultimately lead to overcoming the current
challenges in the Syrian chemical dossier that cannot
be addressed otherwise.

S/PV. 8830

As a major victim in contemporary history of the
most systematic use of chemical weapons, Iran again
condemns in the strongest possible terms the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstances. We also call for the universality of the
Convention and, in that context, stress that the Israeli
regime must be compelled to immediately accede to
the Convention.
Finally, the Islamic Republic of Iran stands ready
to actively and constructively contribute to realizing
the objective of the Convention and to promoting the
authority of the OPCW.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to closed consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

21-2156617/17
