UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3277
15 September 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Wednesday, 15 September 1993, at 7.30 p.m.

President:

(Venezuela)

Brazil
Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
United States of America

Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO
Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. LADSOUS
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. E. YAMAMOTO
Mr. ZAHID
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Taylhardat

Mr. RICHARDSON
Mr. GREY

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.

93-86545 (E)

S/PV.3277
2

The meeting was called to order at 7.30 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN ANGOLA
FURTHER REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE UNITED NATIONS ANGOLA
VERIFICATION MISSION II (UNAVEM II) (S/26434 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I should like to inform

the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Angola,
Egypt, Nigeria and Portugal in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.

In conformity with the

usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Moura (Angola) took a place at
the Council table; Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Gambari (Nigeria) and Mr. Catarino
(Portugal) took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

The Security Council

will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the further report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II),
documents S/26434 and Add.1.

Members of the Council also have before them

documents S/26445, which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should also like to draw the attention of the members of the Council to
document S/26410, which contains the text of a letter dated 3 September 1993
from the Chargé d’affaires, a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The first speaker is the Minister for External
Excellency Mr. Venancio De Moura.
make his statement.

Relations of Angola, His

I welcome His Excellency and invite him to

S/PV.3277
3-5

Mr. DE MOURA (Angola) (Spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by
the delegation):

First of all, I should like to congratulate you,

Mr. President, on your election as President of the Security Council for this
month.

Your presidency began a few days before the beginning of the forty-

eighth session of the General Assembly, which will once again deliberate on the
important problems of today’s international politics, namely, the areas of
restructuring and revitalization of the United Nations; the resolution of
regional conflicts that prevail throughout the world and affect peace, as well
as the socio-economic development of our people; complex financial issues
bearing on the survival of the United Nations and on sustaining United Nations
peace operations; and it will also analyse and take decisions to safeguard the
administrative situation of the United Nations.
I cannot allow the opportunity to pass without expressing our profound
gratitude for the efforts undertaken by Mrs. Madeleine Korbel Albright, the
United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations, during her term.
The present meeting, under your presidency, will analyse the current situation
in Angola, as well as adopt energetic and efficient measures to restore peace in
that United Nations Member State, based on the Bicesse Accords signed on
19 May 1991 in Portugal, which were endorsed by the Security Council.
Sixty days ago, on 15 July 1993, we were together in this same Chamber
after the unanimous adoption of resolution 851 (1993).

Since that time, no

progress has been made in spite of the efforts made by the Angolan Government,
the international community and especially by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, to end the hostilities
unleashed by Jonas Savimbi and his radical and militarist group.

The resumption

of the negotiations process, based on the Bicesse Accords, the Abidjan Protocol,
and the resolutions of this great assembly, did not take place owing to the
refusal of UNITA.

S/PV.3277
6
(Mr. De Moura, Angola)
As members know, my Government made several concessions in Abidjan out of
respect for President Houphouët-Boigny.

Those concessions were praised by the

international community as proof of the Angolan Government’s maturity and
flexibility.

The concessions were contrary to several principles of Angolan

judicial and constitutional law.

In making them, we sought to put an end to the

suffering the Angolan people has endured since October 1992 and to impede the
destruction of the social and economic infrastructure of the country by
Mr. Jonas Savimbi’s UNITA.
The sad reality which confronts us in Angola is that Mr. Savimbi, after
having lost the elections, imposed a third cruel and devastating war on the
Angolan people.

He is acting like a poor loser, an ambitious and power-hungry

person who, unable to win at the ballot box, now wishes to gain power through
force of arms.
Because of this situation, more than 1,000 deaths occur daily in Angola,
according to the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
infant mortality rate in the world:

We have the highest

292 children die every day in Angola.

We

have the highest rate of amputees per capita in the world, and nearly 3 million
displaced persons who are at this moment seeking refuge in government-controlled
zones.

As if this were not enough, between October 1992 and today, there have

been more than 100,000 deaths in Angola.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Angola,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, has stated:
"The military situation is difficult and the humanitarian situation is
catastrophic.

It is the cause of the critical political and social

situation in which Angola lives, which has no equivalent in the present
situations in Somalia, Bosnia, Cambodia or even some countries of the
former Soviet Union."
As the members of the Security Council realize, the situation described in
that statement results from the fact that UNITA has not fulfilled any of the
Security Council’s resolutions.

In fact, UNITA actions have increased since the

last meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Angola.
to conquer more of the national territory has grown.

Their ambition

They have intensified

their attacks and reinforced their presence in the province of Bie, with the aim

S/PV.3277
7-10
(Mr. De Moura, Angola)
of taking over Kuito City, where citizens of Angola and foreigners are dying not
only because of the war waged by UNITA on those towns, which have been under
siege for more than eight months, but also because of the famine that has
reached such proportions that people are obliged to nourish themselves with
human flesh in order to survive.
In the face of this tragedy, this holocaust, the Angolan people whose
bodies suffer the horrors of this war every day have the right to ask how long
this important body, responsible for world peace and security, will allow the
UNITA leader to perpetuate with impunity such horrendous massacres, which fly in
the face of the human conscience and discredit and insult the Security Council
and the international community.
Today, we can say unhesitatingly that the time has come to impose mandatory
sanctions on UNITA in order to force them to stop the war and resume a frank and
serious dialogue which will not only bring lasting peace to the martyred Angolan
people but also enable UNITA itself to participate in the democratic process and
in the social and economic reconstruction of the country.
What the Angola people desire and hope for from the Security Council is the
adoption of more energetic and effective measures to put an end to the tragic
situation in the country, a situation for which Mr. Savimbi is solely
responsible.
In accordance with paragraph 12 of resolution 851 (1993) of 15 July 1993,
the Security Council, acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
should in our view adopt the following measures:
First, impose a mandatory total embargo on the sale or supply of arms and
all related military matériel to UNITA, and on any other form of military
assistance to that organization.

Second, require that all countries, in

particular those in the region or neighbours of Angola, prohibit the sale or
supply of petroleum or petroleum products to UNITA and prohibit any type of
logistical support or transit that would permit UNITA to continue its military
activities.

Third, close UNITA offices and any other form of UNITA

representation and ban any political and propagandistic activity by the
organization in any country.

Fourth, seize and freeze existing bank accounts

under the name of UNITA, its delegations or representatives, or under the name
of its leaders.

S/PV.3277
11
(Mr. De Moura, Angola)
Fifth, take appropriate measures under the provisions of Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter to guarantee humanitarian assistance to the needy
population throughout the country.
Sixth, recognize the legitimate rights of the Angolan Government and
welcome all assistance to this Government in restoring peace, defending its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and the consolidation of democracy.
Seventh, demand that UNITA respect human rights and unconditionally free
all Angolan citizens and foreigners being held captive.
Eighth, call upon all Member States of the United Nations, United Nations
organizations and non-governmental organizations to contribute generously all
types of assistance to the humanitarian emergency plan of assistance to Angola.
These measures could constitute a positive turning-point for the situation
in Angola.

Because of all that has been tolerated and as long as the Angolan

people continue to live through this tragedy, the current situation could be
interpreted as weakness or inadequacy on the part of this Organization, whose
credibility and authority must be maintained and strengthened.
The measures we are proposing are within members’ reach.
needed is the political will to take action.

All that is

To refuse to do so, to delay or

even to wait until tomorrow would only be turning a blind eye to your duties.
This would set a bad example for the rising young democracies of Africa and the
world.

We are therefore convinced that the Security Council will reflect the

conscience and legitimate aspirations of the international community.

It will

not allow itself today to be ridiculed by a number of divisive manoeuvres that
the leader of UNITA is now testing with the objective of deceiving international
public opinion and avoiding a firm condemnation from the Security Council as
well as the adoption of mandatory sanctions.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank His Excellency

the Minister of External Relations for Angola for the kind words he addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria.
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

I invite him to take a

S/PV.3277
12

Mr. GAMBARI (Nigeria):

Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to

welcome you back to New York and to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of September.

I have no doubt

that with your wealth of diplomatic experience the tasks before the Council this
month are indeed in very capable and very competent hands.
I should also like to convey, through you, my delegation’s thanks to your
predecessor, Ambassador Madeleine Albright of the United States, for the very
efficient manner in which she discharged her duties as President of the Council
for the month of August.
May I also warmly welcome the Minister of External Relations of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. Venancio De Moura.

My delegation congratulates him for his lucid

and forthright statement before this Council.
My delegation warmly congratulates the Secretary-General for his additional
report on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) contained
in document S/26434 of 13 September 1993.
analysis and by its comprehensiveness.

We are impressed by its excellent

In this connection, our thanks also go

to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Angola, Mr. Blondin Beye,
whose zeal and enthusiasm for results under even the most difficult
circumstances in Angola have remained undaunted.
For us in Nigeria, Angola occupies a very special place in our national
consciousness and affections.

The Government and the people of Nigeria remain

firmly committed to the territorial integrity of Angola and the well-being of
its citizens.

Nigeria has demonstrated its commitment time and time again to

the search for the peaceful settlement of conflicts throughout the world,
especially those in Africa.
That is why the Nigerian delegation is deeply concerned at the
deterioration of the security and political situation in the brotherly country
of Angola.

We are saddened that, in spite of the untiring efforts that have

been made internationally, peace continues to be as elusive as ever.

In

particular, we are sorely disturbed by the fact that, owing to the
intensification of fighting in several parts of the country, the administration
of humanitarian services has been most adversely affected - a situation that has

S/PV.3277
13
(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
further compounded the hardships and suffering of the masses of people in the
country.
It is a matter of serious regret to my delegation to note, as succinctly
underscored in the Secretary-General’s report:
" ... some 3 million people, particularly the most vulnerable population
groups - children, women and the elderly - are suffering from the
consequences of the conflict." (S/26434, para. 20).
The report further states that
"It is widely estimated that 1,000 persons die every day from the direct or
indirect effects of the war, the highest fatality rate of any conflict in
the world." (ibid.)
In light of the dreadful situation prevailing in Angola, the international
community has a duty and an obligation to take immediate and drastic action.

It

must not allow itself to be held hostage to the intransigence of a party to the
conflict determined to prolong the suffering of the ordinary people of Angola
and sabotage international commitments to peace and a peaceful process.

The

people of Angola do not deserve to continue to live in a perpetual state of fear
for their lives and for their property.

They too, like the rest of humanity,

deserve to be given an opportunity to live in peace and to pursue development.
It is in this context that the Nigerian delegation welcomes the present
draft resolution under consideration by the Council and recommends it for
unanimous adoption.

It is important that the international community, embodied

in the United Nations, send out the strongest possible signals to the rebel
party in Angola, UNITA, that enough is enough and that its patience is running
out.
UNITA must henceforth make visible and credible efforts to assist rather
than impede the peace process in Angola.

UNITA, and in particular its

leadership, must take responsibility for the prolongation of the conflict and
the attendant misery and death which have been visited on the people of Angola.
At this point in time, when old antagonists are reaching agreements to resolve
their conflicts, at a time when most societies and nations, in the aftermath of
the cold war, seem more disposed and more determined to work for peace, elements
in Angola must not be allowed to continue to undermine international efforts to

S/PV.3277
14-15
(Mr. Gambari, Nigeria)
establish peace in the country.

It should be made crystal-clear to UNITA that

henceforth the international community will not allow it to continue to toy with
the lives of its countrymen and women by procrastinating on the peace process.
They need to be clearly told that no legitimate alternative exists to the
pursuit of peace in their country outside of the framework of the Acordos de Paz
and the United Nations.
Permit me to conclude by extending Nigeria’s appreciation to the ongoing
efforts which the Organization of African Unity as a body has been making to
advance the peace process in Angola.

We also wish to commend the efforts of

individuals, States and of other groups helping to achieve the same goal.
We are convinced that the graduated measures contained in the present draft
resolution, including, in particular, the imposition of sanctions, are critical
to galvanizing the peace process and achieving lasting peace in Angola.

We

therefore urge all members of the international community to cooperate in the
full implementation of the terms of the new resolution, and at the same time,
appeal to the Government of Angola, and in particular to UNITA, to resume
promptly negotiations aimed at the early and peaceful resolution of the conflict
in the country.

The people of Angola have surely suffered enough.

S/PV.3277
16

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Nigeria for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.

I invite him to take a

place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. ELARABY (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):

Allow me first,

Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month.

I am pleased to see you in this high position, because I know very

well your abilities and diplomatic experience, and I am confident that the
Council is in good hands.
I also wish to express our appreciation of the United States Ambassador’s
great efforts and able guidance of the Council during her presidency last month.
It is a great honour for the delegation of Egypt to address the Council
once again, on behalf of the present chairmanship of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), regarding the question of Angola, which causes the deepest concern
on the African continent.

We would like to express the support and solidarity

of the continent as a whole for the efforts of the Government of Angola to
establish peace and security.
We are happy to welcome the Foreign Minister of Angola and to thank him for
his clear and comprehensive statement.

His observations a few minutes ago

eloquently and precisely described an extremely serious situation, resulting
from the continued fighting and the increased lack of trust which impede the
realization of meaningful political reconciliation in Angola.

The situation

threatens grave consequences for the peace and security of the region.

It has

led to a deterioration at every political and military level, and the
humanitarian dimensions have become very tragic, especially since, as is stated
in the Secretary-General’s report, the fatality rate has become the highest of
any conflict in the world.
The continued deterioration of the serious situation in Angola - despite
the diplomatic efforts and initiatives of the Government of Angola, the efforts
at the international level by the Secretary-General and at the African level by
the OAU, as well as the efforts of African countries - makes it important that
the Security Council face up to the situation by taking specific, effective
action.

S/PV.3277
17
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
Here I must mention the Declaration of the OAU Summit Meeting in Cairo last
June and the efforts of the OAU Ad Hoc Committee on Southern Africa, as well as
the initiatives of the Heads of neighbouring States.
The three observer countries have continuously made parallel efforts
complementing the African efforts, supported by the ceaseless efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to move the peace process
forward, efforts which we respect very much.
Despite the multiplicity of peace initiatives, the latest report of the
Secretary-General concerning the situation in Angola causes more concern.

The

fighting is still continuing openly, and it is intensifying all over the
country, resulting in heavy loss of life and the complete destruction of the
infrastructure.
Since the signing of the Bicesse Accords the Angolan Government has
undertaken responsibility for establishing peace and security for the people of
Angola.

It welcomed the participation of all political movements, including

UNITA, in the formation of a Government of national reconciliation.

The

Government also tried in vain to urge UNITA to respect the legitimacy, and
accept the results, of last September’s elections as a basis for achieving a
political settlement in Angola.

As we know, UNITA’s answer was complete

rejection, which is regarded as proof of non-compliance with the principles of
democracy and complete disregard of the interests of the people of Angola as
well as complete defiance of the will of the international community.
In resolution 851 (1993) of 15 July the Security Council gave UNITA a
chance to participate in the national efforts to achieve peace within the
framework of legitimacy and democracy in order to implement the peace
agreements, but UNITA did not observe that resolution.

Therefore, the Council

must deal with the crisis by choosing the right option and taking the necessary
measures to prompt UNITA to abide by the international will.
The delegation of Egypt supports the draft resolution which the Security
Council will adopt today and agrees with the specific measures taken against
UNITA under Chapter VII of the Charter.

We also welcome the extension of the

mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) and the

S/PV.3277
18-20
(Mr. Elaraby, Egypt)
Council’s willingness to take urgent measures to extend the presence of the
United Nations in Angola if tangible progress in the peace process is achieved.
Finally, my delegation would like to emphasize the importance of
consultation and continuous coordination between the United Nations and the OAU
in efforts to put an end to the Angolan crisis, and expresses Egypt’s
willingness to take part in all efforts to achieve peace, in addition to its
participation in UNAVEM II and its contribution in providing urgent humanitarian
assistance to create appropriate conditions to put an end to the great suffering
of the people of this fraternal African country.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Egypt for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Portugal.
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

I invite him to take a

S/PV.3277
21

Mr. CATARINO (Portugal):

Before I begin, please allow me to

congratulate you, Sir, on the manner in which you have conducted the work of the
Council during the current month.

Despite your recent arrival, your expertise

and diplomatic skills have smoothly and efficiently guided the deliberations of
the Council.

I should also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the

thoughtful and productive term of your predecessor,
Ambassador Madeleine Albright, as President of this Council.
I should also like to salute the Minister of External Relations of Angola,
Dr. Venancio De Moura.

His presence here today attests to the importance of

this meeting.
Again we are gathered here to address the situation in Angola, where war
continues to intensify and peace continues to be elusive.

When the Council

adopted resolution 851 (1993) it clearly laid down the terms for peace in
Angola.

It condemned UNITA for its continuing military actions and demanded

that this movement cease such actions immediately and accept unreservedly the
Acordos de Paz and the results of the September 1992 elections, which the
international community has recognized, in general terms, as free and fair.
In paragraph 12 of resolution 851 (1993), the Council expressed its
readiness to consider the imposition of measures to prevent UNITA from pursuing
its military actions unless, by 15 September, the Secretary-General had reported
that an effective cease-fire had been established and that agreement had been
reached on the full implementation of the Acordos de Paz and relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

Today, 15 September, UNITA has still not

complied with the Council’s demands.

The Security Council must now act

accordingly.
The United Nations, especially through the invaluable work of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Miss Margaret Anstee and now
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, have spared no efforts to bring UNITA back to the
negotiating table.

The observer countries to the Angolan peace process have

consistently supported and closely cooperated with those United Nations efforts.
First it was in Addis Ababa I and then in Addis Ababa II - to no avail.
Later it was in Abidjan.

The hopes created by the establishment of a set of

additional principles in Abidjan were once again dashed by UNITA’s refusal to

S/PV.3277
22
(Mr. Catarino, Portugal)
accept those principles.

On the contrary, UNITA pursued and intensified its war

option.
We fully support any effort to persuade the leadership of UNITA to return
to the negotiating table.

We believe that the solution of the Angolan conflict

will have to be found in a negotiated settlement leading to genuine national
reconciliation.

But we fail to see any concrete evidence that Mr. Savimbi feels

the same way.
After the signature of the Acordos de Paz, the Angolan people had the
legitimate hope of living in peace and prosperity in a democratic environment
after expressing its wishes at the ballot box.

The period between Bicesse and

the elections was a flourishing time, in terms not only of economic activity
but, more importantly, of political development, with a significant number of
parties appearing on the scene.

It was a time of peace and hope.

By not

accepting the results of the elections, UNITA has denied all these expectations.
The tragic humanitarian situation in Angola is worsening every day and by
far surpasses in agony, death and suffering all other present arenas of
confrontation.

The United Nations attempts to alleviate the suffering brought

on by the conflict.

It is unacceptable to allow the continued disruption of the

distribution of humanitarian relief.
At this point, we should like to draw attention to the tragedy of all
foreign citizens trapped in areas of conflict in Angola.

We demand the

immediate release of all foreigners held captive by UNITA.
We support the draft resolution before the Security Council, and we hope it
will lead to a prompt resumption of fruitful negotiations carried out in good
faith and leading to the full implementation of the Acordos de Paz, the
acceptance of the results of the September 1992 elections, the additional
principles reached in Abidjan and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.
This draft resolution indicates clearly the resolve of the Security Council
to take action and the determination of the international community to bring
peace to Angola.
of war in Angola.

We sincerely hope that it will mark the beginning of the end

S/PV.3277
23-25
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Portugal for his kind words addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it

that that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Before putting the draft resolution to the vote, I shall call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. de ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil):

As we meet once again to consider and

take action on the situation in Angola, we cannot but be extremely concerned and
distressed at the seriousness of the situation in that African and South
Atlantic country to which Brazil is so closely linked.
The persistence of armed conflict in Angola, which has brought about a
humanitarian crisis of tragic proportions, calls for urgent and decisive action
on the part of the international community - the Security Council in particular to reinstate the peace process based on the implementation of the Acordos de
Paz and of the resolutions of the Security Council.
The report submitted by the Secretary-General informs us that up to 1,000
people have been dying every day in Angola from causes related directly or
indirectly to the conflict.

That is a stark reminder of the need for the

Security Council to take strong measures to bring to an end that destructive
fratricidal conflict.

Ours is a heavy responsibility.

In its previous resolutions the Security Council has made it clear beyond
all doubt that there is already a political framework for peace in Angola.

That

framework is spelled out in the Acordos de Paz and the peace process that had
developed on that basis, including the democratic elections held in 1992 under
United Nations supervision.

The parameters elaborated last May in Abidjan

provided important elements for putting the peace process back on track, with a
view to the full implementation of the Acordos de Paz.
The legal and political framework is already there.

The continued

readiness of the Government of Angola to reach a peaceful settlement has already
been recognized by the Council.

The statement made in this Chamber today by the

Minister of External Relations of Angola, Mr. Venancio De Moura, is an eloquent
illustration of that disposition.

S/PV.3277
26
(Mr. de Araujo Castro, Brazil)
The only element lacking is a clear display of political will on the part
of UNITA, translated into practical and unequivocal measures, to accept that
legal and political framework and to work concretely within that context to
allow the peace process to be resumed.

By logical implication - as indicated in

the draft resolution before us - that requires abandoning a strategy of military
actions aimed at seizing or holding on to territory by force.
We have noted with interest recent statements by UNITA that it would be
ready to work towards peace.

It is essential that such statements be translated

into concrete steps fully in accordance with the resolutions of the Security
Council.
As we have stressed on previous occasions, the door remains open for UNITA
to play a constructive role, now and in the years to come, on the basis of
peaceful negotiations and democratic participation.

We continue to hope that

UNITA will assume its democratic and political role in building a peaceful
future for the Angolan nation.
At the same time, however, it is no less important that the UNITA
leadership understand that the United Nations will not turn a blind eye to
violations of Security Council resolutions and that this Organization would be
betraying its most basic principles if it were to allow force to prevail over
the rule of law.
It was thus appropriate that the Security Council should determine, as it
did last July, that the military campaign carried out by UNITA has to stop and
that, if necessary, the Council would take effective measures to make it stop.
In resolution 851 (1993), paragraph 12, the Council affirmed that it would be
ready to impose sanctions against UNITA by today, 15 September, unless the
Secretary-General reported that:

first, an effective cease-fire had been

established; and, secondly, that agreement had been reached for the full
implementation of the Acordos de Paz and the resolutions of the Security
Council.
Much to our disappointment, those conditions are clearly not met.

In spite

of the continuous efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye - and those efforts deserve our highest
praise - an effective cease-fire has not been established and no

S/PV.3277
27
(Mr. de Araujo Castro, Brazil)
agreement has yet been reached for the full implementation of the Acordos de Paz
and of the resolutions of the Council.
Under those circumstances, the Council could not fail to exercise its
responsibilities.

The draft resolution before the Council includes the

imposition of strong measures:

the prohibition of all sale or supply to UNITA

of any kind of arms and military equipment, or military assistance

as well as

of petroleum and petroleum products.
The scope of these measures reflects the goal at which they are aimed:
bringing to an end the military actions of UNITA, as a result of which a threat
to international peace and security is determined to exist in Angola.

The

strength of these measures reflects the firm determination of the Council to
ensure that UNITA will respect the Council’s resolutions and will take the
concrete steps that are required for the peace process to be resumed.
Brazil is convinced that the imposition of such strong measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter is an extraordinary decision that should only be
applied in circumstances that are particularly serious.
this is unfortunately the case now in Angola.

It is our belief that

In that spirit we give our full

support to the draft resolution under consideration.
We wish to express our appreciation for the efforts carried out by the
Secretary-General and by his Special Representative, which continue to be
essential for the solution of the Angolan crisis.

These efforts, undertaken to

ensure respect for the resolutions of the Security Council, thus carrying the
weight of the Council’s authority, can, and we hope will, be successful.

The

decisions to be taken today will further underline that fact and will, we are
convinced, contribute to enhancing the effectiveness of those efforts.
The draft resolution provides for a number of steps that may or may not be
taken by the Security Council in the coming weeks or months.

There can be no

doubt that the Council will continue to follow the matter closely and that it
will be ready to take even stronger measures, should it be necessary.
But it is our sincere hope that the next time we meet to consider this most
serious question, it will be in a significantly changed panorama, in which we
will be able to identify much brighter prospects for peace in Angola.

S/PV.3277
28

Mr. LI Zhaoxing

(China) (interpretation from Chinese):

The signing

of the Acordos de Paz by the Angolan Government and UNITA in May 1991 and the
general elections held in Angola with the assistance of the international
community in September last year have brought the hope of peace to the warridden people there.

The Secretary-General and his Special Representative, as

well as the front-line African countries, have made tremendous efforts for the
settlement of the Angolan question and important progress had once been made in
the process of finding a political settlement.

However, owing to UNITA’s

refusal to accept the results of the general elections and its non-observance of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the situation in Angola continues to
deteriorate, escalating the civil war and forcing a huge exodus of refugees into
neighbouring States.

As a result, the work of the United Nations Angola

Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) is confronted with enormous difficulties, which
have affected peace and security in the region.

The Chinese delegation

therefore wishes to express its deep concern and anxiety.
The Chinese delegation has followed closely the development of the
situation in Angola and is of the view that Angola’s national reconciliation can
only be realized and the differences resolved by negotiation and dialogue.

Any

attempts to win by force are short-sighed and undesirable.
We hold that the current sanctions to be imposed by the Security Council on
UNITA are measures taken in line with the special circumstances in Angola.

The

sanctions themselves are not the end, but rather only the means designed to urge
UNITA to resume negotiations with the Angolan Government as soon as possible and
bring the civil war to an end at an early date.

We therefore hope that the

envisaged sanctions will help bring about a genuine cease-fire at an early date
and agreement on the comprehensive implementation of the Acordos de Paz and the
Security Council resolutions so that the Security Council will be able to
consider the lifting of the sanctions in due course.
We strongly call on UNITA to cease forthwith all hostile activities, to
withdraw from the occupied territories, to ensure the safe withdrawal of foreign
nationals from the areas under its control and the smooth conduct of
humanitarian assistance.

We urge both parties in Angola, especially UNITA, to

cooperate fully with UNAVEM II, comprehensively to implement the Acordos de Paz

S/PV.3277
29-30
(Li Zhaoxing, China)
and the relevant Security Council resolutions and to create the necessary
conditions for the advancement of the peace process and the realization of
national reconciliation.

We approve of UNAVEM II’s continued efforts in the

settlement of the Angolan question and support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation on the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM II.

Based on the above

considerations, the Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
Approximately a year ago, on 29 and 30 September 1992, elections were held in
Angola under the supervision of the United Nations, which presupposed the
initiation of a path towards democracy and national reconciliation in the
country.

The wishes of the Angolan people were freely expressed at the ballot

box and the international community trusted that the lengthy fratricidal
conflict was to become a part of the past of Angola.

Unfortunately that was not

the case, and we all know who bears the responsibility.
Time and again the Security Council has had roundly to condemn UNITA’s
rejection of the outcome of the elections, its failure to participate in the
political institutions that were established on the basis of said elections, its
withdrawal from the new armed forces of Angola, its capture of territory by
force and, the violation of the cease-fire and the resumption of hostilities.
At the same time, the Security Council has placed its hope time and again
in the continuous efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in Angola to find a lasting solution to the conflict, based on
the peace accords and the Security Council resolutions.

S/PV.3277
31
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
The Ad-Hoc Committee of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), as well as
several African heads of State, have evinced a praiseworthy determination to
expedite resumption of the peace process in Angola.
The three observer states of the peace process - the United States,
Portugal and Russia - have spared no efforts for the same cause.

Unfortunately,

the most recent report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Angola does
not hold out much hope for a rapid solution to the country’s tragic situation,
owing to the intransigence of UNITA.
The draft resolution we are to adopt today opens a new chapter in the
conduct of the United Nations in Angola and its commitment to achieve lasting,
effective peace on the basis of the electoral results and in full compliance
with the Acordos de Paz and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Exactly two months ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 851 (1993),
which set down the bases for future Council action if, by today, the negotiating
process, under the auspices of the United Nations, aimed at ensuring full
compliance with the Acordos de Paz had not been reactivated.

Regretfully, we

must acknowledge that the hopes of the international community have been dashed
and its continuous efforts have not been heeded.

Our patience has come to an

end.
My delegation has also taken note of the statement made by the three
observer countries in the peace process in Angola, which at their Lisbon meeting
on 10 September deemed it necessary to recommend the adoption of measures to
ensure that the international community prevent UNITA from pursuing war.
For the aforementioned reasons, Spain considers that the time has come to
adopt appropriate measures vis-à-vis UNITA’s systematic violation of resolutions
adopted by the Council and accords that have been reached.
The Council must act in faith with itself.

It is preparing to carry out

the provisions announced in paragraph 12 of resolution 851 (1993), in other
words, to act under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter in order to impose
sanctions to prevent the supply of weapons, military matériel and petroleum to
UNITA. These are the initial measures to be taken in response to the
intransigence of an organization that refuses to acknowledge the freely
expressed will of the Angolan people and which continues to pursue a civil war

S/PV.3277
32
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
in which tens of thousands of human lives are being lost, thus causing the
greatest human tragedy in the world at this time.
The mechanisms for achieving a just and lasting peace in Angola have been
clearly defined in the Acordos de Paz and in previous resolutions adopted by the
Council.

The tragedy that is afflicting the Angolan people is due to the

irresponsibility of UNITA and its leadership in refusing to recognize the
results of the democratic elections, violating concluded accords and continuing
the civil war at all costs.
We the members of the Council have been informed that the leader of UNITA,
Mr. Savimbi, stands ready to declare a unilateral cease-fire and return to the
negotiating table.

This news will be encouraging if and when his disposition

manifests itself in concrete facts with the establishment of an effective ceasefire throughout the territory and an agreement between the parties regarding the
full implementation of the Acordos de Paz and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.
In the draft resolution we are about to adopt, the Security Council has
provided a 10-day delay for the implementation of the sanctions on UNITA in
order, through the efforts of the Secretary-General, to allow UNITA one more
chance to return to the negotiating table and take effective, concrete steps to
implement the Acordos de Paz.

Otherwise, once that time has elapsed, the draft

resolution calls for the implementation of sanctions which my Government deems
necessary, and which should be fully carried out.
Spain would like to acknowledge the integrity evinced by the Angolan
Government in this very difficult situation as it cooperates with the efforts of
the international community to reach a lasting and effective end to the
conflict.

The Government of President dos Santos, represented here by the

Minister of External Relations, Mr. De Moura, has concretely manifested the
confidence it places in the international community’s ability to improve the
situation of its citizens.
My delegation is also aware of our collective obligation to help the
Angolan people achieve those objectives.

Thus, in today’s draft resolution, the

extension of the mandate of United Nations Angola Verification Mission

S/PV.3277
33-35
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
(UNAVEM II) is approved, and the need for both parties, particularly UNITA, to
allow the unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance is emphasized.
The imposition of sanctions on a transgressor is never an agreeable task
for the Security Council.

I would like to conclude by expressing the desire

that we will soon be in a position to reconsider the measures to be adopted
today, because that would mean that UNITA had seen the light of reason and that
the Angolan people were returning to the path of peace and reconciliation,
liberty and development, just as the Haitian people recently did.
Mr. JESUS (Cape Verde):
Sir, presiding over this Council.

It is a great pleasure for me to see you,
The contribution you have already made to our

deliberations is an indication that the Council’s work will be fruitful this
month.

I would also like to express my appreciation for the skilful and

friendly manner in which Ambassador Albright conducted the work of this Council
last month.

I congratulate her for the good results the Council achieved in the

course of her presidency.
My delegation welcomes the presence here today of the Minister of External
Relations of Angola, Mr. Venancio De Moura.
Once again, we are considering the situation in Angola.

We regret to note

that, despite all the efforts expended, no progress has been made.

In spite of

the many attempts made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
nothing has happened to further the peace process since Abidjan.
As we have noted in the past, there is no military solution to the Angolan
conflict.

It is time for the peace efforts to lead to a serious approach.

We

sincerely hope that the draft resolution we are about to consider will be a
turning-point in the efforts of this Council to assist the Angolan people in
achieving peace.
The measures under Chapter VII now being considered are not an end in
themselves.

The purpose is not to punish anyone.

The purpose is to demonstrate

the determination of this Council to bring peace to Angola, and to that end to
send a clear message that the negotiating efforts of the United Nations have to
be taken seriously, now more than ever.

S/PV.3277
36
(Mr. Jesus, Cape Verde)
Too much destruction has occurred in the country.
taken place unnecessarily.
be ended.

Too many killings have

It is time that the suffering of the Angolan people

We hope that, in the intervening period of 10 days from now until the

entry into force of these measures, a cease-fire will be reached and enough
progress will be made to put the peace process back on track.
It is because we believe that the draft resolution before us can play a
positive role in promoting a solution to the current difficulties that my
delegation will cast its vote in favour.
Mr. OLHAYE (Djibouti):

I wish at the outset to express to you our

warmest congratulations on your assumption - at very short notice, if I may say
so - of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of September.
Indeed, your cautious and calculated but effective approach to guiding our work
is already yielding valuable results.
I should also like to express our deep gratitude to Ambassador Albright of
the United States for the effective manner in which she guided our work last
month and for her candor and versatility.
I salute the Minister for External Relations of Angola, whose presence here
today has undoubtedly strengthened the resolve of the international community to
refocus on the untenable and miserable state of affairs prevailing in his
country.
The report of the Secretary-General of 13 September 1993 is an informative
and suggestive update of the Angolan tragedy and underscores the need for the
Council to implement concrete measures as soon as possible.

We are all

conversant with the agreement worked out between the Government of Angola and
UNITA leading to the Acordos de Paz and the fair and free elections held a year
ago in Angola, and the additional principles reached in Abidjan.
As the Secretary-General indicates, the Angolan conflict has been the focus
of an unimaginable level of international activity, so great has been the
concern at the amount of human suffering and physical destruction in that
country.

With the signed accords, freely arrived at, and the elections of

September 1992, there was a general presumption that peace would prevail, that
words given would be followed by deeds and that Angola would at last begin the
process of true reconciliation and development.

Probably no one accepted this

S/PV.3277
37
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
promise more than the Government, which proceeded to significantly disarm and
demobilize its forces in anticipation of the implementation of accords and the
elections.
These events have not transpired.

The fighting and suffering have, in

fact, escalated to levels unprecedented in this long tragedy.

The blame for

this must be laid squarely at the feet of Jonas Savimbi, whose duplicity,
cynicism and contempt for human life and values are unbounded.

In some

respects, he is an example of a phenomenon the United Nations can expect to
encounter on a rising scale.

As with Karadzic and Mladic in Bosnia, Pol Pot in

Cambodia, Aidid in Somalia and various potential strongmen rising in central
Asia, Savimbi is one of the new warlords - educated, cynical, clever and
ruthless.
These warlords perceive the United Nations as weak and apprehensive,
concerned more with TV news briefs than victory, prepared to accept the
"reality" of what is rather than the means used to reach the situation or the
principles underlying what should be.

Having acquired what they want by "every

means available", exhausting both the United Nations and their opponent, they
will then call for peace talks, unilateral cease-fires and United Nationssponsored arbitrators.

The pattern is all too consistent.

But Angola must not

be a replay of Bosnia.

Savimbi must be shown that there is another "reality".

For this reason, my delegation supports the draft resolution before us
calling for sanctions against UNITA.

As is usual, sanctions work to the extent

that they are supported by the relevant community involved and the concern of
its members for the consequences of violations.

In the case of UNITA, this

would be the use of the territory of adjacent countries for military, supply,
transport and personnel purposes; flights to and from South Africa and to its
creation, Bophuthatswana; and trade in diamonds through Zaire and on to the
diamond markets of Europe.
It must be very clear to all members that the Council is prepared to move
against all violations of these sanctions with additional sanctions.
Additional measures of merit to strengthen the impact of the sanctions
which deserve consideration include technical assistance to countries around
UNITA to identify overflights of supply planes; the sharing of intelligence

S/PV.3277
38
(Mr. Olhaye, Djibouti)
resources to identify States, companies and individuals supplying UNITA; and
terminating UNITA’s satellite telecommunications and fax facilities.
The measures regarding the sanctions regime we have so far covered are but
one aspect of what the Council and Members can do to end this conflict.

There

is little doubt that the Government acted in good faith regarding the ceasefire, the accords, the disarming and the elections.

Faced with renewed

aggression, it has not only the right, but also - unlike Bosnia - the capability
of rearming and defending itself.

We urge that all possible assistance be given

by Members to the Government to help it fight this aggression.

We note in the

report of the Secretary-General that Government forces appear to have recovered
their balance and have begun to push back UNITA forces.

Combined with the

sanctions, this may soon lead to a quick reversal of UNITA policies and a
renewed call for peace talks.

If so, at a minimum, they would have to be on the

basis of the Acordos de Paz, the Abidjan agreements and the elections.
Until that time, we can expect a worsening humanitarian situation.

We

therefore urge the Secretary-General and the courageous United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) personnel to continue to do everything possible
to bring relief and assistance to the civilian population.

Clearly, UNAVEM II’s

mandate should be extended for three months as requested and the level of
international civilian staff restored.
The work of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Beye, has
been commendable, and my delegation appreciates the efforts of the Organization
for African Unity, the observer States of Portugal, Russia and the United States
and the leaders of neighbouring countries to assist in bringing this matter back
to the peace table.

However, if all these good offices do not resolve the

matter, we must then be prepared to implement and enforce these sanctions;
assist the Government; continue and expand humanitarian assistance; and, as
quickly as possible, end UNITA’s aggression, until finally, they have no
alternative but to agree to what they have already agreed to.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of Djibouti for the kind words he addressed to me.
I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/26445.

S/PV.3277
39-40

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution

has been adopted unanimously as resolution 864 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.

S/PV.3177
41
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom):

The hour is late, and I shall try to

be brief, but I should just like to say that I think we can all take
satisfaction from the fact that under your presidency, Sir, we have reached
unanimous agreement on a detailed and indeed far-reaching resolution, the more
so since we considered it in a relatively short space of time.

The unity the

Council has demonstrated is important in itself, and I hope that it will also
send an unequivocal message to Mr. Savimbi.
The resolution we have just adopted reflects the Council’s continuing
determination to support the democratic process in Angola.
which my Government fully shares.

That is an objective

We are sending a clear signal to UNITA that

we will not allow it to set aside the freely expressed democratic decision of
the Angolan people.

The international community has to act to curtail UNITA’s

ability to pursue this appalling conflict any longer.
The political priorities are, I think, very clear.

We strongly support all

the intensive efforts of the Secretary-General and of his new Special
Representative to restart the peace talks under United Nations auspices and on
the basis of the Bicesse Peace Accords and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
In the same spirit, we welcome the continuing efforts of the three observer
nations, and we likewise welcome the continuing willingness of the Government of
Angola to reach a peaceful settlement of the current tragic conflict.
But the humanitarian priorities are equally clear.

The Secretary-General’s

report of 13 September was terrifying, and what it said was amply reinforced by
the statement of the Foreign Minister of Angola, whom we are very glad to see
here today.

My Government has already pledged

2 million for emergency

humanitarian relief, and we shall continue to do all we can to help to alleviate
the terrible human suffering in Angola.

But we have to face the fact that the

surest means of achieving our humanitarian objectives would be a cease-fire and
in the longer term a settlement.
Whether or not the measures set out in the resolution we have just adopted
come into force in 10 days’ time depends entirely upon UNITA.

These measures

are not intended to punish the movement but to persuade it to negotiate
seriously on the basis of the agreements into which it freely entered.

No one

S/PV.3177
42
(Mr. Richardson, United Kingdom)
hopes more sincerely than we do that the measures will not prove necessary and
that UNITA will promptly agree to a cease-fire and take all related action.
But if even the measures in this resolution do not achieve the ends which
we have set ourselves, we for our part will not shrink from the adoption of
other, stronger steps to achieve our goals.

We would have been ready at this

stage to agree upon measures to restrict travel outside Angola by senior members
of UNITA, and if the situation does not develop favourably by 1 November - it
will, of course, be for the Secretary-General to make that assessment to us - we
hope that the Council will consider the measures I have just mentioned and
further restrictions on the supply of goods and services to UNITA.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of the United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. GREY (United States of America):
your ascension to the presidency, Sir.

My delegation warmly welcomes

We hope that you will have a productive

month.
The adoption of today’s resolution is a critical step in the international
community’s continuing efforts to restore peace to the devastated people and
country of Angola.

We condemn the military actions of UNITA, which have wreaked

such havoc on the Angolan people.

The leadership of UNITA must understand that

the international community holds it responsible and will not tolerate its
continued attempts to wage war on its own people in an effort to conquer
militarily what it could not win in a democratic election.
The action we took today is a trumpet call for peace to UNITA, the people
of Angola and the world.

But it is more.

It puts UNITA and any who stand in

the way of peace on notice that the international community will take strong
action to bring about a just and lasting peace.
We are deeply touched by the wretched humanitarian condition this conflict
has created in Angola.

We will not stand by while innocent people are

slaughtered, whether by bullets or slowly by starvation.

The efforts of the

international community to assist the poor and afflicted is of deep importance
to us.

The people of Angola should know that the nations of the world stand

behind their yearning for peace and will persevere in efforts to obtain it.

S/PV.3177
43
(Mr. Grey, United States)
The road to peace in Angola has been a long and tortuous one.
resolution, hopefully, will be the final step in clearing that road.

This

must be no mistake.

But there

UNITA’s leadership must understand that we are ready to

impose additional sanctions on UNITA unless it engages fully and without
reservation in implementing the Acordos de Paz and the relevant resolutions of
this Council.

This is our last warning.

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):

I thank the

representative of the United States for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. YAMAMOTO (Japan):

In spite of the efforts of the Secretary-

General, his Special Representative and the heads of African countries to resume
negotiations to advance the peace process, no substantive progress has been made
towards implementation of the Acordos de Paz in Angola during the past two
months.

Meanwhile, the already desperate humanitarian situation in Angola

continues to worsen, to the point where more than a thousand people die every
day.
Responsibility for this tragic situation lies with UNITA, which has failed
to halt its military actions and has refused to come to the negotiating table.
Under these circumstances, the Security Council had to send a clear message to
UNITA by the resolution we have just adopted.
In this connection, my delegation takes note that UNITA has announced that
it will undertake a unilateral cease-fire by 20 September and resume
negotiations to achieve peace and security in Angola.

I hope that this

announcement is not another attempt by UNITA to deflect international pressure.
In the meantime, both parties must ensure the unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian aid to those in need and take all necessary measures for the safety
of personnel of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM II) as
well as those engaged in humanitarian activities.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian):

The

Russian delegation welcomes your acceding to the post of President of the
Security Council, Sir.

We also wish to express our gratitude to the Permanent

Representative of the United States, Ambassador Madeleine Albright, for the
excellent way in which she guided the Council’s work in August.

English
JP/eds

S/PV.3177
44-45

(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
The Russian delegation would also like to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Angola, His Excellency
Mr. De Moura.

We are certain that his participation in this important Council

meeting will help to move the Angolan crisis towards a political settlement.
There is serious concern in Moscow about the situation regarding an Angolan
settlement.

The new wave of bloodshed and civil war in Angola has brought the

country to the very brink of national disaster, and it threatens to undermine
completely the process of national reconciliation as well as the peacemaking
efforts of the United Nations and its Secretary-General.
The fundamental reason for that situation is the intransigent position of
UNITA and of its leader, Mr. Savimbi, who rejected the results of the democratic
elections held in the country under United Nations supervision, thus throwing
down the gauntlet to the legitimate Government of Angola, which has been
recognized by the whole international community.

In violation of its

obligations under the Bicesse Accords, UNITA has set about seizing power by
military might, thus unleashing mass terror in the country.
Particularly alarming is the humanitarian situation, which has deteriorated
considerably as a result of increased hostilities for which UNITA is
responsible.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-General (S/26434), the

humanitarian aspects of the Angolan tragedy have taken on truly catastrophic
dimensions.

Some 3 million people are suffering from the consequences of the

conflict, and tremendous damage has been done to Angola’s economy, which has
already been bled white by many years of civil war.

S/PV.3277
46
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
The situation prevailing in the country has posed a threat to personnel of
the United Nations and other international organizations who are performing
their duties of rendering humanitarian assistance.

We believe it is only

through coordinated, determined and forceful measures on the part of the
international community that we can force UNITA to fulfil its obligations under
existing agreements and to embark unreservedly on the process of seeking a
peaceful settlement in the country.
The resolution just adopted by the Security Council affords the leadership
of UNITA a final opportunity to demonstrate political realism and responsibility
and to return to the path of genuine interaction with the Government of Angola
in order to ensure a just and complete settlement on the basis of the Bicesse
Agreements and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

If the leadership

of UNITA tries once again to avoid full compliance with the obligations assumed
under the Peace Agreements, the imposition of measures, under Chapter VII of the
United Nations Charter, banning the supply of weapons, oil and petroleum
products to UNITA, will be automatic.

We believe it is essential, if there

should be no progress in the peace process, for the Security Council to consider
additional steps under the United Nations Charter, including trade measures
against UNITA and restrictions on the travel of its representatives and a ban on
all air, land and sea deliveries to Angola, with the exception of those
previously authorized by the Government of Angola.

In the future we should also

consider the possibility of freezing the foreign bank accounts of UNITA and its
leaders.
The Security Council’s adoption of this resolution today is of tremendous
political and diplomatic significance in that it demonstrates that the
international community believes an end should be put to the continuing
bloodshed caused by UNITA and that it is now undertaking practical steps to
bring about a peace settlement in Angola.
We believe that the resolution we have adopted will strengthen the efforts
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and his Special Representative to
find speedily a way to produce a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

S/PV.3277
47
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
For its part, the Russian Federation is prepared, together with other
members of the international community, to give every possible support to these
efforts.
Mr. LADSOUS (France) (interpretation from French):

My Government is

deeply disturbed by the worsening political and military situation in Angola,
the intensification of fighting and the constant obstacles to the distribution
of humanitarian aid that make this conflict one of the deadliest on Earth.

By

all indications, UNITA bears the greatest part of the responsibility for the
continuing suffering of the Angolan people.
no military solution.

It must be clear that there can be

France can but appeal once again to the parties to heed

the language of reason as expressed by the international community as a whole
and to sit down at the negotiating table, as the United Nations and numerous
Heads of State of countries of the region have invited them to do.
With regret, but convinced that there was no alternative, my country voted
today in favour of a resolution imposing sanctions on one of the parties
flouting democratic principles, one that does not honour its commitments and
that has led that country and that people, which had freely expressed itself in
elections, into a tragic civil war.

France hopes this unanimous decision by the

Security Council will make UNITA take the measure of its isolation and will
encourage it to resume the dialogue and finally agree to implement fully the
Peace Agreements.
In agreement with the Secretary-General, the Council has just given
Mr. Savimbi a reprieve of 10 days.
of wisdom.

My delegation hopes he will heed the voice

Such a decision on his part would avoid the implementation of the

mandatory measures we have just adopted and would at the same time allow the
establishment of a massive United Nations peace-keeping operation and, at last,
the restoration of peace in Angola, which is the international community’s
objective.
Mr. ERDOS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):
full support to the adoption of resolution 864 (1993).

Hungary lent its

We have been following

with grave concern the deterioration of the situation in Angola, which has come
about in spite of numerous attempts at peace.

As indicated in the resolution we

have just adopted, it is because of UNITA’s military actions that the situation

S/PV.3277
48-50
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
in Angola remains a threat to international peace and security.

In the

difficult circumstances prevailing as a result of that party’s failure to
respect the results of the democratic elections held in 1992 and its refusal to
implement the provisions of the Peace Agreements, Hungary attaches particular
importance to the reaffirmation of the world community’s desire to preserve
Angola’s unity and territorial integrity.

The international alarm expressed

over this country, over and above its political and military dimensions, is all
the more warranted since, according to the report of the Secretary-General, it
is estimated that more than 1,000 people are dying every day either directly or
indirectly because of the war, making this the deadliest conflict in the world.
We deplore the fact that this circumstance has not received the attention or the
response it deserves from international public opinion.
It is important to realize that, in the present situation, the Security
Council has been able to take a firm and committed stance by naming
unflinchingly those responsible for the tragedy now being played out in Angola
and by carefully and unambiguously choosing steps that will get the process of a
settlement in Angola over an impasse.

By extending the mandate of the United

Nations Verification Mission in Angola (UNAVEM II) for three months and
instituting a regime of sanctions against UNITA, which could be stiffened or
relaxed, the Council wished to indicate its desire to promote significant
progress in the full implementation of the Peace Agreements.
By taking this decision today, in the presence of His Excellency the
Minister for External Relations of Angola, to extend the mandate of UNAVEM II
and by introducing the imminent prospect of sanction measures, we trust that the
Council has sent the right message to UNITA so that its declarations of
willingness to resume peace negotiations and cooperate in the humanitarian arena
will no longer remain dead letters.
Finally, let us note that according to the time-table set out in today’s
resolution, the Council will take up reports of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola twice, during the months of November and December, and that
in the interim it will be kept regularly informed of developments in that
country.

Consequently, the Security Council’s attention to Angola will be

maintained and ongoing.

S/PV.3277
51

Mr. MARKER (Pakistan):

My delegation warmly welcomes the Minister for

External Relations of Angola and has listened with close attention to his
sobering report.

It is with a sense of increasing concern and frustration that

we view the continuing tragedy in Angola.

Despite the sincere efforts of the

Secretary-General, his Special Representative for Angola, the international
community, as well as the States neighbouring Angola, to bring the conflict
raging in that country to an end, conditions in fact seem to have deteriorated.
The humanitarian situation in Angola, as a result of the conflict in that
country, is indeed catastrophic.

The daily mortality of almost 1,000 persons

because of the direct or indirect effects of the war is both barbaric and
intolerable and needs immediate attention.
It is a terrible thought that even as we worked on this important
resolution today, 1,000 innocent people died in Angola.

We commend the

dedication with which the Secretary-General and his Special Representative have
continued to pursue the goal of bringing back peace and normalcy to Angola.

We

are also grateful for the various initiatives coming from the leaders of
countries neighbouring Angola, and urge the UNITA leadership to give a positive
response to them with a view to ending the tragedy in Angola.
UNAVEM’s role in facilitating the peace process in Angola and providing the
badly needed humanitarian assistance to the hapless victims of the war in that
country is highly praiseworthy.

We pay tribute to the UNAVEM personnel who have

been performing their crucial and delicate task under very precarious
conditions.
UNITA is mainly responsible for the deteriorating situation caused by the
failure of its leadership to accept the results of the elections held in Angola
last year and its relentless pursuit to gain control of the country through
military means.
In view of the unabated pursuit of the military option by the UNITA
leadership, the Security Council is left with no alternative but to consider all
necessary measures to prevent the supply of armaments and related materials to
UNITA.

We hope that this will have the desired effect of persuading Mr. Savimbi

to come to the negotiating table.

S/PV.3277
52
(Mr. Marker, Pakistan)
My delegation supported resolution 864 (1993) because, in our view, it
enables the Security Council to take the necessary firm action whilst also
maintaining the requisite flexibility in terms of the response from UNITA.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

I, too, would like to welcome the presence

with us this evening of the Minister for External Relations of the Republic of
Angola.
Two months ago the Council sent a clear signal to UNITA.

We said that

unless UNITA stops the fighting the Council will take action under Chapter VII
of the Charter and impose mandatory sanctions.

But despite this action the

fighting continues.
New Zealand is not persuaded that meaningful steps have yet been taken by
UNITA to comply with resolution 851 (1993).
the commitment which it made in July.

The Council must therefore honour

The resolution we have adopted leaves

UNITA in no doubt about the Council’s determination.

It shows that the Council

will not be diverted by ruses, but it also shows that the Council is supportive
of any serious moves which will result in a cease-fire and full implementation
of the peace accords.
New Zealand calls on UNITA to respond immediately and to stop the fighting.
The door is open.

All they need to do is walk through it.

But if they do not,

the sanctions we have approved will become effective and UNITA should be under
no illusions that if they scorn the Council yet again it is inevitable that we
will have to look at even stronger measures.
The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
speakers on my list.

There are no further

The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.15 p.m.
