United Nations

A/RES/62/57

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2007
[on the report of the First Committee (A/62/395)]

62/57. Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 61/100 of 6 December 2006,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption and the entry into force of the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects, 1 and its amended article 1, 2 and the Protocol on NonDetectable Fragments (Protocol I),1 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II)1 and its amended
version, 3 the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary
Weapons (Protocol III),1 the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons (Protocol IV), 4
and the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V), 5
Welcoming the results of the Third Review Conference of the States Parties to
the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects, and commending the efforts of the President of the
Conference,
Welcoming also the decision of the Third Review Conference to commission
follow-up work under the oversight of the Chairman-designate of a meeting of
States Parties to the Convention to be held from 7 to 13 November 2007 in Geneva, 6
and the decision to convene, as a matter of urgency, an intersessional meeting of
governmental experts to consider further the application and implementation of
existing humanitarian law to specific munitions that may cause explosive remnants
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1342, No. 22495.
See CCW/CONF.II/2 and Corr.1, part II.
3
CCW/CONF.I/16 (Part I), annex B.
4
Ibid., annex A.
5
See CCW/MSP/2003/3, annex V, appendix II.
6
See CCW/CONF.III/11 (Part II).
2

07-46719

A/RES/62/57

of war, with particular focus on cluster munitions, including the factors affecting
their reliability and their technical and design characteristics, with a view to
minimizing the humanitarian impact of the use of these munitions, 7
Welcoming further the holding, on 18 June 2007, of the meeting of the
Preparatory Committee for the First Conference of the States Parties to Protocol V
to be held on 5 November 2007 in Geneva for the purpose of consultations and
cooperation on all issues related to the operation of the Protocol,
Recalling the role played by the International Committee of the Red Cross in
the elaboration of the Convention and the Protocols thereto, and welcoming the
particular efforts of various international, non-governmental and other organizations
in raising awareness of the humanitarian consequences of explosive remnants of
war,
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to take all measures to
1.
become parties, as soon as possible, to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed
to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects1 and the Protocols
thereto, as amended, with a view to achieving the widest possible adherence to these
instruments at an early date, and so as to ultimately achieve their universality;
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so
2.
to express their consent to be bound by the Protocols to the Convention and the
amendment extending the scope of the Convention and the Protocols thereto to
include armed conflicts of a non-international character;
Welcomes the adoption by the Third Review Conference of a Plan of
3.
Action to promote universality of the Convention and its annexed Protocols, 8 and
expresses appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General, as depositary of the
Convention and its annexed Protocols, and the President of the Third Review
Conference, on behalf of the High Contracting Parties, to achieve the goal of
universality;
Also welcomes the decision of the Third Review Conference to establish
4.
a Compliance Mechanism in order to promote compliance and the full
implementation of the obligations contained in the Convention and its annexed
Protocols; 9
5.
Further welcomes the decision of the Third Review Conference to
establish a Sponsorship Programme within the framework of the Convention, 10 and
encourages States to contribute to the programme;
6.
Welcomes the commitment by States parties to continue to address the
humanitarian problems caused by certain specific types of munitions in all their
aspects, including cluster munitions, with a view to minimizing the humanitarian
impact of these munitions;
Expresses support for the work conducted by the Group of Governmental
7.
Experts and the decision of the Group, based on the substantive discussion on the
application and implementation of existing humanitarian law at its intersessional
_______________
7

Ibid.
Ibid., annex III.
9
Ibid., annex II.
10
Ibid., annex IV.
8

2

A/RES/62/57

meeting held in June 2007, without prejudice to the outcome, to recommend to the
2007 Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention to decide how best to address
the humanitarian impact of cluster munitions as a matter of urgency, including the
possibility of a new instrument; 11
8.
Notes the decision of the Third Review Conference to dedicate up to two
days at the next Meeting of the States Parties in 2007 to the issue of mines other
than anti-personnel mines;6
9.
Emphasizes the importance of universalization of the Protocol on
Explosive Remnants of War (Protocol V), and welcomes the commitment of States
parties to the Protocol to the effective and efficient implementation of the Protocol;
10. Notes that, in conformity with article 8 of the Convention, conferences
may be convened to examine amendments to the Convention or to any of the
Protocols thereto, to examine additional protocols concerning other categories of
conventional weapons not covered by existing Protocols or to review the scope and
application of the Convention and the Protocols thereto and to examine any
proposed amendments or additional protocols;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance and to
provide such services, including summary records, as may be required for the Ninth
Annual Conference of the High Contracting Parties to Amended Protocol II to the
Convention to be held on 6 November 2007, for the First Conference of the States
Parties to Protocol V to be held on 5 November 2007, and for the Meeting of the
States Parties to the Convention to be held from 7 to 13 November 2007, as well as
for any possible continuation of work after the Meetings, should the States parties
deem it appropriate;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as depositary of the
Convention and the Protocols thereto, to continue to inform the General Assembly
periodically, by electronic means, of ratifications and acceptances of and accessions
to the Convention, its amended article 1,2 and the Protocols thereto;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the
item entitled “Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects”.
61st plenary meeting
5 December 2007

_______________
11

See CCW/GGE/2007/3, annex III.

3
