UNITEDNATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th

MEETING: 14 MARCH 1978
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
pwj
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2067)

. . . . . . . . . . 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Upper Volta to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/12578) , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . + . .

1

sIPV.2067

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2067th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 14 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
PWident: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

sentatives of Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia in which they
request that they be invited to participate in the discussion.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite them to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United King
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

3. In view of the limited number of places at the Council
table, I invite the representatives of Sri Lanka and
Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
whenever they wish to speak.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2067)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Upper
Volta to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12578)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fernando (Sri
Lanka) and Mr. MujezinoviC (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them a draft resolution sponsored by Bolivia, Gabon, India,
Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria and Venezuela [S/12597]. I
should also like to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/12599, which contains the text of a letter
dated 7 March from the representative of Ghana to the
Secretary-General.

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 1 March 1978 from the Chargb d’Affaires a.i.
of the Permanent Mission of the Upper Volta to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12578)

5. Mr. von WECHMAR (Federal Republic of Germany):
Mr. President, I should first like to perform a very pleasant
task and extend to you the congratulations of my delegation upon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. We are convinced
that your outstanding qualities as a politician and as a
diplomat, together with your particular knowledge of the
question on our agenda, will help the Council in performing
its present duty. At the same time, my delegation wishes to
avail itself of this opportunity to express its gratitude to
Ambassador Troyanovsky of the Soviet Union for the skill
and the sense’ of responsibility with which he guided the
Council’s work last month.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings, I invite the
representatives’of Angola, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Liberia,
Mozambique, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, the Sudan,
the ‘United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

6. I also welcome to our midst our new colleague the
representative of ‘Venezuela, Ambassador Ruben Carpio
Castillo. My delegation is looking forward to the closest
possible co-operation with the Ambassador and his delegation.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Thomas (Liberia), Mr. Lobo
(Mozambique), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mrs. Gbujama
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Medani (Sudan), Mr. Salim (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bamba (Upper Volta) and Miss
Konie (Zambia) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

7. In turning to the question before us, let me recall that
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has
always regarded the illegal exercise of power by the Ian
Smith regime in Zimbabwe to be one of the most burning
issues in southern Africa, and has throughout underlined

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the repre1

13. The Federal Government calls upon all parties to be
aware of their responsibility for maintaining peace alnd to
try jointly, through negotiations, to fmd solutions .to the
outstanding problems.

the urgency of settling this problem. The unilateral declaration of independence by the Smith regime led to a situation
which constituted a threat to international peace and
security and thus prompted the Federal Republic of
Germany, long before its accession to the United Nations as
a Member State, to endorse and apply strictly the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter. The extent of the danger is evidenced by the series
of incidents which led to violation of the territorial
integrity of countries bordering on Zimbabwe and also
caused loss of human lives. We condemn those incursions.

YOUNG
(United
States of America):
14. Mr.
Mr. President, let me take this opportunity to expre.ss my
appreciation of your leadership in this situation, not only in
the Council during this month of your presidency but also
in the long weeks and months that you spent in the process
of bringing the negotiations to the point at which they are
now. As we seethis asan ongoingprocessthat has led us
closer and closer to peace, it gives us somecourageand
someconfidenceaswe move on and take the comingsteps.

8. The overriding principle of the Federal Government’s
policy is the maintaining of peace, and we therefore
advocate peaceful settlements also in southern Africa. In a
statement made on 24 February 1978, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of my country, Mr. Genscher, described as
an aim of that policy “the free and independent development of the African States, without the old colonialism
being replaced by another colonialism based on ideology”.
In a speech which he made at Dar es Salaam on 27
February, our Foreign Minister stated:

15. Rhodesiahasbeenone of the priority issuesof IJnited
States foreign policy under the Administration of President
Carter. Together with the United Kingdom and in couperation with the front-line States,the United Stateshas
worked intensively with the nationalist leadersin an effort
to reconcile differencesand bring about a peacefultransition to majority rule.
16. We participated in the development of the AngieAmerican proposals for Rhodesia becausewe felt it
essentialto establisha coherentplan basedon the following
goals: first, the initiation of an irreversibleprocesshading
to majority rule in an independent Zimbabwe; secondly,
the creation of a neutral political processwhich would
allow all political factions in Zimbabweto competefairly
for political leadershipthrough electionswhich truly reflect
the wiI1 of the majority; thirdly, an end to hostilities,
followed by the maintenanceof stability, law and order
during the transition period, to ensure the fairnessof the
processand thus its durability; fourthly, agreementon an
independence constitution that provides for a democratically electedgovernment, the abolition of discrimination and the protection of individual humanrights, including the rights of the minority aswell asof the majority.

“Regarding the conflicts in southern Africa, the Federal
Republic of Germany stands unreservedly on the side of
those who champion self-determination and the dignity
of all human beings regardless of the colour of their
skin.”
9. A settlement for Zimbabwe based on these principles
must, in our view, provide for a genuine transfer of .power
by the illegal r&me and arrangements for an impartially
administered transitional period ensuring the conduct of
genuinely free elections on a basis of equality and universal
adult suffrage, the choice at those elections of the
parliament and government of an independent Zimbabwe
which will be genuinely represeniative of the peopIe of
Zimbabwe, the final achievement of independence on the
basis of a constitution providing for full democratic rights
and, in particular, a democratically elected government, the
abolition of all forms of discrimination and the protection
of fundamental human rights and freedoms.

17. Having presenteda proposal basedon these goalsto
the Security Council, the United States, together with the
United Kingdom, undertook a seriesof discussionsand
negotiations with all the principal parties concerned.We
have been pursuingthese efforts vigorously. In particular,
we want to engagethe Patriotic Front as welI as the
nationalist partiesinside Rhodesiain the negotiating process.

10. We consider that the provisions of the so-called
Salisbury agreement of 3 March 1978 do not sufficiently
meet these standards and are therefore inadequate.
11. We continue to believe, on the other hand, that the
Anglo-American proposals presented on I September 1977
[S/12393] contain the necessary elements for a peaceful
transition to majority rule and offer reasonable prospects of
political stability. We still consider those proposals to be an
appropriate basis for initiating transition to independence.
We therefore fully support them and have, endorsed
Security Council resolution 415 (1977).

18. We sought and continue to seek the advice and
support of the African States concerned,whose views WC
took into account in initially formulating the proposals.
And we met with membersof the Smith regimein aneffort
to bring them into the negotiationswithin the framework
of our proposals.As PresidentCarter confirmedin h+ press
conference of 9 March, we remain firmly convinced tltat
the Anglo-American plan is the best basisfor a peaceful,
just and prompt transition to an independentZimbabwe.

12. My Government feels encouraged by the fact that the
great majority of speakers in this debate have expressed
their appreciation of the Anglo-American proposals. It
welcomes the appeal of the United Kingdom and the
United States that all parties to the Rhodesian conflict
should be invited without delay to take part in talks for the
purpose of finding an internationally acceptable solution.

19. An internal agreementhas now been announiccdat
Salisbury. A new point hasbeenreachedin the searchfor a
settlement and we are all, understandably, caught up in
measuringdetailsagainstthe standardswe have set. Rut we
should not let legitimate concern with detail obscure t&
2

enormous stakes the people of the region and the entire
international community have in Rhodesia.

26. First and foremost, the Anglo-American plan is based
on the principle of participation by all factions. The
internal settlement does not include all the nationalist
leaders. Thus it threatens to divide further rather than unify
the people of Zimbabwe and threatens to prolong the
violence rather than end it.

20. This is not a time for attempts to advance personal
self-interest or for posturing before the world. This is not a
time for Rhodesians, white or black, to think only of
defending their partisan interests. This is not a time for
outside Powers to be considering what advantage they can
extract during the process of. transition. This is not a time
for those of us who have worked hard to bring about a fair
settlement to lay down our burden and turn our backs.
Most important of all, we must not resign ourselves to the
fact that the birth of a new nation has to be bloody and
violent. We see no reason why we cannot find a peaceful
settlement of the differences which still exist among the
parties.

27. Secondly, the Anglo-American proposals recognize
that transitional political institutions must not be subject to
control by the existing illegal regime or any one of the
parties to the conflict. The Salisbury plan would introduce
a transitional arrangement of shared responsibility subject
to the rule of unanimity and the ultimate authority of the
present parliament. This would allow Smith to hold
effective power and to wield a veto. For, as he himself said
in an interview in The Times of London on 2 March,
whether people liked it or not the present parliament was
the sovereign body under the existing constitution and only
an election could change that. That is what Smith said. He
also said that he was the Prime Minister, and nobody in the
world could do anything about it. In other words, although
others may be associated with him, Smith and his largely
white parliament are still in control of the processes of
government, including security functions, the civil service
and the passage of legislation.

21. At this crucial juncture in the history of Africa and
the world, we must take a longer perspective, looking to the
past and recognizing the progress that has been made, while
holding up for the future the highest standards, which will
ensure that Zimbabwe will enter the community of free and
independent nations promptly and peacefully.
22. We must examine the so-called internal settlement
dispassionately: I am the first to recognize that anything
that Mr. Smith has negotiated merits the most careful
scrutiny. But I am also willing to credit good faith to the
participating nationalist leaders. They, as much as the other
nationalist leaders of Zimbabwe, want freedom and independence for their country and full political equality for all
the people of the country. It is fair, then, to ask what they
have achieved at Salisbury. Compared with the kind of
settlement proposals which Smith has entertained in the
past, the Salisbury agreement marks some progress. The
nationalist leaders have secured Mr. Smith’s agreement to
the principle of universal adult suffrage. Smith’s signature
has been obtained to a commitment eventually to step
down. There is still, however, no ironclad assurance that he
will do so. Finally, there is recognition that during the
transition period some sharing of power must take place
among the participating groups.

28. Thirdly, free and fair elections must be ensured in’
which all elements of the population and all Rhodesian
political factions would participate equally. The AngloAmerican proposal addressed itself to this principle by
proposing that the British Resident Commissioner should
help to ensure that result, as should the presence of
impartial observers. Under the Salisbury agreement there
appears to be no provision for international outside
participation in these elections which would ensure their
fairness or impartiality.
29. Fourthly, in order to ensure the fairness and irreversibility of a transition process, it is essential to maintain law
and order in Zimbabwe. The record of civil strife over the
past dozen years precludes reliance on the Rhodesian army
for this essential purpose. Consequently, it had been
suggested that a United Nations peace-keeping force should
assist the Resident Commissioner and the police force in
maintaining tranquility during the transitional period and in
ensuring the impartiality of the political process. The
Salisbury agreement would rely on the existing Rhodesian
army, absorbing into it those guerrillas capable of passing a
screening test. We cannot but conclude that such a
provision fails to take into account the history of bloodshed which makes the Rhodesian army as now constituted
an unsatisfactory guarantor of the rights of all Zimbabweans, black and white.

23. That being said, there is much in the Salisbury
agreement which raises questions regarding the ability to
withstand the political pressures which have built up over
the past few years.
24. Perhaps more importantly, we must consider whether
the agreement announced at Salisbury takes sufficiently
into account the enormous difficulty of managing the
transition period. That crucial watershed must be handled
in such a way that the violence of the present struggle for
liberation can be transformed into an irreversible political
process which will result in the approval by all the people
of Rhodesia of their own form of government and the
selection of their own leaders.

30. Fifthly, provision must be made in Rhodesia for a
constitutional system which protects the rights of all. The
Anglo-American
proposal provides for an independent
judiciary and an entrenched bill of rights. The bill of rights
is protected against change in order to reassure all that their
freedom will not be taken away. But the remainder of the
constitution can be changed by the process of law. The
constitution outlined at Salisbury also envisages an independent judiciary and the protection of certain rights. HOWever, for a period of approximately 10 years, changes in all

25. In his press conference of 9 March, President Carter
described the Salisbury proposal as not adequate. I believe
that I can demonstrate its inadequacies by comparing the
Salisbury agreement with the principles of the AngloAmerican proposals.
3

entrenched aspects of the constitution could come about
only with the concurrence of all the black members and six
of the white members of parliament. Indeed, there is no
guarantee that this system will not carry over after the
initial lo-year period. This limitation of the ability of the
new government to bring about necessary change and meet
the aspirations of the majority appears inconsistent with
the full exercise of sovereignty by an independent government representing all the people of Zimbabwe.

their resolute decision to persevere in the armed struggleit
the internal settlement were recognized. In a word, practltally all the statements that were made last week tended to
regard the Smith regime and those involved with the
internal settlement as anathema.
36. My delegation wishes at this time only to re-emphasize
a statement found in excerpts from a message from the
President of Liberia, Mr. William R. Tolbert, Jr., to the
Secretary-General. I now repeat the passages in the message
which touch on the question of Zimbabwe:

31. I have gone into some detail in describing what we
think should go into a viable plan for transition. I do not
believe, however, that our debate should begin and end on
this theme. My Government hopes that these Council
meetings can serve as a catalyst to a renewed effort to bring
the nationalist forces together in a new attempt to achieve a
settlement which includes all and which is based on the
principles of the Anglo-American plan. We are prepared to
join with the United Kingdom, all the parties and the
concerned African States in a new effort to make progress
and remedy the inadequacies of the Salisbury settlement
plan. We have no illusion that this will be a simple task,
particularly in light of the evidence that the Rbodesian
armed forces are continuing the arrogant practice of raids
across the borders of neighbouring countries. The recent
Rhodesian ambush of a patrol of the army of Botswana
well within the borders of Botswana and the Rhodesian raid
into Zambia are the latest examples of the behaviour of the
Smith regime that must be halted if we are to believe that
any kind of agreement involving him is feasible.

(The speaker read out the fourth to eleventh paragraphs
of the message contained in document S/12.590 of 9 March
1978.J
37. My delegation must candidly state that it does not
entirely agree with those who have advocated an outright
and complete condemnation and rejection of the recent
Salisbury talks with black leaders. While we do not say that
the Salisbury formula is the most acceptable formula, we
do believe that it may contain certain useful and positive
elements that are worthy of consideration and should not
be overlooked. My delegation believes in pragmatic diplomacy. Consequently we support the Anglo-American proposal as forming a good basis for negotiation towards a just
and peaceful settlement. My delegation further agrees with
the position of President Carter to the effect that the
internal settlement is not adequate for the solution of this
problem, In fact, President Tolbert has strongly insisted
that all parties, including the Patriotic Front and all the
nationalist leaders inside and outside Rhodesia, should in a
spirit of goodwill and understanding participate in trying to
reach an equitable solution that will once and for all avert
continued needless bloodshed, violence and untold suffering. We insist that in order to arrive at any peaceful
settlement there must be flexibility. Every effort must be
put forth to avoid a tone that is bellicose and positions that
are irreconcilable.

32. Success in a new effort would also require the support
of the Council and of the African States most directly
involved. We would need a consensus of responsible opinion
that this was not the time for actions in the United Nations
or elsewhere which would further polarize the situation but
the time for keeping all channels of communication open.
Our goal would be to build on what has gone before, to
produce a just and lasting settlement for Zimbabwe, whose
people would at last know the blessings of independence,
freedom and peace.

38. My delegation would like to feel that the earIy transfer
of power to the black majority and a peaceful resolution of
the problems of Zimbabwe are not beyond the realm of
possibility. There is cause to feel that the promised land,
now in sight, at long last is attainable. Though our
ideologies may differ, may we appeal to the Council to
avoid negativism and pessimism. It is imperative that our
brothers and sisters-the poor, the weak and the innocent
people who have for a long time been victims of violence
within and outside their homeland, fighting and even dying
for their God-given right to enjoy human dignity and
self-determination-should
have speedy relief. They are
anxious to end this preseut state of anguish and inhuman
suffering. This can, however, be achieved only if a spirit of
brotherhood and goodwill is exhibited by all concerned and
if the desire for genuine peace is demonstrated regardless of
whatever may have happened in the past.

33. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Liberia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
34. Mr. THOMAS (Liberia): My delegation associates
itself, Sir, with the preceding speakers who have paid you
highly deserved compliments and extended felicitations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
at this particular time.
35. Throughout the past week we have listened day after
day to the many persons who have made statements on the
question of Rhodesia, a question very dear to our hearts
that is still being debated in the Council. The representatives who have spoken so eloquently and expressed the
views of their respective Governments were in most cases
extremely severe-and probably rightly so-in denouncing
and condemning Mr. Ian Smith and the internal settlement
concluded with the three black leaders of Rhodesia. We also
listened to the two leaders of the Patriotic Front [2064th
meeting], who vehemently and acrimoniously decried the
Smith regime and the internal settlement and reaffirmed

39. My delegation believes that in the final analysis no1
party stands to gain anything by persistent recrimination
and avoidance of peaceful negotiations. What was a fact
yesterday might not necessarily be a fact today. Everything
is constantly undergoing change. Many have expresscdl
unwillingness to consider and accept the promises of
4

Mr. Ian Smith as worthy of confidence or validity because
of his previous record. There is perhaps every good reason
and justification for this. But let us not despair. With
renewed optimism let us persevere unrelentingly until the
goal is reached,

and detention of political leaders and others, the illegal
execution of freedom fighters and the continued denial of
fundamental human rights, including, in particular, criminal
measures of collective punishment, as well as the measures
designed to perpetuate an apartheid State in Southern
Rhodesia.

40. Those of us who are inclined to be rigid in our attitude
and opinion must not forget that we are not infallible; if we
remain sane, and live long enough, some day we may have a
change of heart. Let us not forget that Saul, once the great
persecutor of the Christian Church, was converted and
became Paul, the pre-eminent apostle and loyal defender of
Christianity. Let us therefore not close the door but leave
open all options that would provide any opportunity to
bring about a lasting peaceful solution to the problems of
Zimbabwe and southern Africa and to all the other
problems of Africa.

47. On the day the Smith rdgime promulgated it, the
unilateral declaration of independence was condemned by
the General Assembly f resolution 2024 (XX)]. The following day, the Security Council condemned the racist
minority regime [resolution 216 (196511. Since then the
Council has adopted more than 15 resolutions on the
subject, and for the first time in the history of the United
Nations it has even called for the application of sanctions.
48. The problem of Southern Rhodesia has consistently
been viewed as being one of the necessity of removing the
racist r@me and of not compromising with it, if a just and
lasting answer is to be found by the international community. The General Assembly has resolved that the
national liberation movements of Zimbabwe are the sole
and authentic representatives of the true aspirations of the
people. ‘The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka, in
the course of his statement in the general debate in
September 1977,’ welcomed the recognition of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe by the front-line States and the
Organization of African Unity as a notable development
towards a solution of the Rhodesian problem. The United
Nations has repeatedly affirmed the principle that there
should be no independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe and that any settlement with regard to the future
must be reached with the full participation of the genuine
political leaders and the leaders of the national liberation
movements. The Organization has also desired that such a
step should be endorsed freely and fully by the people.
Those are laudable principles not to be negotiated away in
the face of the exigencies of any situation.

41, Finally, my delegation closes with words of admonition offered by President Tolbert, an apostle of peace and
an advocate of justice, He feels that the international
community should utilize every effort and take decisions
that would aid in bringing together all the parties in seeking
a solution to this and to all important questions.
42. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
43. Mr. FERNANDO (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, first of
all I should like to thank you and the ether members of
the Council for giving me the opportunity of addressing the
Council today.
44. My delegation is happy to see you, a distinguished
fellow member of the Commonwealth representing a
country with which we have excellent relations, presiding
over this important debate. It is significant that the United
Kingdom should preside over the debate since Southern
Rhodesia is, after all, still a British colony and the United
Kingdom is its legal administering Power. I am sure your
personal diplomatic experience and your negotiating skills
will be a great asset in the work of the Council.

49. The United Kingdom as the colonial Power is obliged
as the legal administering Power to hand over power to the
Zimbabwe nationals. This obligation cannot be entrusted to
the illegal regime of Ian Smith who has continued to ignore
the United Nations. The attack on Botswana on 27
February and the attack on Zambia from 6 to 8 March are
demonstrations by Smith that he can not only ignore but
even act with impunity towards the international community. Surely it is inconceivable that we should compromise with such an attitude. The Security Council, as the
custodian of world peace and security, is obliged not only
to take the correct path but to do so quite expeditiously.

45. Last week, after the Government of Zambia, through
its Permanent Representative in New York, formally
briefed me as Acting Chairman of the Co-ordinating Bureau
of Non-Aligned Countries on the latest act of aggression
committed by the illegal minority regime in Southern
Rhodesia against the Republic of Zambia, a communiqutS
was issued on behalf of the Bureau condemning the Smith
r&ime and expressing our solidarity with the Government
aad people of Zambia, That communiqu6 is before the
Council as a document S/12595. I do not propose to
elaborate on this reprehensible act of aggression itself, since
it will be considered by the Security Council at another
meeting. What most concerns us regarding the present
subject matter is the motive behind that act, its timing and
its relation to developments in the southern African region,
developments whose gravity extends far beyond the region.

50. Have we considered the Salisbury agreement or deal in
the light of the principles we have hitherto considered as
necessary? According to such principles, the Salisbury deal
is untenable and ought to be forthwith
declared as
unacceptable. The defects and the intrinsic dangers in that
agreement are too numerous to be even considered by the
international community. The participation of all parties
concerned in a conference convened by the administering
Power with the assistance of the United Nations is a
prerequisite condition for reaching an amicable settlement.

46. The United Nations has repeatedly condemned the
continued oppression of the people of Zimbabwe by the
tiegal racist minority rhgime, the arbitrary imprisonment

1 See Offi& Records of the General Assembly, Thirwecond
Session, Plenary Meetings, 12th meeting.

5

The Salisbury deal is in contradiction to the AngloAmerican proposals and to the conununiqut! of the June
1977 Conference of Commonwealth,Heads of Government.
That communique’ recognized the need for a negotiated
settlement to involve not only the removal of the illegal
Smith rtlgime but also the dismantling of its apparatus of
repression, in order to pave the way for the orderly and
effective transfer of power. The Salisbury deal will perpetuate that apparatus of repression and also m&e a
complete mockery of the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination.
51. For over a decade the Security Council has denounced
the situation in Rhodesia as not only morally indefensible
but also as constituting a threat to international peace and
security. All along we in the United Nations have desired a
genuine transfer of power from the minority rdgime to
majority rule. For this purpose, the consensus of opinion
has been that the illegal regime of Ian Smith must be
removed and the participation of the various African
groups, including the Patriotic Front, obtained together
with the views of the front-line States. Why are we now
reluctant to denounce the so-called Salisbury deal and the
attacks by Ian Smith? Has the Smith regime undergone a
genuine change of heart or merely a change of tactics or
have some of us undergone a change of heart or even of
tactics? Or has that illegal Government suddenly become
deserving of international acceptability?
52. The conduct of Ian Smith regarding the attacks on
front-line States and other manoeuvres uni-nistakably prove
that this is an effort by the minority rdgime to nullify the
Anglo-American proposals and to accommodate the interests of the Smith r6gime. On the other hand, it may be the
view of some of us that temporarily to accommodate the
Salisbury deal or agreement and the Smith regime would be
a practical way out of this dangerous situation and that we
should regard it as transitional, on the way to more
definitive majority rule in the future. I am afraid that
compromising in this manner the ideals we have cherished
for so long would only encourage the Ian Smith regime to
attempt the perpetuation of the minority racist r6gime. It
would also result in the local African population’s being
manoeuvred into a situation of internal disputes and
tensions amongst brothers. The situation in that continent
would become even more painful and sad, Further, any
compromising attitude on the part of the Security Council
might also set a dangerous precedent.
53. I am convinced that any compromise of the past
resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council
would lead to a bitter struggle and violence in that
continent. I urge the Council unequivocally to declare the
Salisbury deal unacceptable and condemn the violent
aggressions committed by the illegal Smith rigime. That is
the only way to achieve an honourable and just solution of
this problem which has plagued the Organization for over a
decade. The United Nations resolutions, the Colombo
Declaration of the Non-aligned Countries, the Maputo
Declaration and the Lagos Declaration have all reaffirmed
the inalienable right of the people of Zimbabwe to
self-determination,
freedom and independence and the
legitimacy of their struggle to secure by all means at their
disposal the enjoyment of that right as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations.

54. On behalf of my own delegation and in Sri Lanka’s
capacity as Chairman of the Group of Non-Aligned Coun..
tries, let me reaffirm this right and the principle that there.
should be no independence before majority rule in Zim..
babwe and that any settlements relating to the future of the
colony must be worked out with the full participation of all
the people of Zimbabwe and in accordance with their true
aspirations. Any settlement reached under the auspices of
the Ian Smith r&me is illegal and unacceptable.
55. The PRESIDENT: I am sure that I speak on behalf of
all the members of the Security Council when I welcome
the representative of Sri Lanka to his post at the United
Nations and say how much we look forward to working
with him in friendly collaboration in the future.
56. The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I
invite liim to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
57. Mr, MUJEZINOVI c (Yugoslavia): First of all I wish to
express our thanks to you, Mr. President, and the othe!r
members of the Security Council for having enabled the
Yugoslav delegation to participate in this important debate
on the question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia. May I also avail myself at the same tiine of the
opportunity to congratulate you as President of the Council
for the month of March and to wish you success in carrying
out this responsible duty. My delegation is particularity
pleased to see you presiding over the Council’s meetings ;as
the representative of a country with which Yugoslavia has
long-standing traditionally friendly relations.
58. The Yugoslav delegation has asked to be allowed to
participate in this debate in order to voice its solidarity
with the authentic aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe
embodied in the statements delivered by the leaders of the
Patriotic Front, Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Nkomo [206&h meeting]. Their firm stand, their realistic analysis of fhe
so-called internal settlement, their deep conviction of the
justice of their struggle and their vision of the future of
independent Zimbabwe, the fact that they are devoid of
an? racial prejudice with regard to the problem despite the
terrible suffering inflicted by the racist regime on their
people, the calm with which they are looking the sta,rk
reality in the face and, above all, their broad statesmanlike
wisdom and rea.diness to continue the dialogue with the
United Kingdom as the administering Power-all
this has
confirmed my delegation in its profound belief that the
world Organization has every reason for exerting maximum
efforts in the search for a solution of the problem of
Zimbabwe along the lines indicated by the leaders of the
Patriotic Front.
59. Further, the united stand of African and other
non-aligned countries which have, together with other
speakers in the Council, rejected in their statements in this
debate the so-called internal settlement in Zimbabwe is the
best guarantee that the problems of the continent will be
solved on the basis of the principles adopted by the
Organization of African Unity and by the non-align&
movement, as well as in the spirit of the Charter of the
United. Nations. In such a resolute stand, we have again
discerned Africa’s firm resolve not to allow
the neo-

recognize the internal settlement, because it is not in
harmony with the principles of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

colonialist and racist forces to slow down the irrepressible
march towards the definitive decolonization of southern
Africa, the overthrow of the policy of apartheid, the
establishment of the rule of the majority and the immediate
independence of Zimbabwe. However, the problem that we
are now discussing in the Council has been on the agenda of
the United Nations and the international community for
more than 12 years. The more its solution is postponed the
more dangerous for peace and security it will become, not
only in the region of southern Africa but also more widely
in the world.

65. I am convinced that you, Mr. President, as an experienced parliamentarian and diplomat understand, as we do,
the aspirations of the martyred and oppressed people of
Zimbabwe. I believe that both in your capacity as representative of the United Kingdom, which bears a special
responsibility
for solving this question, and in that as
President of the Security Council you will fully contribute
to the solution of this urgent problem.

60. The international community, the United Nations and
the administering Power have rejected the unilateral proclamation of the independence of Zimbabwe by the racist
Smith regime as an illegal, unlawful act, and as such they
have never recognized it. Appraising the grave situation and
the conditions that Smith’s racist regime has imposed on
the African majority, the Security Council, in view of the
threat to peace and security in the world, voted sanctions
with the aim of bringing about the downfall of the illegal
regime of Ian Smith.
61. It has been stressed in the current debate-both in the
statements of the Co-leaders of the Patriotic Front and in
those of other representatives-that
the signing of the
so-called agreement at Salisbury is aimed merely at preserving the existing privileges and institutions of Smith’s
racist r@ime. By that action, Smith is trying to confront
the United Nations and the international community as a
whole with a fait accompli,

66. Although Yugoslavia is not a member of the Council, I
wish to point out that, in the view of our delegation, the
proposals contained in draft resolution S/12597, introduced at the last meeting by the representative of Mauritius
on behalf of the non-aligned countries members of the
Council, are realistic and provide a solid basis for a further
acceleration and intensification of efforts in the search for a
solution meeting the demands of the people of Zimbabwe
for national independence and for the abolition of the
racist regime. The proposals countenance the continuation
of dialogue between the parties concerned, taking into
account the Anglo-American plan, which has been supported by the Patriotic Front and the neighbouring States
as a basis for the search for a solution. The abandonment of
that’ basis would jeopardize action to find a peaceful
solution, with all the negative implications likely to arise
therefrom.

62. The recent attacks perpetrated by Smith’s racist
regime against Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique also
reveal the true nature of that regime. Actions against the
innocent civilian populations of neighbouring African
States, including women and children, have become a daily
practice. That amounts to a disturbance of peace and
security on a wider scale. Consequently, the Security
Council should take resolute steps in condemning such
inadmissible acts.

67. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): First, permit me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the high
office of the Security Council presidency-or
perhaps I
should commiserate with you, for there can be nothing
more difficult than to have to preside with the most
scrupulous objectivity over an issue involving the vital
interests of one’s own country. It is a tribute to the United
Nations, which has, on the whole, produced that kind of a
presiding statesman.

63. In its statement issued on 10 March, the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries strongly condemned the
acts perpetrated by the Smith regime in the territory of
Zambia as follows:

68. Addressing the plenary meeting of the twenty-fifth
session of the General Assembly on 13 October 1970 on
the item “Admission of Fiji to membership in the United
Nations”, I stated the following:

“The Co-ordinating Bureau most strongly condemns
this latest ignominious act by the illegal racist minority
regime of Southern Rhodesia against the freedom-loving
and peace-loving people of non-aligned Zambia. The
non-aligned movement is firmly convinced that the
continuance of such barbaric acts by the racist minority
rkgimes in southern Africa against neighbouring independent African countries contributes to the deterioration of
the tense situation in the southern Africa region and
constitutes a further threat to international peace and
security,” [See S/12595, annex.]

“On this occasion it is fitting to recall that Fiji’s
accession to sovereignty is the latest step in the remarkable march to independence which has taken place in a
large number of those Territories which used to be under
British administration. During the 25 years of existence
of the United Nations, 29 Territories formerly under
British responsibility, all of them now represented in this
Assembly, have become independent, sovereign States. In
addition, the four Trust Territories for which Britain was
responsible to the United Nations under Trusteeship
Agreements have all attained independence. These 33
former British Territories have a total population of over
800 mil.lion.

64. Socialist and non-aligned Yugoslavia expresses its
solidarity with Zambia, Mozambique, Botswana and other
African front-line countries in the struggle against the racist
r&me of Ian Smith. We also feel that it is important at this
moment for the Security Council to condemn and not to

“This is, on all accounts, a remarkable record in the
field of decolonization. But this record is somewhat
marred by Britain’s failure to bring freedom to the people
7

and its black co-authorsasa “betrayal”, sayingthat it wasa
betrayal of the black people of Zimbabwe. But littIe was
noted about another aspect of that “betrayal”, The
document was signedby Smith, Sithole, Muzorewa and
Chirau. But in a matter of days, the Smith forceslaunched
a violent attack on Zambia, with simultaneousattacks on
Mozambique and Botswana,leavingmany civiliansdead and
wounded. When Muzorewa was asked on Channel 13 of
United States television whether he, a signatory of the
so-called constitution, was consulted before the attacks
were launched, his reply was: “No, I was not consulted.”
But he obviously thinks he probably will be consultedin
the future.

of Zimbabwe in ensuring that majority rule prevails in
that Territory.“2
69. Seven and a half years have since passed and we are,
alas, still debating the question of Zimbabwe, currently
known as Southern Rhodesia. I wish 1 could say with some
confidence that this was the last time we shall be debating
the question of the decolonization and independence of
Zimbabwe.
70. As the representative of Mauritius, I will not burden
the Council with what would be a repetition of what all
Africans who have preceded me have said on the Rhodesian
issue in our long and dramatic general debate. I can very
easily dispose of that by merely stating that my Government can subscribe to virtuahy all the major principles
enunciated, especially by our African brothers and sisters,
on the question of Salisbury’s so-called internal settlement.
My statement will, therefore, deal mainly with the question
of the immediate future.

75. Thus, in a matter of days after the signing of the
so-called internal agreement, Smith betrayed all three
African parties to the agreement.Many speakersreferred to
Sithole and Muzorewa as “puppets” of the Smith regime,
and this may or may not be altogether true. But this single
incident establishesthe fact that at least Smith regards
them as puppets-puppet accomplicesin his repeated acts
of aggression.

71. In regard to what I may perhaps call the “Smith
constitution”-and
that is what it essentially is, a “Smith
constitution”:
Africans may have signed it, but no African
could possibly have written it-, I would only note its
complete illegality and its total not inadequacy but
irrelevance. It is a trick card pulled out of Smith’s sleeve in
an attempt to take in all the chips in one sweep, in what is
for him a 13”year-old Rhodesian poker game. And, if he has
in the past invariably won, I do not believe it has been just
plain luck.

76. All speakershave pointed out that, under the “constitution”, Smith will have the power to make military
decisions.Here,in this attack, we have the acid test of his
ability-and will-to usethat power, and of the inability of
the black leaders to stop him from using it against
neighbouring States.Here, in these attacks, we have early
premonitions that that new State, controlled by white
hegemony, would be an aggressor
State planted in the heart
of Africa, augmentedby over 6 million blacksandready to
wagewar on other blacks.

72. The “constitution”
is likewise immaterial, because it
does not create a truly democratic State with majority ruIe.
It is illegal because it has not been approved by the
administering Power, and runs counter to the decisions of
the Security Council. It is irrelevant because it was
hammered out in an effort to by-pass all the decisions of
the United Nations, of the administering Power, of the
Organization of African Unity, of the Anglo-American
negotiators, of the non-aligned countries and the Conunonwealth nations and without
the participation of the
Patriotic Front.

77. Thesemultiple aggressions
give somecredibility to the
warnings issuedin the Council by my beloved African
brother JoshuaNkomo (2064th meeting] that the “Smith
constitution” is one more step towards what has been
shapingup for years asthe “Smith-Vorster axis”, groomed
for eventual war againstthe many surroundingStates in.
southern and central Africa. South Africa is already the
strongest military State in all’ of Africa, with nuclear
materialsin its cellarsstored away for the day when it may
explode its first nuclearbomb. The “Smith constitution” is
paving the way for a RhodesianState called Zimbabwe,
armed with similar power. Some will say Nkomo is
indulging in flights of fancy, But why, if Hitler in a similar
situation could have conqueredall of an unarmedEurope,
as well as an armedRussia,doesit seemso far-fetched that
a Smith-Vorster axis could sweepthrough Africa, with its
string of militarily puny States?

73. Never has a political document come into the world so
completely isolated from the approval of the totality of the
international community. The only thing that can be said
to its credit is that is has been able to create an almost
unmatched unanimity in the Council, which had become
notorious for lack of it. I do not refer to the upcoming
draft resolution-that
is a different matter. But it is an
astonishing fact-and perhaps the first time-that in contrast to the debateson all other issuesbefore the Council
there was not a singlestatement for the other side.To be
sure, there are two big Powers which, for somereasonor
other, choseto seesomebeauty in this strangedocument,
but it did not gain their actual acceptance.None claimsthis
“child”, and none respectsits parentage.
74. To what has already been saidI would add only one
more point. Many speakersreferred to the “constitution”
2 Bid.,

Twenty-fifth

paras.36 and 37.

Session,

Plenary

Meetings,

1863rd meeting,

8

78. This is what the “Smith constitution” in the broader
perspective could mean to Africa. What we see now in
Namibia, in Angola, in the other States,may be the same
skirmisheswe saw in Spain as a prelude to the Secontl
World War, and in Chinaasa prelude to the attack on Pearl
Harbor-which, it will be recalled,wasalsoprecededby the
strategy of protracted negotiations. It may never happen,
but in order to makesureit doesnot it is necessaryto press
for an early resolution of the Namibian and Rhodesian
issues.There must be dead-linesfor talks, if talks are not to
becomedeadly. Peacenegotiationsbetween the strong arnd
the weak in open-endedtime are an invitation to disaster.

79. Permit me to add another note. The Council has been
attacked by certain segments of the press for not hearing
Bishop Muzorewa’s side of the issue. Smce he made no
request to be heard, certain correspondents engaged in
corridor nose-counting of possible votes and, unfortunately
encouraged by corridor remarks of some delegations, they
concluded that Muzorewa’s failure to make the request
anticipated an almost certain snub by the Council.

resolution of the Zimbabwe question, although he added
that it had not been completely accepted by Nkomo and
Mugabe. Here I quote the President, who said:
“We hope now that we can have a conference of all the
interested national leaders to try to work out the
disparity between the internal settlement proposal, which
is not adequate, and the so-called Anglo-American plan,
which we believe is adequate.

80. This is a contrived explanation, We would suppose
that if the Bishop felt he had a right to speak before the
Council, he would assert that right, regardless of any
opposition. There was a fair chance he might have won.
Then why did he choose to capitulate? Is it because he was
embarrassed
to appear, in the face of the universal
sentiment against him, or because of an innate inclination
to easy retreat as manifested at Salisbury’? And how do we
know it was not the other way about-that it was he who
chose to snub the Council? Had he not already done so
when he put his pen to that universally condemned
so-called internal agreement?

“We have not rejected the individual component parts
of the so-called internal settlement plan. To the extent
that they are consistent with the over-all Anglo-American
plan provisions, they are a step in the right direction.”
88. There we have two major premises: first, a partial
acceptance of the Salisbury agreement; secondly, the
introduction of that agreement as a basis for resumed
negotiations, and the borrowing or adoption of some of its
provisions.
89. Now beautified with the make-up of reasonableness, it
was referred to by Ambassador Young last Sunday as being
essentially what he called a “neutral” approach, But what
this
amounts to is a recognition of the validity of the
so-called Salisbury internal settlement, which has been
referred to with such hatred by previous African speakers in
their statements. Whether taken as a whole or in part, it
amounts to the crowning of the “Smith constitution” with
an implied legality, It seems to us to be unbalanced to
equate the two as bargaining plans, The Anglo-American
plan is a plan for negotiations; the other is a constitution, a
fait accompli, and presumably not subject to negotiation, if
we are to judge from Reuters news reports from Salisbury.
Surely the signatories to it did not draft a working paper;
they drew up a “constitution” for a new State and States
do not subject themselves lightly to a negotiation of their
sovereignty. To see the two as being mutually negotiable is
to introduce a confusing and dangerous incongruityassuming that almighty Smith will permit himself to bow to
any such endeavour. Frankly, my delegation must express
surprise that the two Powers could even think in such
terms, following the sharp reaction to their first flirtation
with the constitution as a “first step in the right direction”.

81. Since we must make a fresh start, no one will deny
that it will be a most difficult task, made all the more
complex by the crisis of confidence and credibility generated by the action at Salisbury.
82. We have heard some brutally frank statements about
the administering Power. A lack of confidence in the British
and American negotiators was expressed by many, especially by my African brethren, Joshua Nkomo and Robert
Mugabe, leaders of the Patriotic Front [ibid.].
83. These are facts that will not easily go away with time;
they are wounds that will not quickly heal, even with the
most determined resolve to come to terms.
84. Should we be surprised at African suspicions when the
British and American partners have themselves expressed
suspicions about each other’s motives? The latest agreement between Mr. Owen and Mr. Vance cannot cover UP
the new development: Britain’s apparent threat to run out
and leave the United States holding the bag, even if, as
reported in ‘Z%e Times of London, the statement in
question was apparently later withdrawn.

86. So where do we go from here? Apparently we have no
choice but to revert to the Anglo-American plan, to the
same ship-to pursue our analogy-that seems to have so far
remained grounded. What is the plan, following the
Salisbury development? Is it to maintain its Original
configuration, or is it being groomed for change?

90. The “Smith constitution”-we
insist on this label for
we cannot make ourselves believe that any son of Africa
could have drafted such an un-African document, this
constitution roundly condemned by previous speakers as
being one of the most wicked betrayals in the history of
African decolonization-cannot be thrust under the noses
of African liberationists as a book of virtues to be
emulated, as a whole or even in its tiniest part. It has been
rejected by one African after another as a betrayal
comparable only to the shame of Munich, while its black
signatories have been compared to the quislings under
Hitler. Some may dub this as sheer emotion and anger, but
our Western colleagues of the biblical faith should know
that there is such a thing as “righteous anger”.

87. Following Mr. Owen’s talks in Washington on Wednesday and Thursday of last week, President Carter, in his
press conference on Friday, maintained that the AngloAmerican plan was still the best basis for a Permanent

91. I do not believe that it would be wise to flaunt this
Smithian constitution in the face of those who consider it
trickery and a betrayal. And in purely juridical terms, how
can an illegal agreement, manufactured by an illegal head of

85. These are appalling divisions within divisions as we
hoist our sails for a new journey into the Rhodesian
whirlpool. ‘I mention them not in a spirit of pessimism but
so that we may have a realistic reading of the possible
storms ahead, as a guide to the kind of resolution we are
about to consider.

9

an illegal r&me,
negotiation? s

sumably gained an advantage. This would be a tragic
misinterpretation
of the realities of the Rhodesian situation. The Patriotic Front is not wringing its hands, pleading
for negotiations. If we read deep into the minds of i?s
leadership, we see that they have little confidence in the
entire negotiating process as it is practised in Africa, in
Namibia, and especially in Rhodesia with its long history of
Machiavellian negotiations, sham proposals, transparent
betrayals and the use of negotiations to gain time for each
of those pantomime operations.

become a prestigious and hopeful basis for

92. Having studied the Smith document, we wonder what
brilliant ideas the two Powers can fmd in it that are
indispensable to their own plan? The vetoed majority?
The white-controlled councils? The white-controlled armed
forces? The infmite economic guarantees for white-owned
properties?
The phased ‘reduction of racism? Or the
prospective short-lived duration-10 years-of the so-called
independent State?

99. Indeed, we have heard many Africans at this table
share their bitter doubts about peaceful negotiations. For
them, the imperial Powers now worship at the icons of
peace because it is the fetish of peace and not of war that
has come to symbolize the new strategy for resurgent
colonialism. Thus we seem to have the paradox that when
colonialists talk of peace it is a sure signal to Africans that
they must think in terms of war.

93. If the devil had written his own bible, would God’s
followers in the Council ask for negotiations in the hope
that they might adopt some of his provisions? Almost any
layman unversed in law could point out the fallacy of
culling a part of a document without risking recognition of
its legality.
94. Unless Nkomo and Mugabe have changed since last
week, they have already categorically rejected the Smith
ruse as “null and void” and unthinkable as a basis for
resumed negotiations. To disregard their views from the
beginning is to start on the wrong foot and to hamstring the
talks at the outset.

100. This is what constitutes the rationale of the Patriotic
Front. With its modest guerrilla army of an estimated
lO,OOO-not a mighty army by European standards-it is in
a position to negotiate from a position of strength, strength
that is certain to be augmented by those who are in a
position to supply arms and men if necessary. We have all
heard the pledges and the commitments by Council
members-I need not mention the delegations-who
have
the power to give power and know-how.

95. If the Anglo-American team has some improvements
in mind to add to their plan, there is nothing to stop them
from proposing an acceptable addendum. If it is taken from
the Smith epic, the rebel will, I am sure, forgive them for a
bit of well-intentioned plagiarism.

101. Africans are not allowing themselves to be brainwashed by the self-serving sophistry that there are arms of
varying degrees of morality-bad arms from bad people and
good arms from good people, who unfortunately give them
to our enemies. To Africans generally all arms seem to be
good if they are to be used for freedom and for their
liberation. There is no end to the sermons we hear about
the sin of taking arms from the Soviet Union or Cuba,
ironically delivered by those same Western Powers which
made the USSR their ally when they desperately needed
Soviet power in their losing battles against Hitler. To allay
Western fears, we have heard some outright offers of
military aid also from African States.

96. For my part, I am puzzled at the hesitancy of some of
the Western Powers to declare the so-called internal
settlement unacceptable. We are not asking that they
strongly condemn it, or even reject it; only that they
declare it unacceptable since it is admitted by all to be
illegal. Certainly, Smith did not hesitate summarily to snub
their plan; and, incidentally, since he has done so, which of
their provisions will he relish? Smith is a fox, but at least a
self-respecting fox, Should the British lion be more sub.
servient?
97. In conclusion, the whole concept of acceptable provisions is unnecessary.. It is confusing. It condemns the new
talks to months of protracted debate about selective
provisions-which
provisions are acceptable and which are
not-and
we have seen how similar lost months were
exploited in the wrong direction. Worse still, it would give
Smith a legality he has never previously enjoyed. For the
Patriotic Front it would literally add insult to injury. It is
contrary even to President Carter’s own concept that the
new talks will be between the national leaders. To bring in
the so-called constitution is to bring in the unacceptable,
On the other hand, there is nothing to prevent Sithole and
Muzorewa from bargaining on the basis of some elements
incorporated in their constitution.

102. The Mauritian position now with regard to Rhodesia
is one of outright preference for peaceful negotiations. We
call for further talks between the parties concerned. We will
pursue this course, exhausting patiently every possibility of
,resolving vital differences by peaceful means, and we will
counsel our brothers accordingly. We prefer and counsel the
wisdom of statesmanship and the skill of diplomacy.
103. In this spirit we see the new start being made, not at
Salisbury, but where negotiations were wantonly left off, in
Malta. It is our understanding that both Nkomo and
Mugabe accepted this formula and the Anglo-American plan
as a promising basis for the negotiations which were so
rudely upset by what happened at Salisbury. It may not be
easy to induce the Patriotic Front leaders to consent to sit
with their opponents at this stage, but this obstacle can be
overcome. There will be many other difficulties ahead. But,
in any case, we Africans cannot encourage any solution
which even remotely or indirectly or obliquely recognizes
the legality of the Smith constitution and the Salisbury
surrender.

98. Finally, in drawing up a viable resolution for fruitful
negotiations, it is essential to take into account the
psychological factor. As the two Powers resume their
homework, we discern a tendency to treat the Patriotic
Front as the weaker side at the negotiating table, the
outsiders trying to placate the insiders, who have pre10

104. Our brother from Nigeria, Commissioner for External
Affairs Garba [ZOdSth meeting], made an important
observation about the new negotiations. He said that the
political action would be complemented by armed struggle.
The siren-song of cease-fire will not enchant the African
Ulysses. Africans are beginning to understand full well the
signal that our Chinese colleague tried to convey to us on
Friday [ibid.] : that only by armed struggle can one go into
negotiations for peace. I hope I got it correctly.

have spoken. I can also now identify and shall try to
discount those occasionalexpressionsof suspicion,even
irritation, regardingmy country’s role and future intentions, and to focuson what I believearethe mainconcerns
of the world communityin the presentsituation.
111. I should perhapsbegin by statinga basicprinciple
which has been expressedso often that I would have
thought it had by now becomeuniversallyrecognizedand
accepted.Someof the statementsmadeduringthis debate,
however, have shownme that my expectation wasfalse.
The questionwasaskedby a numberof speakerswhether
the United Kingdomcontinuedto acceptthe legalresponsibility for the colony of SouthernRhodesia.The answeris
yes, of course we do. And, quite frankly, I am very
surprisedthat anyoneshoulddoubt it.

105. In conclusion, I have pointed out some of the
difficulties that beset the new negotiations. There seem to
be a lack of confidence and a great deal of suspicion on all
sides. To my African brothers and sisters I say, let us not
judge our brother Bishop Muzorewa too harshly, Not every
bishop can aspire to be of the political stature of the late
Archbishop Makarios. So, if Bishop Muzorewa has made a
mistake, let us retrieve him and educate him rather than
chastise him and treat him like a pariah. He may have acted
in sincerity but also in naivety. Let us be compassionate.
After all, he commands some significant support in the
cities of Zimbabwe and it may be necessary, if not essential,
to bring him together with the other parties concerned at a
conference table for a peaceful settlement sooner rather
than later.

112. The extent to which we have acceptedour responsibility is, I would have thought, amply illustratedby the
events of the last 12 months. I do not propose this
afternoon to deliveran extendedversionof the history of
the Rhodes& problem.I suspectthat mostof uswho have
sat in this room have heard quite enough about the
backgroundof this problem.Moreover,we have dealt with
the eventsof recentyearsin innumerablestatementsin this
and other forums of the United Nations.But I fear that I
mustgo back to the launchingof what hasbecomeknown
as the Anglo-Americanproposals,more preciselyentitled
“Rhodesia: proposalsfor a settlement”, circulated as
documentsS/12393andS/12395in Septemberlastyear.

106. Perhaps it would be insurance and wisdom to give a
role in these delicate negotiations to the Secretary-General,
whose sagacity and wisdom have proved themselves so
brilliantly on similar crucial issues. His diplomatic skill, the
confidence of all which he enjoys universally, make up the
one element that is now lacking and that is essential if
things are to move well, or indeed if they are to move at all,

109. I would begin by paying my compliments to my
neighbour and colleague, Ambassador Troyanovsky, who
wasPresident of the Council in February. I canthink of no
greater compliment than to say that he exercised his
authority that month with the skill and goodwill we have
cometo expect of him.

113. The packageof ideascontainedin those proposals
was the result of long, hard and seriouswork. They
attracted a generally favourablereaction from the world
community when they were first launched.Indeed, when
we had our debate here at the end of September-the
debate which led to the adoption of resolution
415 (1977)-, very few of thosewho spokein this room
then seemedfundamentallyopposedto the generalcontent
of those proposals.In the view of the authors, they
representedand representa genuineattempt to fiid a fair
and reasonablesolution to the Rhodesianproblem, to
securethe key objective of a transfer of power from the
minority to the majority, whilst at the sametime taking
account of the legitimate fears and interestsof all the
parties concerned.During the past few days I haveheard
many speakersreact favourably to the Anglo-American
proposals.They seemto be attractingadherentsrather than
the opposite. Indeed, I believe that there may be more
awareness
of the positivevirtues in our proposalsnow than
there wasin September.Many speakersaskedwhether the
United Kingdomhad abandonedthe proposalsof which it
waspati author. I am delightedthat I can now respondto
those questions.In the view of my Government, the
Anglo-American proposalsremain very much alive and
continue to representthe best and the fairest basisfor a
peacefulsettlement.

110. I have sat through the past seven days of debatein
comparativesilence,muzzled partly by my role asPresident
and partly becauseI wishedto listen carefully to what was
said in the Council before making my own statement. I
think now that, after everything has been said, I can see
clearly the main points of concern expressedby thosewho

114. That questionssuchasthis havebeenaskednot once
but repeatedlyhas brought home to me the fact there is
widespreadmisunderstanding
of what the Governmentsof
the United Kingdomandthe United Stateshavebeendoing
in recent months.I fear too that there hasbeena great deal
of unquestioningacceptanceof newspaperreports. I have

107. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Mauritius for the kind words he addressed to me. I am also
grateful that he pointed out the decolonization record of
my country over the last 30 years, It is with a senseof at
least historical achievement that I look at the United
Nations today and see, I think, no lessthan 34 countries
which are ex-colonies of the United Kingdom-35, if I
include the United States, but even if one is a little more
contemporary it is perhapsan astonishingrecord. I must,
however, take issuewith him on one point. Without going
into the details, I think his version of the circumstances
in
which Bishop Muzorewa did not addressthe Security
Councilwas somewhateccentric and inaccurate.
108, I should like now to make a statement in my
capacity as the representativeof the UNITED KINGDOM.

11

November he had completed his tour. He had one short
session with Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Nkomo, the joint leaders
of the Patriotic Front, at Dar es Salaam. At Salisbury he
held two long sessions with Bishop Muzorewa and with the
Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole. While at Salisbury, Lord
Carver and Lieutenant-General Prem Chand had several
meetings with Mr. Smith’s senior civilian and military
officials and one meeting at which Mr. Smith was present,
Apart from these contacts with the parties directly concerned, there were also meetings with a number of the
Presidents of the front-line States and with the head of
State of Nigeria. Since then there have been several contacts
with all the parties at working level and, together with our
United States colleagues, we have been very active in
keeping the representatives of the front-line States fully
informed.

of course the highest regard for the press and believe that
generally they have done a remarkably good job in
following a complex and difficult story, which, from its
very nature, has often been only half in the open. But, even
if by definition journalists can never make mistakes, they
do occasionally allow their fictional fancies a little too
much freedom.
115. The Commissioner for External Affairs of Nigeria
himself repeated a story which had appeared in some
newspapers and which is totally inaccurate. He seemed to
believe reports that my Secretary of State, Mr. David Owen,
“ran away” from this meeting because of a remark made by
my friend and colleague the representative of the United
States [see 2065th meeting, para. 91. In the interests of
truth and historical accuracy, may I say that such a version
is completely false. The fact is that the comments which
were supposed to have induced Mr. Owen to return to
London did not come to the attention of the United
Kingdom Permanent Mission to the United Nations or to
our Embassy at Washington until after Mr, Owen had
boarded an aeroplane at, Washington en route back to
London. Mr. Owen himself has made clear that he returned
to London after having spent hours in detailed talks with
his United States opposite number, Mr. Vance, and with
President Carter. Having reached agreement with the United
States authorities on a number of important decisions for
the future handling of the problem of Rhodesia, he decided
to return immediately to London to inform his Cabinet
colleagues on the following day. At no time had a decision
been taken that the Secretary of State was definitely to
attend this debate. Indeed, quite the contrary is the case. It
is, to say the least, unfortunate that the Commissioner for
External Affairs of Nigeria should have encouraged this
canard. I hope that this will be a definitive end to some of
the sillier stories which have been circulated on this subject.

118. Within two or three weeks of Lord Carver’s return to
London, Mr. Smith announced his intention of beginning
negotiations with Bishop Muzorewa, the Reverend Sithole
and Chief Chirau in the hope of reaching what has come to
be called the internal settlement. On 4 and 5 December the
Reverend Sithole travelled to London for discussions at the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office. At about the same
time, Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Nkomo were invited to come to
London for talks on 13 December, but the leaders of the
Patriotic Front refused that invitation.
119. We continued our efforts to prevent the AngloAmerican initiative from losing momentum. Those efforts
were successful in that we arranged for Lord Carver and
Lieutenant-General Prem Chand to go to Maputo early in
January to see President Machel of Mozambique, with
whom it had not been possible to arrange a meeting in
November. Those talks proved positive and useful. Taking
advantage of his presence in southern Africa, Lord Carver
also had brief discussions with the South African Foreign
Minister at Johannesburg and with Ministers of Botswana at
Gaborone.

116. But the fact that a number of such rnisunderstandings have gained currency does suggest to me that
there may be a need to recount briefly some of the events
which have taken place since the publication of our
proposals last September. The most immediate action was
to bring to the Council the request that the SecretaryGeneral should be authorized to nominate a representative
to enter into discussion with the British Resident Commissioner designate. The upshot of that request was the
adoption of resolution 415 (1977) and the consequent
appointment of Lieutenant-General Prem Chand. The task
we faced thereafter was clear. We had to persuade all the
parties to recognize that our proposals represented a
package containing elements which were distasteful to them
but essential for others and elements which were essential
for them and distasteful to others. From the start, all the
parties indicated a readiness to treat our proposals as a
framework for negotiation, although it was clear from both
their public and their private statements that some of them
had major reservations. Indeed, we have now reached the
point where none of the parties directly concerned seems
willing to accept the Anglo-American proposals in all their
essentials.

120. It was not until towards the end of January that we
were able to obtain from ,the Patriotic Front leaders a
favourable response to our invitation to a meeting in Malta
from 30 January to 2 February. The United Kingdom was
represented there by Mr. Owen and the United States by
Ambassador Young. These talks have been referred to both
by Mr. Nkomo and by Mr. Mugabe as well as by other
speakers. They have been characterized as useful in allowing
the parties to achieve a greater understanding of each
other’s positions. In his statement to the House of
Commons after those talks, Mr. Owen pointed out that,
although the necessary element of compromise between the
parties was lacking at present, we would continue to work
within the framework of the proposals for a peaceful
settlement, and that we had agreed with the Patriotic Front
to meet again at a time and place to be decided. Much has
been made of the fact that there has been no meeting since
the talks in Malta. The representative of Mauritius indeed
referred to it in the statement which he has just made. This
has been adduced as evidence of our “paralysis”. The fact is
that we offered to the Patriotic Front a follow-up meeting
here in New York on 10 February and that this was not
taken up.

117. The Resident Commissioner designate, Field-Marshal
Lord Carver, set off for Africa at the end of October,
accompanied by Lieutenant-General Prem Chand. By mid13

121. I find it impossible, having listed all the foregoing
contacts, to accept the conclusion that the United Kingdom
and the United States, the authors of the Anglo-American
proposals, have been guilty of any reluctance to sustain
momentum. It is just not true. The front-line States
themselves know how often the Ambassadors or other
diplomatic officials of the United Kingdom or the United
States have been in contact with them over the last few
months in endless efforts to keep the initiative alive and in
motion. We cannot accept that the fault is ours if the
proposals have not so far resulted in a compromise
agreement.

however seriously defective in terms of what we believe to
be necessary for a lasting and just solution to the problem.
But we must face the fact too that, from the time we first
put these proposals forward, neither the Patriotic Front nor
the regime at Salisbury accepted them as anything more
than a basis for negotiation; and, in th.e negotiations we
have had with them, it is clear that, in practice, they reject
elements in our proposals which go to their very heart. In
Malta some progress was made, but even there the Patriotic
Front was asking for a dominant role in government during
the transitional period which would have been inconsistent
with our responsibility to ensure fair and free elections in
which all could take part on au equal footing.

122. Into this situation another element was then introduced. Mr. Smith back in December had begun his negotiations with those African leaders inside Rhodesia, These
talks had continued in the background as a kind of
counterpoint to our own negotiations. We were not privy to
them; we were not in any way involved in them; we did
nothing to encourage them at the expense of our proposals.
But whether we like it or not, an agreement was signed at
Salisbury on 3 March between
Mr. Smith, Bishop
Muzorewa, Chief Chirau and the Reverend Sithole and that
agreement undoubtedly represents a new element in the
situation. The internal agreement, as it has come to be
called, is not adequate. It leaves many major issues still to
be resolved, and is seriously defective in a number of areas
to which we attach great importance: in particular, the
need that in any transition there should be adequate
agreement on how to deal with the critical issue of law and
order, and on the necessity of ensuring that control during
this period is not left in the hands of the illegal regime.

125. The question we must now face therefore is how to
proceed from here. On 9 March, at his regular press
conference, the President of the IJnited States announced
that, following the meeting between the United States
Secretary of State and Mr. Owen, our two Governments
intended to call a conference to try to work out the
disparity between the provisions of the internal agreement,
which are inadequate, and the Anglo-American plan, which
we believe to be adequate and sensible. The following day,
Mr, Owen himself reiterated that our aim was to secure a
genuine and irreversible transfer to majority rule. We have
therefore decided, with our United States partners, that we
should now attempt to bring together all the parties to the
Malta and the Salisbury talks with a view to widening the
areas of agreement.
126. Our decision to take this step seems to me to reflect
a wish which has often been expressed in this chamber over
the past few days. Many speakers have urged that the
United Kingdom and the United States should make
further, urgent efforts to get the parties back into negotiations. We believe that, to make any progress, we have to
involve the parties engaged in the Salisbury talks, as well as
those engaged in the Malta talks, since whatever we may
think of them the former are a reality.

123. As President Carter has said:
“We have not rejected the individual component parts
of the so-called internal settlement plan, To the extent
that they are consistent with the over-all Anglo-American
plan provisions, they are a step in the right direction.”
These words seem to have caused great unhappiness among
the leaders of the Patriotic Front, and among a number of
those who have spoken during this. debate. I really cannot
see why. The fact is that there are elements in the internal
settlement as it has been reported which correspond to
what the United Nations has been calling for for many
years. These elements include agreement on a universal
franchise, on the acceptance that a government elected by
the majority of the people shall run the country, and
acceptance that at long last Mr. Smith will have to step
down. Whether or not there are other provisions which
derogate from those concessions, whether or not other
parts of the internal settlement are to say the least
unappealing to the international community, it is undeniable that there are concessions which represent a move in
the right direction.

127. To avoid any possible further misapprehension, I
repeat that in the view of Her Majesty’s Government the
agreement signed at Salisbury earlier this month is, as things
stand, seriously defective and inadequate and cannot be
endorsed, But I repeat, too, that it is a reality and it makes
no sense to pretend that it is not there.
128. We do not delude ourselves that the Patriotic Front
would wish to involve itself in the Salisbury arrangements,
nor would we seek to persuade it to do so, given our own
view of the nature of those arrangements. But we do believe
that by bringing together all the parties there might be ways
of widening the areas of agreement. We do not ask that the
parties invited to meet us should concede in advance their
previous positions. Attendance at these discussions would
not entail recognition by any party of the positions or
claims of others. It would confer no legality on what has
always been and remains illegal. But we do hope that the
parties will be prepared to put the future of Zimbabwe
first, and to examine the issues objectively in a genuine
search for peace, We ourselves will be holding to the
Anglo-American proposals, which we continue to believe
offer the best chance of a peaceful settlement.

124. There is no inconsistency between our support for
our own proposals-which
we believe represent the best
way forward-and
our recognition that there are some
elements in the internal agreement which reflect aspirations
which are universally approved. We therefore find ourselves
in a situation where some of the parties with whom we have
beennegotiating have signed an agreement of sorts, which is
13

129. The key question which has to be considered by all
parties is that of the transfer of power from the minority to
the majority by free and fair elections which are manifestly
seen to be so. At the risk of repeating myself, I would say
that there are elements of common ground between the
different positions held by the participants in the Salisbury
talks, by the Patriotic Front, and by the authors of the
Anglo-American proposals. Those common elements are:
that Zimbabwe should become independent in 1978; that
the Government of Zimbabwe should be eleoted by
universal suffrage; that the elections so held have to be free
and fair. That is already an important area of agreement. Of
course there remain great difficulties in trying to bring
about a peaceful settlement. But we must not allow those
problems to deter us from pursuing the objective of
achieving an agreement which will enable the transfer of
power to take place peacefully rather than leaving it to a
contest of arms which wilI inevitably cost many lives and
may set back the whole future of Zimbabwe. We therefore
hope that all those we have invited will accept the
seriousness of our intentions and will come to a meeting as
we have proposed. Whatever happens, our offer remains on
the table and we will not be deflected from our efforts to
bring all the parties together.
130. I now resume my function
Council.

as PRESIDENT

134. Mr. LA1 Ya-Ii (China) (interpretation from Chinese]:
In its statement made on 10 March 12065th meeting], the
Chinese delegation expounded its views on the situation ia
Southern Rhodesia and expressed its firm support for the
Zimbabwe people’s struggle against racist rule and for
national independence and liberation. Accordingly, we
favour in principle the draft resolution contained la
document S/12597 and we shall vote in favour of it.
However, we hold that there are some parts of the draft
resolution that are not satisfactory. It fails explicitly to
reaffirm support for the just struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. In its operative paragraph 4, the holding of
elections on the basis of universal suffrage “under United
Nations supervision” is referred to. With regard to the
question of “United Nations supervision”, the Chinese
delegation has always held a different position in principle.
In the first preambular paragraph, resolution 41.5 (1977) is
mentioned. As is known to all, when the Council adopted
that resolution on 29 September of last year, the Chinese
delegation fully stated its views on the relevant questions
and did not participate in the voting 12034th meeting].
135. The PRESIDENT: I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution in document S/ 12597,

of the
A vote was taken by show of hands.

13 1. There are no other names on the list of speakers. The
Council will therefore proceed to the voting on the draft
resolution contained in document S/12597. A number of
representatives have indicated their wish to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting. I shall therefore now
calf on them.

In favour: Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, Gabon, India,
Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Venezuela.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Canada, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

132. Mr. BARTON (Canada): In considering the draft
resolution before us, the Canadian authorities have been
guided by the key principle I enunciated in my statement
of 13 March [2066th meeting/, that is, that Southern
Rhodesia must be returned to constitutional govermnent
and that this must include the transfer of effective power to
a government based on majority rule. In that statement I
also said that in the Canadian view the agreement signed at
Salisbury did not provide for such a transfer and that we
therefore regarded it as inadequate.

The draft resolution was adopted by 10 votes to none,
with 5 abstentions. 3
136. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call upon representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote after
the vote.
137. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): Since my Commissioner
for External Affairs has already spoken extensively here
[2065th meeting], it is not my intention to go into the
substance of the debate.

133. The problem we have faced in this debate is how to
express the strong concern of the Security Council over
developments arising out of the signing of the agreement at
Salisbury. We think that the debate has demonstratedhigh
degree of common interest and purpose and it is therefore a
matter of considerable disappointment that, notwithstanding the best efforts of many delegations, we were
unable to arrive at a text which acceptably reflected the
wide area of agreement. For its part, my delegation has
reluctantly come to the conclusion that it cannot support
the draft resolution in the terms in which it has been
drafted. Nevertheless we shall indeed maintain our efforts
to promote an early resumption of negotiations based on
the Anglo-American proposals, which have now attracted
wide support. We are confident that all members of the
Council and, indeed, all Members of the United Nations will
continue in their common efforts to bring freedom and
genuine majority rde to Zimbabwe.

138. I am happy that a unanimous decision has been taken
here which declares illegal and unacceptable any internal
settlement arrived at under the auspices of the illegal
Salisbury regime. I have searched for a basis for seeing
anything like good faith on the part of those, particularly
the United Kingdom, who have on principle abstained on
an issue they have taken up with my Government and
concerning which we gave them all the support possible. It
is quite disquieting to my delegation that by their actions
over the past few weeks, particularly since Malta, they have
stalled, and consciously stalled, the reconvening of the
meetings with the Patriotic Front.
3 Seeresolution 423 (1978).
14

139. It is all well and good for the representative of the

delegation found it possible to vote in favour of it, It is our
belief that the condemnation contained in the resolution of
all attempts and manoeuvres on the part of the illegal
regime designed to preserve power for the racist minority
and aimed at preventing the achievement of independence
by Zimbabwe naturally applies to the deal whkh
was
recently concluded at Salisbury between Smith and the
African collaborationists.

United Kingdom to say that the matter was not taken up.
Taken up by whom? Did they follow up on the Malta
talks? We should not distort the facts. As a matter of fact,
as it turned out, nobody invited the Patriotic Front to a
meeting on the fixed date that had been determined and,
even if they had received that invitation and had not
responded, nobody would have urged members of the
front-line States and Nigeria to,,preva.il on the Patriotic
Front.

146. In voting last September on resolution 415 (1977),
the Soviet delegation expressed its objections to the United
Nations’ becoming involved in any way in measures which
might be prejudicial to the national liberation struggle of
the people of Zimbabwe [2034th meeting]. The Soviet
delegation would like to stress once again that no provisions
of the present resolution should be used to involve the
United Nations in the Rhodesian affair in order to cover up
neo-colonislist plans to settle the problem or to prevent the
elimination of the remnants of racism and colonialism on
the African continent.

140. As we speak now, 33 very important top officials of
transnational corporations here are planning to go to
Rhodesia. During the last week, while we were debating in
this
Council chamber, large transnational companies were
ftting and dining Muzorewa and his rebel group.
141. TO my delegation, the Salisbury talks and the pattern
of voting of the Western Powers here clearly indicates that
they have not been serious with us, and we shall decide
whether we shall take them seriously in future in talking
about peace proposals, The principles for the determination
of the Rhodesian situation and other situations in southern
Africa will in future be dictated not by those Powers but by
Africa.

147. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): It is not my intention to
explain my vote after the vote, but I do wish, on behalf of
the sponsors of the draft resolution which has just been
adopted, to thank the members who voted in favour of it. I
regret that the five Western members of the Council did not
find it possible to vote in favour of it, but rather abstained.
However, we hope that they will join the international
community in the implementation of the resolution.

142. Mr. HUSSON (France) (interpretation from French):
Yesterday [2066th meeting] the French delegation stated
its position on the question before the Council. It is
therefore not necessary for me to revert to the matter
today. I shall be brief.

148. Mr. President, I warmly thank you personally. In
your capacity as President of the Council you have
conducted the affairs of the Council with great talent and
integrity. I take into consideration that during the last few
days you must have been faced with some very difficult
moments.

143. I would simply explain that throughout the debate
my delegation hoped that we could unanimously agree on a
text. Unfortunately
it has not been possible to agree on
wording, and that is why we abstained in the vote.

149. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Mauritius. He is quite right.

144. The lack of unanimity is regrettable, because we all
seem to share the feeling that the document signed on
3 March at Salisbury is an unsatisfactory answer to the
Rhodesian question and that efforts should be continued
tenaciously under the leadership of the United Kingdom
and the United States towards a comprehensive settlement.
In particular, we hope that all who have a decisive role to
play in the future of the country, and particularly the
nationalist leaders, will agree to set aside their rivalries and
join with the administering Power in the interests of
building an independent Zimbabwe in conditions of peace.

150. I should like now to make an explanation of vote in
my capacity as representative of the UNITED KINGDOM.
151. We have abstained on this draft resolution because
we do not believe that it would help to bring about what
everyone wants, namely, a peaceful settlement, if the
United Kingdom, with its special responsibilities as the
administering Power, were to vote in favour of a text which
could be open to misconstruction in a number of important
respects.

145. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The Soviet dekgation would have preferred to vote in favour of a
resolution which condemned more decisively the manoeuvres of the racists and their henchmen snd which determined more clearly ways and means of ensuring the right to
self-determination
and independence of the people of
Zimbabwe. However, in the light of the position taken by
the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe and by the African and
nonaligned countries members of the COU~C%and alsO
taking into account the fact that even in its present form
the resolution, in particular, declares as illegal and unacceptable any internal settlement arrived at under the
auspices of the illegal regime of Salisbury and calls uPon all
States not to recognize such a settlement, the Soviet

152. I should add that we regret very much that the
sponsors of the draft resolution were not able to give fuller
consideration to the alternative formulations which we and
other members of the Council offered to them during
consultations.
153. I made clear the United Kingdom’s position in my
statement earlier today. We have made clear that we will
neither accept nor condemn the outcome of the recent
discussions at Salisbury. We have also made clear that we
regard that outcome as seriously defective and inadequate
as a basis for a settlement. The outcome of the talks is not a
settlement, nor is it even a full agreement, as there are still
15

major outstanding issues, particularly relating to law and
order, which have to be resolved. These are among the
issues which are at the heart of the present conflict.

have any misunderstanding, we wish to place on record our
interpretation of the resolution. We regard its primary
purpose as being to indicate clearly that a settlement which
leaves the position substantially as it is at present, with an
illegal regime retaining power on behalf of a minority
community, is unacceptable to the international community and not one which will or can be recognized. We
have no hesitation in endorsing that, for that has been our
consistent position, and it would be totally incompatible
with our own proposals not to do so. We do not interpret
the operative paragraphs as precluding the acceptance and
recognition of an independent Government of Zimbabwe
chosen by a manifestly democratic process of the people of
Zimbabwe as a whole. That has consistently been the
principle on which my Government has taken its stand and
we cannot and will not depart from it.

154. As members of the Council know, it is our aim, in
co-operation with the Government of the United States, to
bring all the parties together to resolve all the issues which
stand in the way of ending that conflict. In advance of such
discussion with the parties, it is right that the United
Kingdom should maintain a position in which we can bring
the parties together and it is important to maintain such a
position, in circumstances in which a vote for the draft
resolution could be seen as a condemnation of the outcome
of the recent discussions at Salisbury and a vote against the
draft as an endorsement of it.
155. My Government considers that some of the formulations used in the resolution are obscure and, rather than

The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your
bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
deposit&es
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
h : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes,
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoraa
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S.

2.00

(or

equivalent

in other currencies)

78-70005-September

1979-9,906
