E.

D. Application of the Republic of Uzbekistan

Application of the Republic of Tajikistan

Decisions

Decisions

At its 3037th meeting, on 23 J anuary 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic ofUzbekistan 377 for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3038th meeting, on 23 January 1992, the Council,
following the adoption of its agenda, decided to refer the
application of the Republic of Tajikistan 380 for membership in
the United Nations to the Committee on the Admission of New
Members for examination and report, as provided in rule 59 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 3043rd meeting, on 29 J anuary 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members378 conceming the application of the Republic of
Uzbekistan for admission to membership in the United Nations.

At its 3044th meeting, on 29 January 1992, the Council
discussed the report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members381 conceming the application of the Republic of
Tajikistan for admission to membership in the United Nations.

Resolution 738 (1992)
Resolution 737 (1992)

or 29 January 1992

or 29 January 1992

The Security Council,
The Security Council,
Having examined the application of the Republic of
Tajikistan for admission to the United Nations,3&J

Having examined the application of the Republic of
Uzbekistan for admission to the United Nations,3 77

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
ofTajikistan be admitted to membership in the United Nations.

Recommends to the General Assembly that the Republic
of Uzbekistan be admitted to membership in the United

Adopted without a vole al th,· 3044th
meeting.

Nations.
Adopled without a vote at the 3043rd
meeting.

Decision
Decision

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 738 (1992), the President made the following
statement on behalf of the members of the Council: 382

At the same meeting, following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 737 (1992), the President made the following
statement on behalf of the members of the Council: 379

"I am pleased, on behalf of the members of the
Council, to extend our congratulations to the Republic of
Tajikistan on the occasion of the Council's recommendation that Tajikistan be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

"The Council bas just adopted resolution 737 (1992)
recommending the admission of the Republic of Uzbekistan to the United Nations. This recommendation will
shortlybe before the General Assembly, for the final stage
of the process of admission. On behalf of the members of
the Council, it is my privilege to congratulate Uzbekistan
on this happy and historie event.

"Ali the members of the Council are confident that
Tajikistan will make a significant contribution to the work
of the Organization. In today's changing world, the
principle of universality is ever more important. We note
with great satisfaction Tajikistan's commitment to uphold
the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and to fulfil ail the obligations contained in the
Charter.

"Uzbekistan bas solemnly undertaken to fulfil ail the
obligations of the Charter of the United Nations, and this
is most welcome. The members of the Council are confident that Uzbekistan will have much to contribute to the
many tasks of this Organization. We look forward to
welcoming the representatives of Uzbekistan as colleagues
and working with them in ail the various forums of the
United Nations."

"In conclusion, I should like to address to the Republic of Tajikistan the warmest greetings of the members of
the Council."
112
