S/PRST/2004/40

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 October 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5066th (resumed) meeting of the Security Council, held on 28 October
2004, in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Women
and peace and security”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the continuing and
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and welcomes the increasing
focus on the situation of women and girls in armed conflict since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) in October 2000. The Council recalls the Statement
by its President of 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/32) and the meeting held
on 29 October 2003 as valuable demonstrations of that commitment.
“The Security Council also recalls the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action (A/52/231) and the outcome document of the twenty-third Special
Session of the United Nations General Assembly entitled “Women 2000:
Gender Equality, Development and Peace for the Twenty-First Century (A/S23/10/Rev.1), in particular the commitments concerning women and armed
conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes the Report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security (S/2004/814) and expresses its intention to study
its recommendations. The Council welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
system, Member States, civil society and other relevant actors, to promote the
equal participation of women in efforts to build sustainable peace and security.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the continued acts of genderbased violence in situations of armed conflict. The Council also condemns all
violations of the human rights of women and girls in situations of armed
conflict and the use of sexual exploitation, violence and abuse. The Council
urges the complete cessation by all parties of such acts with immediate effect.
The Council stresses the need to end impunity for such acts as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking peace, justice, truth and national
reconciliation. The Council welcomes the efforts of the United Nations system
to establish and implement strategies and programmes to prevent and report on
gender-based violence, and urges the Secretary-General to further his efforts in
this regard. The Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure that human
rights monitors and members of commissions of inquiry have the necessary
expertise and training in gender-based crimes and in the conduct of
investigations, including in a culturally sensitive manner favourable to the
04-57809 (E) 281004

*0457809*

S/PRST/2004/40

needs, dignity and rights of the victims. The Council urges all international
and national courts specifically established to prosecute war-related crimes to
provide gender expertise, gender training for all staff and gender-sensitive
programmes for victims and witness protection. The Council emphasizes the
urgent need for programmes that provide support to survivors of gender-based
violence. The Council further requests that appropriate attention is given to the
issue of gender-based violence in all future reports to the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms the important role of women in the
prevention of conflict and supports the Secretary-General’s intention to
develop a comprehensive system-wide strategy and action plan for increasing
attention to gender perspectives in conflict prevention. The Council urges all
relevant actors to work collaboratively, including through strengthened
interaction with women’s organizations, to ensure the full participation of
women and the incorporation of a gender perspective in all conflict prevention
work.
“The Security Council also welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention
to develop a comprehensive strategy and action plan for mainstreaming a
gender perspective into all peacekeeping activities and operations and to
incorporate gender perspectives in each thematic and country report to the
Council. In support of this process, the Council reaffirms its commitment to
integrate fully gender perspectives into the mandates of all peacekeeping
missions. The Council recognizes the contribution of the gender adviser within
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to advancing the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and requests the Secretary-General to consider an
equivalent arrangement within the Department of Political Affairs to further
support such implementation.
“The Security Council considers that an increase in the representation of
women in all aspects of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building
operations and humanitarian response is urgently needed. To that end, the
Council urges the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to identify
suitable female candidates, including, as appropriate, from troop-contributing
countries, in conformity with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations
and taking into account the principle of equitable geographical balance. Such
efforts should include the implementation of targeted recruitment strategies
and also seek to identify candidates for senior level positions, including in the
military and civilian police services.
“The Security Council recognizes the vital contribution of women in
promoting peace and their role in reconstruction processes. The Council
welcomes the Secretary-General’s intention to develop strategies to encourage
women’s full participation in all stages of the peace process. The Council also
requests the Secretary-General to encourage gender mainstreaming in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes by developing
guidelines to increase attention to the needs of women and girls in such
programmes. The Council further requests the Secretary-General to
mainstream a gender perspective in all aspects of post-conflict reconstruction
programmes, including through the strengthening of gender theme groups in
countries emerging from conflict, and to ensure that all policies and
programmes in support of post-conflict constitutional, judicial and legislative

2

S/PRST/2004/40

reform, including truth and reconciliation and electoral processes, promote the
full participation of women, gender equality and women’s human rights.
“The Security Council recognizes the important contribution of civil
society to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and encourages
Member States to continue to collaborate with civil society, in particular with
local women’s networks and organizations, in order to strengthen
implementation. To that end, the Council welcomes the efforts of Member
States in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) at the national level, including
the development of national action plans, and encourages Member States to
continue to pursue such implementation.
“The Security Council recognizes that significant progress has been
made in the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in certain areas of the
United Nations peace and security work. The Council expresses its readiness
to further promote the implementation of this resolution, and in particular
through active cooperation with the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly. In order to further consolidate this progress, the Council
requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Security Council in October
2005 an action plan, with time lines, for implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
across the United Nations system, with a view to strengthening commitment
and accountability at the highest levels, as well as to allow for improved
accountability, monitoring and reporting on progress on implementation within
the United Nations system.”

3
