A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/208
27 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 96 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/52/627)]
52/208. Industrial development cooperation:
Decade for Africa

Second Industrial Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on International Economic Cooperation, in particular the Revitalization of
Economic Growth and Development of the Developing Countries,1 the International Development Strategy
for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade 2 and the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s,3
Taking note of the declaration adopted by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of countries members of the
Group of 77 at their twenty-first annual meeting, held in New York on 26 September 1997,4 the communiqué
adopted in New York on 25 September 1997 at the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Heads of
Delegation of Non-Aligned Countries to the fifty-second session of the General Assembly 5 and the
Declaration on Africa's Industrialization, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held at Harare from 2 to 4 June 1997,6
concerning the importance of industrial development for developing countries, especially those in Africa, and
the essential role of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in this regard,

1

Resolution S-18/3, annex.

2

Resolution 45/199, annex.

3

Resolution 46/151, annex, sect. II.

4

A/52/460, annex.

5

A/52/447-S/1997/775, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fifty-second Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1997, document S/1997/775.
6

A/52/465, annex II, document AHG/Decl.4 (XXXIII).

98-77011

/...

A/RES/52/208
Page 2

Reaffirming its resolution 50/94 of 20 December 1995 on the Second Industrial Development Decade
for Africa, in which it requested the Secretary-General to report to it at its fifty-second session on the
implementation of the resolution, and its resolution 51/170 of 16 December 1996,
Recognizing the importance of industrialization as a key element in promoting sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in Africa, in accordance with relevant General Assembly resolutions and
recent United Nations conferences, as well as its role in facilitating efforts for the eradication of poverty, the
integration of women in the development process and the creation of productive employment,
Recognizing also the increasing role of the business community, including the private sector, in particular
small and medium-sized enterprises, in enhancing the dynamic process of the development of the industrial
sector,
Taking note of the Plan of Action for the Alliance for Africa's Industrialization, adopted by the
Conference of African Ministers of Industry at its thirteenth meeting, held at Accra in May 1997,7
Emphasizing the continuing need for the mobilization of adequate resources through domestic and
international initiatives for the implementation of the programme for the Second Decade, including a
favourable climate for foreign direct investment, private sector development, small and medium-sized
enterprises and enhanced market access, and recognizing the need for African countries to use both human
and financial resources more effectively in the process of industrialization,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the programme for the
Second Industrial Development Decade for Africa (1993-2002);8
2. Calls upon all Member States to support the implementation of the programme for the Second
Decade and the Plan of Action for the Alliance for Africa's Industrialization, taking into account the results
of the mid-term review of the Second Decade;
3. Invites donor countries, United Nations funds and programmes, all relevant United Nations
organizations and the private sector to participate in a meeting of donors to be organized by the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization in collaboration with the Economic Commission for Africa, the
United Nations Development Programme and the Organization of African Unity, under the leadership of the
African Development Bank and in cooperation with the World Bank;
4. Appeals to the international community and the relevant organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, in particular the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Economic
Commission for Africa, in accordance with their agreed mandates, work programmes and priorities, to support
the programmes of the African countries to intensify and expand industrial cooperation among themselves;
5. Urges African Member States to integrate the objectives of the Alliance for Africa's Industrialization
into their national plans and in the establishment of institutional capacity for the formulation of mechanisms
to follow up and monitor programmes and projects, including, where appropriate, the involvement of the
private sector;
6. Requests the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Economic Commission for
Africa and other relevant United Nations organizations, in accordance with their agreed mandates, work
programmes and priorities, to work closely with Governments and the private sector in Africa at the national,
regional and international levels to foster industrial production and development;

7

See A/52/480, sect. IV.C.

8

A/52/480.
/...

A/RES/52/208
Page 3

7. Calls upon the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Economic Commission
for Africa, in accordance with their agreed mandates, work programmes and priorities, to strengthen their
coordination with the United Nations Development Programme and other United Nations agencies and
donors, with a view to accelerating the implementation of the programme and goals of the Second Decade;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 1997
