S/PRST/2004/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 June 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4992nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 June 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its previous statements on GuineaBissau, in particular the Statement of its President of 19 June 2003
(S/PRST/2003/8), welcomes the report of the Secretary-General dated 4 June
2004 (S/2004/456) on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on activities of the
United Nations Peace-building Support Office in that country (UNOGBIS).
“In this regard, the Council expresses its satisfaction regarding progress
made by national authorities towards restoring constitutional order, in
accordance with the Transition Charter provisions and calendar, in particular
the installation of a new National Popular Assembly and a new Government,
thus completing the first phase of the transitional process due to end with the
holding of presidential elections by March 2005, and generating the
environment for growing international confidence and support.
“The Security Council acknowledges, with appreciation, the manner in
which the country’s principal actors and the political forces managed to reach
consensus on critical political challenges they faced during and after the
elections and encourages them to stay the course.
“The Security Council also encourages all parties, and the new
government established on 12 May 2004, to faithfully adhere to the provisions
of the Transition Charter in order to achieve and consolidate national
reconciliation and to ensure the full restoration of constitutional order. It
further encourages the authorities to continue to strengthen the rule of law and
respect for human rights and to resolve outstanding human rights issues.
“The Security Council commends the national authorities and the people
of Guinea-Bissau for their continued commitment and dedication to
democracy.
“The Security Council expresses, nonetheless, its concern with the
fragility of the democratization process in Guinea-Bissau, due mainly to the
country’s deep-rooted structural problems, including the weakness of State
institutions and structures, as well as persistent economic and social crisis.

04-39591 (E) 180604

*0439591*

S/PRST/2004/20

“The Security Council further expresses its concern about the need to
improve the situation of the military, in particular the payment of salary
arrears, which continues to be seen as a potentially destabilizing factor. It
welcomes the Government’s commitment to make all efforts aimed at
addressing the issue of salary arrears and the reorganization of the national
armed forces and invites the international community to fully support such
efforts.
“The Security Council welcomes the improved dialogue between the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the Bretton Woods institutions and urges
the Government to continue to implement its commitments in the areas of
fiscal responsibility and good governance. It highlights the importance that
those efforts be matched by the resumption of adequate levels of international
assistance.
“The Security Council acknowledges and also welcomes the assistance
provided to Guinea-Bissau by bilateral and multilateral partners, in particular
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank,
and encourages their enhanced constructive involvement in the country.
“The Security Council underlines the importance it attaches to the
organization of a round table conference to take place in the last quarter of this
year, which it considers of utmost relevance to addressing some of the most
urgent needs of Guinea-Bissau. In the interim, the Council reiterates its
appeals to the international community to contribute financially to the
Emergency Economic Management Fund for Guinea-Bissau, managed by the
UNDP.
“The Security Council recognizes and commends the work of UNOGBIS
and the entire United Nations country team for their outstanding support and
contribution to the process of normalization of the political situation and
stability in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of the regional
dimension in the solution of the problems faced by Guinea-Bissau and, in this
regard, welcomes the role being played by the African Union, the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguese Speaking
Countries (CPLP) in the peace-building process in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council also commends the efforts by the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa of the Security
Council, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and
Social Council and the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau aimed at assisting
the country to address both its short-term post-conflict crisis and longer-term
development goals.
“The Security Council looks forward to conclusions and
recommendations of its mission to West Africa, which includes GuineaBissau.”

2
