S/PRST/2008/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 May 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5898th meeting of the Security Council, held on 27 May 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the full and effective
implementation of its resolutions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and recalls previous statements on the issue made by its President.
“The Security Council remains committed to addressing the impact of
armed conflict on civilians. The Council expresses its deepest concern that
civilians continue to account for the majority of victims of acts of violence
committed by parties to armed conflicts, including as a result of deliberate
targeting, indiscriminate and excessive use of force and of sexual and gender
based violence. The Security Council condemns all violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law committed against civilians in situations of armed conflict. The Council
demands that all relevant parties immediately put an end to such practices. The
Council reaffirms in this regard that parties to armed conflict bear the primary
responsibility to take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of affected
civilians, in particular giving attention to the specific needs of women and
children.
“The Security Council re-emphasises the responsibility of states to
comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and serious
violations of international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel to provide assistance to civilians in armed
conflict in accordance with international law, and stresses the importance,
within the framework of humanitarian assistance, of upholding and respecting
the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.
“The Security Council recognizes the increasingly valuable role that
regional organisations and other intergovernmental institutions play in the
protection of civilians, and encourages the Secretary-General and the heads of

08-35409 (E) 270508

*0835409*

S/PRST/2008/18

regional and other intergovernmental organisations to continue their efforts to
strengthen their partnership in this regard.
“The Security Council takes note of the Secretary-General’s report of
28 October 2007 (S/2007/643) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit his next report on this subject by
May 2009. The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to provide an
update in that report on the implementation of protection mandates in United
Nations missions as mandated by the Security Council. The Council
encourages the Secretary-General to continue to include such updates on the
protection of civilians in his regular reporting on United Nations missions.”

2

08-35409
