S/2019/355

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 29 April 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the sixty-seventh monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The report of the Director-General covers the period from
24 March to 23 April 2019.
The twenty-first round of technical consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team of OPCW and representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic was held
in the Syrian Arab Republic from 10 to17 April 2019.
During the consultations, some of the outstanding issues related to the initial
declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic were discussed and field visits to the former
chemical weapons production facilities were conducted to collect samples to be sent
for analysis to OPCW-designated laboratories. Additionally, in the framework of
these consultations, the Head of the Declaration Assessment Team discussed with the
Head of the Syrian National Authority the activities and progress of the Declaration
Assessment Team.
I look forward to the report of the OPCW Technical Secretariat on the analysis
of all the information collected during the above-mentioned round of consultations
and I hope that the structured dialogue agreed between the Technical Secretariat of
OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic contributes to achieving progress on all
chemical weapons-related issues.
As I have stated previously, the use of chemical weapons is ab horrent, and
impunity for their use is inexcusable. It is therefore imperative to identify and hold
accountable all those who have used chemical weapons. Unity in the Security Council
is fundamental to achieve this urgent obligation.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-07084 (E)

020519

*1907084*

S/2019/355

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit herewith my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of decision EC-M-33/DEC.1 of the Executive Council of
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and Security
Council resolution 2118 (2013), both adopted on27 September 2013, for transmission
to the Security Council. My report covers the period from 24 March to 23 April 2019,
and also covers the reporting requirements set out in Executive Council decision
EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Fernando Arias

2/6

19-07084

S/2019/355

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish]

Report of the Director-General of the Organisation for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
Background
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Detailed
Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian Chemical
Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013). In
paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat should report
on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by subparagraph
2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February
2015) noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM), along with information on the Council ’s
discussion thereof, as part of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eighty-First
Session, adopted a decision entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the
Declaration and Related Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic ” (EC-81/DEC.4,
dated 23 March 2016), noting the Director-General’s intent to provide information on
the implementation of that decision.
4.
The Council, at its Eighty-Third Session, adopted a decision entitled “OPCWUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Reports on Chemical Weapons Use in
the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-83/DEC.5, dated 11 November 2016). In
subparagraph 12(a) of that decision, the Council decided that the Director-General
shall “regularly inform the Council on the implementation of this decision and
incorporate information regarding the implementation of this decision into his
monthly reporting to the United Nations Security Council, through the United Nations
Secretary-General, regarding EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
5.
This, the sixty-seventh monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance
with the aforementioned Council decisions and includes information relevant to the
period from 24 March to 23 April 2019.

19-07084

3/6

S/2019/355

Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
Executive Council decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
6.

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) As stated in previous reports, the Secretariat has verified the destruction
of all 27 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian
Arab Republic;
(b) On 15 April 2019, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
sixty-fifth monthly report (EC-91/P/NAT.2, dated 15 April 2019) regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19
of EC-M-34/DEC.1.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties
hosting destruction activities
7.
As stated in previous reports, all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014 have been des troyed.
Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to Executive
Council decisions EC-81/DEC.4 and EC-83/DEC.5
8.
The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continues its efforts to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic in
accordance with paragraph 3 of Council decision EC -81/DEC.4 and paragraph 6 of
Council decision EC-83/DEC.5.
9.
Pursuant to the framework of the Structured Dialogue agreed between the
Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic on all chemical weapons -related issues, the
twenty-first round of technical consultations between the DAT and representatives o f
the Syrian Arab Republic took place between 10 and 17 April 2019 in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Syrian Arab Republic facilitated the visit and provided the necessary
cooperation and support for the conduct of a range of activities, which included:
Technical meetings: the DAT and technical experts from the Syrian National
Authority held several technical meetings to discuss some of the outstanding
issues. During these consultations, the Syrian Arab Republic provided
additional information, documents, and/or clarifications with regard to several
outstanding issues identified in relation to its initial declaration and related
submissions.
Field visits: five site visits to former CWPFs were conducted. During these
visits, the DAT collected a total of 33 samples, which will be transported to the
OPCW Laboratory and then shipped to OPCW designated laboratories for
analysis.
Other meetings: the Head of the DAT held a meeting with the Head of the Syrian
National Authority, Deputy Foreign Minister Dr Faisal Me kdad, to discuss the
activities and progress of the DAT.
Interviews: one interview was conducted in Damascus on the occasion of the
removal and smelting of the remnants of the destroyed chemical munitions
and/or production equipment previously located at several former declared
CWPFs.
10. The Secretariat will analyse all the information, documents, and results of the
analysis of samples collected during the twenty-first round of consultations, together
with any further information that may be provided by the Syrian Arab Republic and/or

4/6

19-07084

S/2019/355

collected from possible future DAT deployments, and will report to the Council at its
Ninety-First Session.
11. In accordance with paragraph 10 of Council decision EC -83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat continues to assess conditions for the conduct of inspections at the sites
identified by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in its third
and fourth reports. Pursuant to paragraph 11 of Council decision EC -83/DEC.5, the
Secretariat conducted the third and fourth rounds of inspections at the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in
November and December 2018, respectively. Samples were taken during both
inspections for analysis in OPCW designated laboratories. Once the result s of this
analysis have been received, the Secretariat will report on the results of both
inspections to the Council.
Other activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to the
Syrian Arab Republic
12. The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to provide
support to the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance with the
Tripartite Agreement concluded between the OPCW, UNOPS, and the Syrian Arab
Republic.
13. As at the cut-off date of this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as
part of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
14. Guided by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1 (dated
23 November 2015), as well as by United Nations Security Council resolution 2209
(2015), the FFM continues to study all available information relating to the
allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
15. At the end of September 2018, the FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic
to gather further information and conduct interviews regarding five reported incidents
currently under investigation: two incidents in Kharbit Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and
4 August 2017; one incident in Qalib Al-Thawr, Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; one
incident in Yarmouk, Damascus on 22 October 2017; and one incident in Al -Balil,
Souran on 8 November 2017. The FFM is currently analysing the information
collected with regard to these incidents and will report to the Council on the results
of this analysis in due course.
16. In response to a note verbale from the Syrian Arab Republic dated 28 November
2018, the Director-General deployed an advance team to Damascus from 4 to
6 December 2018 to collect information provided by the Syrian National Authority
regarding an incident of alleged use of chemicals as a weapon in Aleppo on
24 November 2018. The FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic from 5 to
15 January 2019 to conduct interviews and visit hospitals in Aleppo, and to receive
samples provided by the Syrian national authorities in Damascus. The Secretariat is
analysing the collected information.
Activities carried out by the Technical Secretariat with respect to decision
C-SS-4/DEC.3 of the Conference of the States Parties at its Fourth Special
Session related to the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
17. Decision C-SS-4/DEC.3 (dated 27 June 2018) entitled “Addressing the Threat
from Chemical Weapons Use” addresses, inter alia, the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic. In paragraph 8 of the decision, the Conference of the States
Parties (hereinafter “the Conference”) encouraged the Director-General to continue
19-07084

5/6

S/2019/355

to provide regular updates on the FFM’s operations, taking into account the need to
protect the security and safety of Secretariat personnel.
18. Pursuant to paragraph 10 of C-SS-4/DEC.3, the Secretariat is establishing an
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) and p utting in place other arrangements
to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic by identifying and reporting on all information potentially relevant to the
origin of those chemical weapons in those instances in wh ich the FFM determines or
has determined that use or likely use occurred, and cases for which the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has not issued a report.
19. Pursuant to paragraph 24 of decision C-SS-4/DEC.3, the next progress report
on implementation of that decision will be submitted to the Council at its Ninety-First
Session.
Supplementary resources
20. As previously reported, the Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in
November 2015 to support the FFM and other remainin g activities, which include the
work of the DAT and IIT, and the biannual inspections of the SSRC. As at the cut -off
date of this report, total contributions to this fund stood at EUR 21.1 million.
Contribution agreements had been concluded with Australia, Canada, Chile,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Monaco, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America, and the European Union.
Conclusion
21. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic will be on the activities of the FFM; the implementation of Council
decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, including declaration-related issues;
annual inspections of the underground structures already verified as destroyed; and
the implementation of Conference decision C-SS-4/DEC.3. These activities will
continue to be implemented within the framework of the Structured Dialogue with
the Syrian Arab Republic.

6/6

19-07084
