A/66/PV.86

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

86th plenary meeting

Thursday, 15 December 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Alotaibi
(Kuwait), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda items 70 and 71 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/345)
Draft resolutions (A/66/L.26 and A/66/L.29)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/66/81,
A/66/332, A/66/339 and A/66/357)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.28)
(b) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/80)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.27)
(c) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/331)

(Qatar)

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 49/2
of 19 October 1994, I call on the observer for the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies.
Mr. Jilani (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The thirty-first
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, which brings together the States parties
to the Geneva Conventions, the 187 Red Cross and
Red Crescent National Societies, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC), was convened in Geneva at the end of
November with the overall objective of strengthening
international humanitarian law and humanitarian
action. The deliberations of the International
Conference focused on four main themes: strengthening
legal protections under international humanitarian law
for victims of armed conflict, strengthening disaster
law, strengthening local humanitarian action, and
addressing barriers to health care.
The International Conference concluded with the
adoption of a number of resolutions, including on the
topics of health care in dangerous situations, migration,
international disaster law, health care inequalities,
national society and volunteer development, a four-year
action plan on international humanitarian law, and
strengthening legal protections for victims of armed
conflict. I will take the opportunity of today’s debate
to focus on two issues addressed at the International
Conference.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-63985 (E)

*1163985*

A/66/PV.86

Strengthening local humanitarian action lies at the
heart of the mandate of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. The need for
independent and strong operational partners at the local
level is critical to reaching all vulnerable people and
address their needs.
The national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies,
recognized by all Governments as auxiliaries to their
national authorities in the humanitarian field, are best
placed and equipped to provide effective humanitarian
assistance at the local level, particularly in politically
sensitive and complex situations. They work also within
the framework of the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and adhere to its fundamental
principles, which represent the best way not only to
gain access to people in need, but also to win their trust
and confidence.
That unique strength has been translated into
concrete action by the staff and volunteers of the
national societies in areas where very few organizations
have access to people in need, as witnessed recently in
situations in the Middle East and the Horn of Africa.
The International Conference provided the
opportunity for States and national societies to discuss
and exchange views on how to implement the resolution
to effectively develop, manage and extend productive
partnerships that contribute to strengthening national
societies and their volunteer base in order to deliver
assistance and services according to their mission and
mandate.
We recognize that our national societies are at
various stages of development and that each has
particular strengths and faces distinctive challenges.
There remains the need for external support to
maximize their operational and institutional capacities,
as auxiliaries to the public authorities.
Therefore, the Conference called for strengthened
efforts on the part of Governments to support
development of their national societies and their
volunteer base, while respecting and preserving their
mandate and independence. That includes ensuring that
adequate and comprehensive Red Cross Red Crescent
legislation is in place to protect the mandate of the
national society.
The second issue of relevance to our debate today
is the Red Cross Red Crescent commitment to disaster
preparedness, risk reduction and disaster response

2

and recovery. The IFRC continues to build on the
success of its work on the Guidelines for the Domestic
Facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster
Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, known as the
IDRL Guidelines. The Guidelines can help both to
anticipate and to solve common regulatory problems
in international operations, thus helping to accelerate
the entry of relief and ensure oversight and control by
domestic authorities.
It is very clear that because of the increasing scale
and complexity of disasters, Governments need a
balanced and well-prepared legal system as envisaged
by the IDRL Guidelines if international assistance is
to be managed effectively. The report presented at the
Conference on that topic recognized some encouraging
examples of implementation at the regional and national
levels. In that context, the Conference addressed three
aspects of disaster law: the legal preparedness for
international disaster response; legislating enhanced
disaster risk reduction, particularly at the community
level; and addressing regulatory barriers related to
meeting the emergency and transitional shelter needs
of people affected by natural disasters. The primary
focus is on domestic law, policy and procedure, and
particularly on how States, with support from the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
can proactively move to address common regulatory
problems and gaps.
The resolution adopted in that context
welcomed the efforts of the IFRC, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union to develop a model act on
disaster law to assist interested States in incorporating
the recommendations of the IDRL Guidelines into
their national legal frameworks, and invited further
consultation with States and other stakeholders on
using the model act as a reference tool.
Another initiative jointly organized by the Swiss
Government, OCHA, the IFRC and the International
Council of Voluntary Agencies highlighted the fact
that one of today’s key challenges in bridging national
and international assistance is insufficient mutual
understanding, dialogue and knowledge-sharing among
affected States and the international community. That
has led to gaps in trust and confidence and failed
coordination efforts that have ultimately hindered our
ability to work together effectively.

11-63985

A/66/PV.86

Continuing to develop and foster long-term
relationships, working towards a culture of respect and
understanding for the positions and values of others,
and critically examining one’s own systems and ways
of working are necessary lessons to be learned in that
regard.

The scope of use of the “humanitarian” label has
expanded, ranging from emergency relief to disaster
preparedness, early recovery, capacity-building,
judicial action and institutional reconstruction, with
greater stress placed on the causes and structural
consequences of crises.

Finally, we will continue to work with our
partners to encourage such dialogue and to implement
recommendations and lessons learned. We will continue
to work towards enhanced coordination among other
humanitarian actors, including the United Nations,
other international organizations and civil society,
while ensuring respect for our fundamental principles.

Actors are manifold. Alongside organizations
engaged in relief and assistance, there are others whose
raison d’être is not strictly humanitarian action, but
whose action can, in some cases, have a significant
impact. We are referring here to private actors acting
on their own initiative or under a contract and to the
deployment of military or civil defence means. As for
the use of such assets, compliance under internationally
agreed guidelines and the principle of last resort is
paramount.

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 45/6
of 16 October 1990, I now call on the observer
of the International Committee of the Red
Cross. Mr. Füllemann (International Committee
of the Red Cross): The International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) welcomes the opportunity
to address the General Assembly on the important
subject of humanitarian coordination. The past year
has been particularly eventful, highlighting the
growing complexity of the humanitarian environment
in which the ICRC works. Protracted conflicts and
crises coexist with outbreaks of violence and natural
disasters, regularly testing the ability of humanitarian
organizations to anticipate, act and coordinate their
efforts.
In such an unpredictable environment, the ICRC
has repeatedly managed to mobilize its resources to
continue providing timely assistance and protecting
those in need. We have therefore been able to carry
out or scale up operations in armed conflict and other
situations of violence, such as those in Côte d’Ivoire,
Libya, Yemen, Syria and Somalia, to cite just a few of
our main challenges in the current year.
The principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality
and independence observed by the ICRC underpin its
ability to act. They constitute the framework for its
interaction with other entities. The diverse situations
of humanitarian concern encompass natural disasters,
armed conflicts and other situations of violence as well
as increased vulnerability and displacement resulting
from global challenges such as urban concentration,
major economic inequality, fluctuating food prices,
environmental degradation and rising crime in some
parts of the world.

In that environment and based on its experience
and mandate, the ICRC would like to point out two
fundamental aspects of its approach. The first is that
the ability to act is not given — it must be built and
depends on many factors. Experience has shown that
the ICRC’s access and ability to act rely on its constant
and strict observance of the aforementioned guiding
principles, as well as on knowledge of the realities on
the ground, direct access to affected populations and
local partnerships.
The second aspect lies in tirelessly reaffirming that
the responsibility for protecting the civilian population
from serious violations of international humanitarian
law lies primarily with the States in question, as well
as any other parties to armed conflict. Hence, the ICRC
calls for the rules prescribing protection of civilians to
be respected by all parties to armed conflict, basing
this call on strictly humanitarian grounds and on
international humanitarian law.
When armed conflicts and other situations of
violence break out, humanitarian action endeavours
to protect the physical integrity and dignity of those
affected. The recipients of humanitarian action are
the men, women and children who are placed in a
vulnerable situation and who have every right to expect
a swift response, free of any political agenda. For the
ICRC, therefore, the objectives of humanitarian action
in situations of armed conflict and other situations
of violence must be kept distinct from any objectives
of a military, political or judicial nature. Similarly,
such action should not be conditional on the link
with longer-term objectives of good governance or

11-639853

A/66/PV.86

institutional reconstruction, however legitimate and
desirable those may be.
Regarding the relation between humanitarian action
and development, the ICRC confronts that challenge in
most of its operations and activities. More often than not
it needs to mix the two approaches to adequately address
the needs of people and communities affected in the
same country. This depends not only on humanitarian
needs, but also on existing capacities and resilience that
we seek to identify and support rather than substitute.
The ICRC largely shares the ambition to make
better and more efficient the work carried out by all
international, regional, national and local stakeholders.
It sees it as part of a holistic, comprehensive approach,
with the threefold objective of tackling poverty,
fostering development and achieving political stability.
However, although humanitarian action should naturally
aspire to accommodate and facilitate wider efforts
aimed at reducing vulnerability and promoting lasting
development, such a broad perspective is not always
feasible. The reality is that it depends on circumstances,
needs and capacities.
The ICRC’s humanitarian work is strictly and
exclusively humanitarian and civilian in nature.
It is founded on the principles of humanity and
impartiality — that is, without discrimination and
according to the most urgent needs. The ICRC relies on
its neutrality and independence in order to gain access
to affected populations and achieve its objectives of
assistance and protection. Independence means that,
while the ICRC develops a regular dialogue with relevant
authorities, it formulates and implements its policies
and activities independently of Governments’ policies
and actions. By being neutral, the ICRC, focusing on
its exclusively humanitarian mission, deliberately
abstains from any action or declaration that could be
interpreted as taking sides for one party or another.
Concerning those principles of impartiality, neutrality
and independence, the ICRC calls for close attention to
be paid to the operational use of these principles and
the need for clarity about whether the reality matches
the discourse.
The ICRC always acts in complete transparency
with the State in question, building a relationship of
trust through dialogue with States and taking a purely
humanitarian approach based on the principles set out
earlier in my statement. To accomplish its mission and
humanitarian objectives, the ICRC also engages with

4

non-State actors that have de facto influence on the
territories where communities in need live. That is
essential not only to gaining acceptance for the ICRC’s
presence and activities, but also to ensuring access to
the people affected.
The ICRC acts on an analysis of needs based on
assessments combining direct observations from its
staff and partners and information collected from the
affected people. In all stages of the action, it seeks
to consult and involve the populations themselves
and the authorities in charge. Among other concerns,
humanitarian actors have a duty to avoid jeopardizing a
lasting improvement of the situation or bringing about
any other negative effects. In other words, the ICRC
embraces the principle of “do no harm”.
The ICRC strives to respond to emergencies and
is also focused on the prevention of violations of
international humanitarian law, disaster preparedness
and early recovery. The decision to take action is always
determined by an evaluation of the ICRC’s capacity to
make a significant contribution, in the form of either
emergency relief or of longer-term initiatives, by
adapting its know-how to the specific local situation.
The ICRC is also committed to promoting
humanitarian endeavours more generally. That is the
purpose of the campaign launched recently to raise
awareness of health care in danger. Recent crises have
once again illustrated the extent to which violence
disrupts health care precisely when it is needed most.
Combatants and civilians die of injuries that they ought
to survive because they are prevented from receiving
the timely medical assistance to which they have a right.
Lastly, the ICRC places partnerships at the heart
of its practices, as demonstrated by its support for
many governmental structures and services, such as
hospitals, and by the joint operations it carries out in
cooperation with components of the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement. That has been the
case with the close partnerships forged, for example,
for crucially important operations in the course of
the past year in Libya, Yemen, Somalia, Colombia
and Afghanistan, with the national societies in each
of those countries. Close partnerships are the key to
successfully reaching people in need. They are also a
vehicle for sustained capacity-building aimed not only
at governmental structures and personnel, but also at
the national societies of the Red Cross and Red Crescent
in the countries in which the ICRC operates.

11-63985

A/66/PV.86

The ICRC upholds the principle of cooperating
with all operational actors in a spirit of complementary
mandates
and action aimed solely at meeting
humanitarian needs. The ICRC’s approach to coordination
is pragmatic, reality-based and action-oriented. For the
ICRC, coordination is not an end in itself, but rather a
means to an end. Coordination as practised by the ICRC
is based on an analysis of the organizations present on
the ground. Coordination should enable the ICRC and
other organizations to better meet their responsibilities.
Coordination for the ICRC is meant to be tailored to the
context, taking different forms depending on whether
the ICRC is among the few actors able to respond in a
given emergency or if it operates in a broader context in
a complementary manner with multiple organizations.
The principles underpinning the ICRC’s involvement
in humanitarian coordination are as follows. Victims’
needs should be met by those organizations best
placed to do so in operational terms. Coordination
with partners from the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement, first and foremost with the
national societies of affected countries, is a priority.
In all situations, the ICRC takes care to ensure that it
balances commitment to the coordination process with
preserving the independence of its decision-making.
Ultimately, the ICRC promotes coordination that fully
acknowledges the role of the authorities concerned, in
keeping with the spirit of international humanitarian
law and resolution 46/182.
It is on that basis that the ICRC has participated in
the discussions and work of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee for the past 20 years. It is also on that
basis that the ICRC field teams interact with existing
coordination mechanisms, including those of the United
Nations.
The increasing number of actors involved makes
it ever harder to guarantee the effectiveness of the
humanitarian response and to pursue coordination efforts
that maintain the quality of the assistance provided.
The challenge here is to avoid any confusion that would
ultimately harm the people who we have a duty to
help. The current complexity means that only effective
coordination can mould the diversity of approaches into
a suitable response. It is by respecting the principles of
humanitarian action and holding dialogue with all those
concerned that the best response to urgent needs can be
found and a sustained improvement in the welfare of the
affected populations can be achieved.

In conclusion, in an increasingly complex and highly
unpredictable environment, the ICRC will continue to
develop its capacity to pursue strictly and exclusively
humanitarian assistance and protection-based action.
Its efforts will also focus on the speed and quality of
its operational response, the promotion of suitable laws
and regulations through its monitoring of international
humanitarian law, and its commitment, together with
other actors, to improving interaction and coordination
mechanisms, insofar as the ICRC’s independence will
allow.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): In
accordance with resolution 47/4 of 16 October 1992,
I now call on the observer for the International
Organization for Migration.
Mrs. Klein Solomon: The International Organization
for Migration (IOM) thanks the Secretary-General
most sincerely for preparing the thoughtful reports
associated with this debate.
Humanitarian actors, as has been said, are working
in more places and perhaps in more difficult conditions
than ever before, including the provision of assistance
to displaced persons in West Africa following
post-election violence in Côte d’Ivoire, addressing
widespread drought in the Horn of Africa, aiding
large-scale population movements in South Sudan,
and responding to mass flooding in parts of Asia and
Central America — all while responding to the needs
of hundreds of thousands of people fleeing violence in
Libya this year alone. We are grappling with a series of
complex emergencies, often simultaneously.
That is why we welcome the Secretary-General’s
report on the strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations (A/66/81). Effective coordination among
partners is essential when working in complex
environments, and the IOM is committed to working
with our partners at the local, national and international
levels. However, as has just been said by my colleague
from the International Committee of the Red Cross,
coordination cannot be the end but it must be simply
a means for our activities to best serve those in need.
We would like to reflect on this occasion on three of
the Secretary-General’s reports. First, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s thematic report on international
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of
natural disasters, from relief to development (A/66/339).
As the report highlights, with more natural disasters

11-639855

A/66/PV.86

there are more people on the move. Natural disasters
are by their nature unpredictable and require national
authorities, local communities and humanitarian
partners to work together to strengthen resilience and
preparedness.
The IOM calls for greater cohesiveness between
humanitarian and development actors in this regard.
Donors will need to look at their structures in order
to fund preparedness programmes that build true local
capacities for effective disaster response. Additionally,
to bridge that famous gap, agencies need to better link
our humanitarian and development activities for better
outcomes for affected communities.
Secondly, the IOM shares the conclusions of
the report (A/66/357) on the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF). We, too, believe that the
CERF provides quick, predictable funds that allow
humanitarian agencies to reach out immediately to
those in need — not after surveys are undertaken or
policy papers drafted, but when lives are hanging in the
balance. The CERF reinforces the ability of agencies to
work together to provide faster, more effective services
to affected populations. It has also encouraged us to
enter into joint operations, including with partners
such as non-governmental organizations, Red Cross
and Red Crescent societies and other national partners.
IOM continues to be committed to and is actively
working towards further strengthening the CERF. This
afternoon, our Director General will address the CERF
High-Level Conference, and I hope all representatives
will be there.
Thirdly, we are concerned by the Secretary-General’s
report on the safety and security of United Nations and
associated personnel (A/66/345) and its observation
regarding the erosion of respect for humanitarian
operations. In this regard, we urge States to ensure
the safety of humanitarian personnel, to respect the
neutrality of all humanitarian staff and to facilitate
their work in a manner consistent with the values of the
United Nations.
In closing, let me reiterate IOM’s commitment
to those who are most vulnerable. We reaffirm our
commitment to strengthening partnerships and
coordination among States, humanitarian partners and
local communities.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker on agenda items 70 and 71.

6

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/66/L.26, A/66/L.27, A/66/L.28 and A/66/L.29.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.26, entitled “Safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and protection of United
Nations personnel”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/66/L.26, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Cape
Verde, Costa Rica, Honduras, India, the Republic of
Moldova, San Marino, Serbia and Timor-Leste.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.26?
Draft resolution A/66/L.26 was adopted (resolution
66/117).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.27, entitled “Assistance to the
Palestinian people”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/66/L.27, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Andorra, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina
Faso, Cape Verde, Japan, Liechtenstein, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Peru, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, San Marino and Serbia.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.27?
Draft resolution A/66/L.27 was adopted (resolution
66/118).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/66/L.28, entitled “Strengthening of the

11-63985

A/66/PV.86

coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/66/L.28, and in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Belize,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Haiti, Honduras, India, Japan, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Serbia, South Africa, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Timor-Leste.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.28?
Draft resolution A/66/L.28 was adopted (resolution
66/119).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/66/L.29, entitled “Strengthening humanitarian
assistance, emergency relief and rehabilitation in
response to the severe drought in the Horn of Africa
region”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/66/L.29, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Albania, Andorra, Belgium, Botswana,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Eritrea, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
Jamaica, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Peru, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste and the United
States of America.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/66/L.29?
Draft resolution A/66/L.29 was adopted (resolution
66/120).

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): One
representative has asked to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolutions just adopted. I remind her that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel joined the consensus
on resolution 66/118, “Assistance to the Palestinian
people”. Ensuring that assistance reaches the Palestinian
people is an important issue for Israel and for our
region. Israel has demonstrated its commitment to that
cause with more than mere words. We continue to take
concrete actions on the ground. In the West Bank, Israel
has worked closely with the Palestinian Authority to
grow the area’s economy and improve security. Even as
terrorists continue to use the Gaza Strip as a launching
ground for constant attacks against Israeli civilians, we
have taken bold steps to expand commercial activity
and to advance international development in the area.
The results of those actions speak for themselves.
The West Bank’s gross domestic product (GDP) grew
by 8 per cent in 2010 and by 4 per cent during the first
half of 2011. In Gaza, the GDP has increased more than
30 per cent compared to last year and the unemployment
rate is the lowest on record in more than a decade.
Although Israel joined the consensus today
to support the broader principle of assistance and
development for the Palestinian people, we hold serious
reservations about certain aspects of the resolution.
The truth is that the text before us is far from impartial
or comprehensive. It paints an incomplete and distorted
picture. Key obstacles that stand in the way of bringing
peace and prosperity to all in our region, particularly
the Palestinian people, are conveniently omitted. For
instance, there is no mention in the resolution of the
destructive role that Hamas and other terrorist groups
play in Gaza, in clear violation of international law.
When Hamas is not attacking Israeli civilians it is
repressing the Palestinian people that it brutally rules
or facilitating the firing of rockets at the humanitarian
checkpoints through which goods enter Gaza.
Such a neglect of basic facts is nothing new for
the General Assembly when it comes to addressing the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Indeed, over the past several
weeks this body has again rubber-stamped a whole
series of one-sided resolutions that are irrelevant at
best and damaging at worst. Instead of encouraging the
Palestinian leadership to return immediately to direct
negotiations, some in the Assembly are encouraging

11-639857

A/66/PV.86

it to pursue the destructive path of unilateralism. The
international community must make clear that that road
is a dead end. Only through bilateral negotiations can
we achieve the vision of two States for two peoples.
Although Israel joined the consensus today, it
is clear that the ultimate path to peace, security and
prosperity for Palestinians and Israelis lies not in
resolutions of the General Assembly but in solutions
worked out at the negotiating table.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly has heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the representative of Costa
Rica.
Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica attaches great importance to the coordination of
United Nations emergency humanitarian assistance and
believes that the resolution just adopted on the issue is
a useful tool for expediting an effective United Nations
response to various humanitarian emergencies, be
they complex emergencies or natural disasters, and the
delivery of help to affected populations. We agree in
general with the statement on humanitarian and disaster
relief delivered on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
by its Chair.
Nevertheless, in the matter of resolution 66/119,
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”, the
Costa Rican delegation wishes to make a few remarks.
We appreciate the work of John Mosoti of Kenya in
coordinating the draft resolution on behalf of the Group
of 77 along with the Group’s acting Chair, Marcelo
Cesa of Argentina. They sought consensus within the
Group at all times and in an open, constructive way.
We differ, however, with the Group’s ultimate position
in the negotiations in two respects, which we believe to
be significant.
First, Costa Rica regrets that the final text did
not include a proposed reference to the importance
of identifying concerns relative to the protection of
populations, which had been included in a previous

8

draft. In our country’s view, the duty of States to
protect affected civilian populations is not only an
immutable principle, but also of extreme humanitarian
importance. As pointed out in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/66/81), the protection of civilians remains an
important concern and one of the greatest humanitarian
challenges, especially in complex emergencies.
Secondly, as our country has stated on other
occasions, Costa Rica considers the issue of safe, timely
and unhindered access by humanitarian personnel and
assistance to be extremely important. We therefore
regret that we did not include the adjective “timely” in
paragraph 33. Timely access is an absolute necessity if
humanitarian assistance is to be delivered effectively
and must be accorded its proper importance. Instead,
the text avoids mentioning the term for fear that the
concept could be abused. Separating this issue from
its real-life consequences is counterproductive to a
clear understanding of the matter and an obstacle to its
practical application.
Our delegation is aware of the complex political
sensitivities that arise with these issues, but our
primary concern should be to protect the victims of
humanitarian emergencies and to ensure the safety
of humanitarian workers who selflessly come to their
aid, on the basis of the principles of international law,
including international humanitarian law, and national
laws, and in strict accordance with internationally
accepted humanitarian principles, which are included
in the annex to resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991
and in resolution 58/114 of 17 December 2003. We
believe that we must not allow political considerations
to outweigh the lives and well-being of populations in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. We reiterate
our willingness to continue exchanging ideas on this
issue, in quest of a better understanding of the need to
incorporate these elements.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-items (a) to (c) of agenda item 70
and agenda item 71.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

11-63985
