UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
,’ ,’ ; ,. ;,.\ : ;I ‘” _ I.1
,>e ‘.,
‘,
14 JANUARY’ 1982
‘b,

th
MEETING:

0

,,’

NEW YORK

CONTENTs
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2328)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . . . .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situution in the occupied Arab territories:
((11 Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-Genet-al (S/14821) . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2328

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Srrpplct~nts
of the L@c*itri Rcr~~ris (.$ the Sec*rrrity Callrzcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolr~tic~ns trrd
Decisions
r?f’ tlrc Scrurity Cort~il.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2328th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 14 January 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
Mr. Oleg. A. TROYANOVSKY
t Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Prc,sidcnt:

Prc.sr/lt: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

I.
.2.

Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2328)

of the agenda

The situation

in the occupied Arab territories:
497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/ 14821)
(u) Resolution

Adoption

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpwttrtiorz
jiwtn Rtrs.sitrn):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/l4832 which contains the text of a draft resolution
sponsored by Jordan.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(n) Resolution 497 (1981);
(15) Report of the Secretary-General
(S/14821)

I I The PRESIDENT
(i,?tPs/)rcJtatitn from Rttssicrt?):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2.?2211d to 232Srh rtnd 2327th tnmings 1,
I invite the representative of Israel and the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to take places at
the Council table; I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic
Yemen,
the
German Democratic
Republic,
Greece, Hungary,
India. Indonesia,
Iraq, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Mongolia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam,
Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber: I invite
the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

3. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): This is a fateful moment
in the history of the United Nations. The overwhelming
majority of mankind has been anxiously awaiting the
outcome of our extensive deliberations over the past
IO days. Representatives of a wide spectrum of humanity from all corners of the world, of diverse ideologies,
political systems, regions and affiliations, have spoken
with one emphatic voice in expressing their abhorrence
and shock and their determination that brazen relentless Israeli aggression must not be allowed to go
unpunished and unchecked.
4. I have no intention of dramatizing a situation
which has already, through persistent, relentless and
calculated acts of aggression and lawlessness, gone
far beyond anything that could be redressed by abject
acquiescence, slapping of the wrist or formal verbal.
condemnations and denunciations. A self-proclaimed
and expansionist Israel has placed itself outside the
framework of international
law and the Charter of
the United Nations. Enough is enough, for the overwhelming majority of mankind. Those States which
misguidedly might try to bail it out, either wilfully or
in consequence of ransomed wills and resolve to
I

IO. If the intent of the Council has been merely to
reiterate words such as “condemnation”
and “illegality” and other expressions of dismay, then it would
not have decided to take appropriate measures in
accordance with the Charter-because
that is not the
term used in the Charter. That was an unmi.stnkably
action-oriented
decision and its ingredients are meticulously spelt out in Chapter VII of the Charter.

their obligations
to the Charter, cannot but
be regarded as accessories and accomplices in the
crime of blatant aggression against the independence,
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of one Of oul
Member States. This is totally unacceptable and
inexcusable and will not fail categorically to identify
those whose fidelity to the Charter and to peace is
genuine
and not just deceptive lip-service, and the
rest of mankind, whose paramount concern iS for a
continued and effective United Nations as the only
guarantor of an orderly international order as well as
of international
peace and security. The Israeli aggressors are unabashedly determined to destroy both.
The case before us, therefore, is Begin versus the
community ofnations, 3 million well-connected Israelis
versus the destiny of 3 to 4 billion people of our planet.
This is indeed a watershed, n turning point, and the
time has arrived to face it squarely.

perform

It is most pertinent that the draft resolution
~!iialls General Assembly resolution 33 I4 (XXIX).
adopted on I4 December 1974, in which, after years
of collective thinking and assessment, the Assembly
defined in article 3 of the annex, an act of aggression as
“The invasion or attack by the armed forces of a
State of the territory of another State, or any military occupation, however temporary, resulting from
such invasion or attack, or any annexation by the
use of force of the territory of another State or part
thereof’.

5. I had the honour yesterday afternoon to submit
the draft resolution contained in document S/14832.
That draft which, Mr. President, with your permission I now wish to explain to the Council, is not just
a Jordanian draft but is the concerted and unanimous
draft of the Arab world represented in the League of
Arab States, with the consensus support of the nonaligned movement and the valuable support of all other
regions and friendly and peace-loving countries.

Nothing could be clearer or more explicit than the
General
Assembly
formulation
representing
the
consensus and considered view of mankind.
12. The latest Israeli measures in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights and Israel’s imposition
of its
laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights not only constitute a clear-cut
act of aggression as spelt out in the Charter, by the
General Assembly, by the Security Council and in
various Hague and Geneva conventions,
but also
constitute a continuing threat to peace and security in
the region, as well as in our interrelated world. It is
a time bomb set off by a deranged Israeli leadership
bent on setting the entire Middle East and beyond
aflame. There is no dearth of inflammatory
material
in the area, both physically and psychologically,
to
ensure an unfathomable
inferno. Perhaps this is
precisely what Israel would like to see happen, cunsidering the monumental
reservoir of enmity that it
holds towards numerous peoples and regions in the
world.

6. We regard the draft resolution as a first step in the
implementation
of Chapter VII of the Charter. Article 42 of Chapter VII states that
“Should the Security Council consider that
measures provided for in Article 41 would be inadequate . . . it may take [additional measures] as
may be necessary to maintain or restore international
peace and security.”
7. The Arab world is facing all-out aggression against
its domains and its peoples. It is determined that this
all-out onslaught be defeated and repelled by all
possible means, as provided for in the Charter itself.
8. I should like to spell out the provisions of draft
resolution S/ I4832 in the most earnest hope that it will
meet with the positive response commensurate with
the enormity of the aggression imposed upon the Arab
world by Israel’s undisputed acts of aggression.

13. Having endured millenia of hardships in our part
of the world, the Arab world cannot be daunted by
Israeli blackmail and its horrendous consequences.
The primacy in our priorities nurtured in our history
and system of values is that national territories
are
never alienable, nor are honour and *justice amenable
to being sacrificed for material gains, no matter how
great their magnitude, As I stated earlier, the entire
legacy and destiny of the Arab nation face grave jeopardy, and we shall not fail in our duty to repulse it,
regardless of the price.

9. The draft resolution w.hich my delegation had the
honour to submit yesterday afternoon and which has
since been circulated to all Member States is selfexPhitOrY.
It recalls Council resolution 497 (1981).
It further recalls the three reports prepared by the
Secretary-General at the behest of the Council, and
in Particukuthe report contained in document S/
14821, dated 3 1 December 1981, These reports unequivocally establish Israel’s defiance of resolution
497 (1981) on which it was decided that in the event of
non-compliance
by Israel, the Council would meet
urgently “to consider taking appropriate measures
in accordance with the Charter ofthe United Nations”.

14. But what the Council should most seriously
address itself to, apart from our own problem, is the
welfare and continued functioning of the world economy and peace, which would be seriously, if not
3

mortally, wounded should the Council fail to confront
the challenge of Israeli lawlessness and aggression.

Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Pirez de CuCllar. His
outstanding diplomatic skills and dedication to the
lofty purposes of the United Nations have been amply
illustrated in the course of a distinguished career,
including a long association with the Organization.
We wish to assure him of our support in the discharge
of his weighty responsibilities.

15. It is therefore incumbent
upon the Council,
whether representing the industrialized countries or the
developing world, to bring Jsrael to its senses and to
avert a cataclysm of incalculable proportions.
Permissiveness, double standards and favouritism may in
the very short run be clever politics, but can the world
afford its inevitable and catastrophic ramifications?

23. I should also like to convey to his predecessor,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, the expressions of our sincere
appreciation for the high competence, dedication
and talent he displayed during his long service with
the Organization.

16. 1 am not making any insinuations whatsoever, but
simply bringing to the attention of the Council what
J am convinced will come to pass.

24. May I also be permitted to say how pleased we
are to commence this term of ours in the company of
Guyana, Jordan, Togo and Zaire, countries to which
Poland is bound by durable ties of friendly and fruitful
co-operation, J would likewise wish to join in the
expressions of praise of the outgoing members of the
Security Council: the German Democratic Republic,
the country that we succeed here as a member of the
Group of the socialist States of Eastern Europe, and
Mexico, Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia, whose
remarkable contributions to the work of the Council
we all value highly.

17. The draft resolution before us invokes Articles 39 and 41 of the Charter. It will be seen that the
provisions which the draft contains are selective and
by no means comprehensive,
to facilitate its acceptance, notwithstanding
the fact that the Israeli acts are
the ultimate under a definition of aggression. In comparison with other resolutions adopted under Chapter VII. and in particular draft resolution S/l3735 of
10 January 1980, with which my delegation sympathized because of the humanitarian element involved,
the present draft is truly minimal and, as J stated
earlier, a mere first step and an acid test of whither
goeth the United Nations.

25. May J also share in the expressions of thanks
and best wishes addressed to our esteemed and dear
colleague, Mr. Peter Florin, who is shortly leaving
his present post.

18. Such being the case, it is the earnest hope and
faith of my delegation that the draft will be adopted
without equivocation or ambivalence.

26. In addition I wish to express my most sincere
appreciation for the kind words of welcome addressed
to my country by you, Sir, and other speakers.

19. While the Jordanian delegation requests that the
draft resolution be put to the vote, we fully recognize
that the decision on this matter is the prerogative of
the President, who, in consultations
with member
States, can best assess what would be the most appropriate time to put this draft to the vote.

27. Poland is privileged to serve on the Council as
one of its non-permanent
members for the fourth
time. This is undoubtedly a sign of recognition by the
international
community
of the contribution
which
my country has sought to make in the area of international security, in particular within the Organization. We regard our membership in the Council as both
an honour and a responsibility. We are conscious that
this responsibility consists in contributing to the utmost
of our possibilities to the Council’s effective discharge
of its primary task, the maintenance of international
peace and security, as set out in Article 24, paragraph 1,
of the Charter of the United Nations.

20, Mr. WYZNEK
(Poland): Comrade President,
allow me first to offer you my delegation’s heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the Council’s
presidency for the month of January. We are particularly pleased to see you, a representative of the allied
and fraternal Soviet Union, with which my country
maintains relations of friendship as well as close and
comprehensive co-operation, presiding over our work
in what certainly is an important period in the activities
of the Council. We are fully confident that your diplomatic talents, widely recognized expertise and qualities of leadership will enable you to discharge your
complex and sensitive duties with particular distinction.

28. On 24 September 1981, addressing the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session, Jozef Czyrek,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, referred to our awareness of the necessity of firmly counteracting everything
that worsens the international situation and to Poland’s
traditional involvement in moulding peaceful relations
in Europe and in the world at large.’

21. I could not fail to join others in expressing admiration and thanks to Mr. Otunnu of Uganda for the
truly spectacular manner in which he presided over
crucial and delicate deliberations
during the last
month of the past year.

29. Minister Czyrek’s words remain equally valid
today and apply, rnuttrtis mrrllrnu’is, to the attitude
Poland shall adopt in discharging its duties as a member of the Council. The spiritus mo\vm of our actions

22. It gives me special pleasure to express here our
warm congratulations
and best wishes to the new
3

in the Council will always be relentless striving for
international peace and security, constant efforts
towards mutual understanding and co-operation and
respect for the Charter. It is in this spirit that I offer
my delegation’s full co-operation with other members of the Council towards the effective discharge
of its statutory responsibilities.

33. The Council is meeting today pursuant to para.
graph 4 of its resolution 497 ! 1981), in order “to consider taking appropriate measures in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations”,
in the face of
Israel’s
non-compliance
with paragraph 2 which
demands that Israel should rescind forthwith its decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied Syrian Golan Heights-a
decision
which, for all practical purposes, was tantamount to
the outright annexation of a part of the territory of
another Member State of the United Nations. That
non-compliance
has been confirmed by the SecretnryGeneral in his reports to the General Assembly and to
the Council of 21 December and 3 I December 1981
lSll4SO5 mln S/14821].

30, My country’s position concerning the conflict
in the Middle East has been made known on several
occasions and in unequivocal terms both in a number
of United Nations bodies, including the Council, and
in various forums outside the Organization. There is
therefore no need for me to repeat it in detail and at
length. Let me say only that along with other socialist
countries we have consistently advocated a political
and negotiated solution, stressing that a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the problem requires
the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from all the Arab
territories occupied since June 1967, realization of the
inalienable right of the Arab people of Palestine to selfdetermination, including the establishment of its own
independent State, and the safeguarding of the sovereignty and security of all States of the region.

34. In our view the Council is therefore meeting not
to decide what to do about the decision to annex the
Golan Heights, because it has already rendered its decision on that part of the problem under consideration.
In actual fact we are meeting today to decide what
action to take in response to Israel’s non-compliance
with resolution 497 (1981), which constitutes a clear
violation of Article 2.5 of the Charter, which states
that “the Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter”.

31. Our contribution towards such a settlement has
been made not merely in terms of verbal political
support. Members of the Council will recall that Polish
contingents have been serving with the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force since its inception in
1974, as they served with the United Nations Emergency Force throughout its existence,

35. The Council is also faced with and called upon to
react to Israel’s repeated violations of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, referred to in short as the
principle
of inadmissibility
of acquisition
of territory by force: its unilateral, and thus unlawful, negation of the provisions of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of 30 May
1974 [S/l i302/Add. I, annex f]; its violations of the
relevant provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August l949;2 and its continuous violsttions of the well-known relevant Security Council resolutions which constitute the international foundation
of the peace process in the Middle East. The flouting
of Council resolution 465 (1980), also unanimously
adopted, should be added to this list-which
is far
from being exhaustive.

32. With regard to that specific aspects of the situation in the Middle East that led to our present debate
-namely, Israel’s decision to apply its laws, jurisdiction and administration to the Golan Heights-on
21 December 1981 the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Poland issued a statement in which it declared the
following:
“This question is a de.fncto attempt to annex the
Golan Heights and constitutes yet another confirmation of the policy of aggression and expansion
conducted for years by Israel towards the Arab
peoples. The adoption of this decision aggravates
further the already tense situation in the Middle
East, threatens to have serious implications
for
international peace and security and makes more
distant and complicated the attainment of a just
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.
Expressing its resolute protest and deep indignation at this act, the Government of Poland fully
suPPorts the resolution adopted by the Security
Council on 17 December [rPso/ution 497 (I%$/)],
in which the Council declared this decision null and
void and without international legal effect, Poland
will continue to demonstrate its solidarity with the
struggle of the Syrian and other Arab peoples for
ajust Political comprehensive solution of the Middle
East conflict, a solution which would serve the cause
of Peace and security in the region of the Middle
East and in the world.”

36. Only slightly outside the direct scope of this
debate, but certainly relevant to the general background of IsraeIi-created
lawlessness, would be a
reference to Security Council resolution 478 (1980)
concerning the status of Jerusalem.
37. The sober assessment of the situation created
-or,
should I say, compounded-by
the Knesset’s
decision of 14 December 1981 has led numerous eminent statesmen to clear conclusions. Allow me to
mention in this connection that the Secretary-General
stated the following on 15 December 1981:
“Such measures are in clear contravention of United
Nations resolutions. They can only heighten tension
in the area and become an additional obstacle to
4

efforts to achieve a comprehensive,
settlement in the Middle East.”
38. Before concluding,
basic facts.

just and lasting

business of the year 1982 in the Council, where I am
taking a seat for the first time, to convey greetings to
you, Mr. President, and to thank you most sincerely
for the kind words of welcome addressed to my delegation. I extend these thanks also to the members of
the Council and to those delegations which have been
kind enough to greet us. I should also like to express
thanks to the Member States of the United Nations
for having placed their trust in my country, Togo,
by electing us to the Security Council.

I should like to sum up the

39. Syria is the sole sovereign over the Golan Heights.
Any arbitrary attempt to change the status of that part
of Syrian territory constitutes dc frrctct annexation.
Such an act is therefore nothing else but repeated
aggression and a flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations. Since it can only aggravate the
situation in the region, increase the already existing
serious tension and make a just and final settlement
even more remote, the Israeli decision which resulted
from and was facilitated by a policy of separate solutions cannot but emphasize more forcefully than ever
the utmost urgency of achieving a global political
settlement.

45. On behalf of the President of the Republic of
Togo, Army General Gnassingbe Eyadema. on behalf
of my delegation and on my own behalf, I should like
to assure you of our deep gratitude and to say that we
are determined to abide by the rules governing the
work of the Council and to work unstintingly for the
maintenance of international peace and security. An
experienced observer who has followed our foreign and
domestic policy during the past 10 years will recognize
that peace and stability are constants of our behaviour:
that is why our action in the Council will be guided
by an ongoing quest for such peace and such stability
throughout the world.

40. Against the background of all that I have said
one thing stands out clearly: the Council is dutybound to take swift and effective action lest it allow
its authority and credibility to be seriously impaired.
If-as we are deeply convinced-that
is the case,
then the only avenue for action left to the Council is
to invoke relevant provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter, as requested inter o/iu by the General Assembly in paragraph 6 of its resolution 36/226 B of
I7 December 1981.

46. Mr. President, I am sure that I can rely in advance
on your indulgence and understanding and on that of
the members of the Council in carrying out my mandate, a mandate which consists essentially of participating in the search for solutions to the conflicts
which are troubling the world and which call into
question one of the fundamental characteristics of
man: his reason.

41. My delegation is therefore ready to co-operate
,with the Council’s employment of appropriate measures under Article 41 of the Charter in order to compel
Israel to rescind the unlawful annexation of the Golan
Heights. It is in this spirit that we welcome the draft
resolution [S//4832], so ably presented by the representative of Jordan, which, among other things, in
operative paragraph 3, would have the Council decide
-that all Member States should:

47. If we look at the many serious conflicts which
exist, we are led to say that, increasingly, the irrational is replacing the rational in determining human
behaviour. How else can we explain the persistent
crises buffeting southern Africa, South-East Asia, the
Gulf and, in particular, the Middle East, where the
annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights by Israel on
I4 December 1981 constituted a new escalation of the
Israeli-Arab conflict? How else can we explain, within
the framework of that conflict, the fact that Israel
denies the Palestinian people the exercise of their
inalienable rights, including the right to establish a
State? How else can we explain the refusal of the
Palestinians and some Arab States to accept the
existence of Israel within secure and recognized
boundaries?

“(a) Refrain from supplying Israel with any
weapons and related military equipment and suspend any military assistance to Israel;
“(h) Suspend economic,
logical assistance to Israel”.

financial

and techno-

42. My delegation believes that those sanctions are
judicious and fully warranted. It is indeed the least
that the Council can do in order to express its determination to stand firm against the contemptuous disregard that Israel has been continuously displaying for
the Charter, other important international instruments
and countless United Nations resolutions, including
several unanimously
adopted resolutions
of the
Council.
43, We shall therefore
resolution before us.
440 Mr.
F~vnc-h):

48. Before I go on, Mr. President, may I address
warm congratulations on behalf of my delegation to
your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu, representative of
Uganda, for the outstanding way in which he presided
over the Council last month, during a particularly
difficult time for the United Nations.

vote in favour of the draft

49. I should also like on behalf of my country to
address our sincere congratulations to the new Secretary General, Mr. Javier P&ez de Culllar, on his election to head the Secretariat. I am sure that, given his

AMEGA
(Togo)
(intupr’ctrrtion
from
It is my pleasure, as we take up the first
5

to implement

. former functions, he has a natural aptitude to lead the
Organization in an efficient manner towards the attainment of its objectives. I extend congratulations to
Mr. Kurt Waldheim for the outstanding work done
during the last 10 years of devotion to and sustained
effort for peace in the world and I wish him all the
success that is his due in his new responsibilities.

its resolution

497 ( 1% 1). pnrticuIluly

psu-agr;lph 4. It has no choice hut to have I’WOU~SC to
Chapter VII of the Charter. My delegation is ready
to support any action by the Council along those lines

for two reasons: first, it is convinced that such an
action would demonstrate the will and the capability
of the Council to meet the responsibilities
incumbent
upon it under the Charter. which could only enhance
its credibility as well ;)s that of the United Nations:
secondly, we think that such an action would defuse
the crisis in the immediate future by giving hope to the
wronged party and avoiding a situution where it would
feel that it had no way out other than that of desperate
action.

50. I also wish to congratulate Guyana, Jordan,
Poland and Zaire, which were elected to the Council
at the same time as we were. I must mention also the
German Democratic Republic, Mexico, the Niger,
the Philippines and Tunisia, which need no further
praise for the effective work they accomplished during
their terms of office. I can assure them that we shall
sprove ourselves worthy successors.

whoguided the M
skilfully and effici
requireno further (
and we CM Sil)’ \
worthof this diplo
60, 1 am pk:ksc(

cuillar, Secrctaryloftyduties. His w
communityand his
,,,a” needed by tllc
lenge of the prcv
Governmentof Bu
Success
and the G
ofits modest contr
,ccomplishes his v
myd&gation’S ~1

54. At the beginning of my statement, I pointed out
that, increasingly, the irrational is replacing the rational
in determining human behaviour. Just the opposite
would be more to my liking; thus, I should like to close
by appealing for a return to reason, to wisdom, to
moderation and to tolerance in the Middle East.

5 1. The international community UnanimOUSlY condemned the law enacted on 14 December 1981 by the
Knesset aimed at imposing Israeli laws, jurisdiction
and administration in the Syrian Golan Heights, occupied since 1967. That unilateral decision, which is
in fact purely and simply an annexation of the territory, is a flagrant violation of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, of international law
-particularly
the principle of the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force-and of the relevant resolutions of the Organization, particularly
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Furthermore, it is in complete contradiction to article 47 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,? a convention to which Israel is, moreover,
a party and which forbids the occupying Power to
modify the legal status of the occupied territory.
Finally, that decision merely increases tension in a
region in which the situation is already disquieting. In
that respect, it dangerously jeopardizes the efforts
made to bring about a negotiated settlement of the
Israeli-Arab conflict and the establishment of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region.

55. In order to facilitate a settlement of the IsraeliArab conflict and to avoid a new war in the Middle
East, the Council has an important part to play by
demonstrating
moderation,
appealing to tolerance
and, when necessary, bringing pressure to bear on
the parties involved. It is therefore important that the
Council fully assume its responsibilities
and 1 hope
it will not shirk them. That is the price of peace in the
world.
56. The PRESIDENT
(irttc~~~l’c’tolic111,fi.onl R~.r.sianJ:
The next speaker is the representative of Burundi,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
57.

Mr. BWAKIRA

(Burundi)

(irltc,pl.rftrtic,n

.fi’c~m

French): Mr. President, it is an honour for me to speak

in the Council and I thank you for having allowed me
to do so. Before stating my delegation’s views on “the
situation in the occupied Arab territories”,
I should
like to express to you, on behalf both of my delegation
and of the Group of African States, of which I have
the honour to be Chairman for the month of January,
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council which, we hope, will find
during these meetings an adequate solution to the
question which is of concern to the international
community.

52. For all those reasons, it is understandable that
the Council unanimously opposed the Israeli decision
by adopting resolution 497 (1981). In that resolution,
it rightly states that the decision taken by Israel is
null and void and without international legal effect. It
further demands that Israel rescind its decision forthwith, and decides that in the event of non-compliance
by Israel, the Council would, at its present series of
meetings, consider “taking appropriate measures in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,”

58. I am all the more happy to see you presiding
over the Council as you represent a country which
plays an important role in international
relations and
which has relations of fruitful co-operation with mY
own country. Your qualities as an astute diplomat and
Your experience are guarantees that this debate Will
be successful,

53. The present series of meetings of the Council in
effect demonstrates that we have taken note of Israel’s
refusal to rescind its unlawful and illegal decision to
annex the Syrian Golan Heights, which it occupies,
This refusal again places the region on the threshold
of a new war and thus threatens international peace
and security, the maintenance of which is the main
responsibility of the Council. Consequently, my delegation hopes that the Council wiII be in a position itself

59. I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute
to Your predecessor, our colleague and friend Mr. Olara
Otunnu, representative of the Republic of Uganda,
6

oftheCouncil. Th<
is pleased to h:lv
forgedby history.
61, The Council I
lItcelb+] followine
Republic concerni
extendthe applic;\
toryof the Golan
lution497 (1981).
Israel,the occupyi
itsdecision to annc.
Israel’sdecision I+
national legal eff’
361226B, adopted
anoverwhelming I
gation,is illSO un;u
opposesthe anncs
becausethis anne:
62. The Council
;\ncewith paragrur
it is provided tha
appropriate me:Isi
compliance with s
63. An analysis

sentativeof Israel
purrs.3) and of hi>
1231Yrh
JwriJl,Lf 1
ernmentcategoric
rity Council’s inju
lsraeldo not con\
64. Since 1967, \

force,Israel has II
of security and s
providedit with :11
area prelude to th
tories.Israel is :I
Heightsthe policy
inLebanon, in Iri
lel, This is again
towardsthe inter
international law.

who guided the work of the Council in December
skilfully and efficiently. His qualities as a diplomat
require no further demonstration.
We are proud of him
and we can say without any exaggeration that the
worth of this diplomat transcends his youth.

65. In this case, non-compliance by Israel with the
provisions of resolution 497 (1981) is unambiguous:
it is categorical.
66. I repeat: the annexation of the Golan Heights by
the Israeli Government shows scorn for international
conventions, is a violation of international law and
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. It
is a grave threat to peace and security, not only in the
Middle East but also throughout the world. If Israel
continues its expansionist policy in all directions,
it will be a grave threat to the security and territorial
integrity of its neighbours.

60, I am pleased to welcome here Mr. PCrez de
Cu&Ilar, Secretary-General,
who has .iust taken up his
lofty duties. His willingness to serve the international
community and his experience make of him the statesman needed by the United Nations to meet the challenge of the prevailing international
situation. The
Government of Burundi once again wishes him every
success and the Group of African States assures him
of its modest contribution and total co-operation as he
accomplishes his very important task. I wish to renew
my delegation’s congratulations to the new members
of the Council. They are countries with which Burundi
is pleased to have brotherly and friendly relations
forged by history.

67. For great evils appropriate remedies are required. The United Nations and its special body, the
Security Council, bear major responsibility for the
maintenance of international
peace and security.
The Council must not be indecisive in the face of the
challenge posed by the Israeli Government.

61, The Council met last December [23/&h to 2319th
!~tretinlr:] following the complaint by the Syrian Arab
Republic concerning the decision taken by Israel to
extend the application of its laws to the Syrian territory of the Golan Heights [S//47Yl]. It adopted resolution 497 (1981). In that resolution, it demanded that
Israel, the occupying Power, should rescind forthwith
its decision to annex the Golan Heights. It decided that
Israel’s decision was null and void and without international legal effect. General Assembly resolution
36/226 B, adopted on 17 December on this matter by
an overwhelming
majority and supported by my delegation, is also unambiguous. The Assembly vigorously
opposes the annexation of the Golan Heights by force
because this annexation is illegal.

68. It is high time for the Council to take appropriate
measures against that State, which refuses to put an end
to the virtual annexation of the Syrian territory of the
Golan Heights. The credibility of the United Nations
and of the Security Council is at stake. The Council
must compel Israel to obey international norms. It
would be an unfortunate precedent, with grave consequences, if Israel, a State Member of the United Nations, having committed the illegal act of annexing a
territory belonging to a sovereign State, were not subjected to sanctions by the Council, to set an example.
In these circumstances, the acquisition of territory
by force would supplant law.
69. All States Members of the United Nations are
duty-bound and have the obligation to respect the
principles of the Charter. Israel has no right to be the
sole exception capable of allowing itself to violate
the Charter of the United Nations with impunity.

62. The Council is meeting once again in accordance with paragraph 4 of resolution 497 (1981), in which
it is provided that it would meet to consider taking
appropriate measures in the event of Israel’s noncompliance with said resolution.

70. Having deprived the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights, having expelled it from its. homeland and having taken over its property and occupied
its lands, Israel has embarked on a military adventure
of seizing other Arab territories, including the Golan
Heights, which belong to Syria. Israel is cynical in
claiming that its act of expansionism and annexation
was designed to protect the right of the population of
the Golan Heights.

63. An analysis of the note addressed by the representative of Israel to the Secretary-General [S/1482/,
pnru. 31 and of his statement made before the Council
12319th ,nrrti,?g] makes it clear that the Israeli Government categorically refuses to comply with the Security Council’s injunctions. The arguments adduced by
Israel do not convince anyone.
64. Since 1967, when it occupied Arab territories by
force, Israel has always had recourse to a pretext, that
of security and secure boundaries. This pretext has
provided it with an alibi to establish settlements which
are a prelude to the annexation of occupied Arab territories. Israel is a recidivist. It applies to the Golan
Heights the policy of aggression which it has followed
in Lebanon, in Iraq and in making Jerusalem its capital. This is again defiance of the Council, arrogance
towards the international
community
and scorn for
international law.

71. In line with what is stressed in the communiqu&
of the non-aligned countries at the beginning of this
month [S//482Y, (VVZLJ.T],my delegation wishes to
express its concern at Israel’s defiance of Security
Council resolution 497 (1981) and General Assembly
resolution 36/226 B.
72. The annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights is
-need it really be recalled?-an
obvious act of aggression, as stipulated in Article 39 of the Charter and in
General Assembly resolution 33 I4 (XXIX). That is why
7

it is imperative for the international
community
to
impose forthwith adequate sanctions under Article 41
of the Charter.

territorial
integrity of Syria, aggravating the tensions
in the Middle East and seriously affecting the peace
and stability of the Middle East region and of the
world.

73. We believe that the Council should adopt appropriate measures, as set forth in Chapter VII of the
Charter, to force the Government of Israel to return
to the Syrian Arab Republic all its territories, which it
has occupied and continues to occupy illegally.

80. Faced with such a grave situation, the Council
met urgently and adopted resolution 497 ( 1981) declaring the Israeli decision to annex the Golan Heights
null and void, and demanding that Israel rescind forthwith its decision, Yet, to date, the Israeli authorities
have refused to comply with the relevant resolutions
of the Council, adamantly maintained their aggressive
and expansionist stand, and insisted on considering
the Golan Heights-l
,600 square kilometres of Syrian
territory-as
their own. Such blatant truculence on the
part of the Israeli authorities fully exposes their arragant stand that they are bent on remaining hostile to
the Palestinian and Arab peoples and on flouting the
Charter and Council resolutions. Under such circumstances, simply to “condemn” or “strongly condemn”’
Israel time and again for its atrocities will be to no
avail. It is incumbent upon the Council to uphold
justice and, in accordance with Article 41 of the
Charter, adopt firm and effective measures to impose
sanctions on Israel. Otherwise, Israel the aggressor
wilI be allowed to occupy and annex the territories of
others by mere force, in which case the solemn Charter
of the United Nations will be trampled underfoot, and
what then would become of the noble functions of the
Council? What happens today in the Golan Heights
could very well recur in other Arab nations, what
happens today in the Middle East could very well
recur elsewhere in the world and aggressors would
become even more reckless and unbridled. If things
were allowed to continue this way, how could the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and independence of
small and weak countries be guaranteed? How would
world peace and security be safeguarded?

74. Finally, I should like to reaffirm our active solidarity with and support for the people and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
75. Mr. LING Qing (China) (intcrpwtrrtion
jiwrn
Chinese): Mr. President, first of all, on behalf of the
Chinese delegation, I would like to offer you our
sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month.
76. I would also like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Otunnu for his outstanding statesmanship and
diplomatic
skills while serving as President of the
Council during last December.
77. Moreover, I warmly welcome the delegations
of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire to participate in the work of the Council, to which, we are
sure, they will make useful and fruitful contributions.
78. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend
a warm welcome to Mr. Perez de CuelIar on his assumption of the important post of Secretary-General.
I am certain that while discharging his important task
he will heed the aspirations of the people of the world,
respect the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and make positive contributions
to the maintenance of world peace and security and
to the promotion of friendly co-operation on an equal
footing among all nations of the world.

81. The Chinese Government has always considered illegal and null and void any Israeli measures to
permanently occupy Arab territories. We have consistently stood by the Arab, Syrian and Palestinian
peoples and resolutely supported their just struggle to
recover their lost territories and to regain their national
rights. We resolutely support the just stand of the
Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, Since the
Israeli authorities refuse to implement the Council’s
resolutions, the latter should, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter, take the
necessary measures of sanctions to deal with Israeli
acts of aggression, thus preserving the credibility of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We resolutely support the draft resolution submitted by Jordan [S//4832].

79. In the statements in the Council over the past
few days, representatives
from various countries
expressed the deep concern of the international com‘munity over the present development in the Middle
East situation. As is known to all, the defence of the
national
sovereignty,
independence and territorial
integrity of States constitutes a basic principle in international law and is an important norm of the conduct
of States recognized by the entire international community. The Charter stipulates clearly that all Members
shall refrain in their international
relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations. The Israeli authorities, in total disregard of
international
law and regulations, grossly trampled on
the Charter concerning the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by force and brazenly passed a
bill in the Knesset to annex the Syrian Golan Heights,
which they had occupied by force. Their action was
a further encroachment
upon the sovereignty and

82. The PRESIDENT
(inte~p~c~tation~oln
Rusiutz):
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
83. Mr. AL-QASIMI
(United
I wish at the outset to congratulate
8

Arab Emirates):
you, Sir, on behalf

1

of my delegation, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of January. Your
proven skills and vast experience in diplomacy and
foreign affairs will undoubtedly
guarantee that our
vocation dedicated to peace with justice will be
crowned with success.

“The invasion or attack by the armed forces of a
State of the territory of another State, or any military occupation,
however temporary,
resulting
from such invasion or attack, or any annexation by
the use of force of the territory of another State
or part thereof ‘.

84. To your predecessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda,
I also extend my congratulations
for conducting the
business of the Council in the most skilful manner,
which earned him the respect and admiration of us
all.

91. The second element of the case is the Israeli
refusal to rescind its legislative decision embodying
the act of aggression, in defiance of the Council’s
injunction.
What is left to the Council, therefore, is to invoke
against Israel Article 41 of the Charter, which involves
the application of sanctions. To do otherwise would be
tantamount to the abdication of its responsibilities
and duties. To act in another way would be a violation of the task entrusted it under the Charter. To sidestep the issue before it would be a total obliteration of
the meaning of Article 41 as well as of its spirit. To
embark in a different manner would erode the authority
of the United Nations and lead it downhill on the path
and towards the fate of its predecessor, the League of
Nations.
92.

85. I take this opportunity to extend my delegation’s
felicitations to Mr. PCrez de Cukllar, the new Secretary-General, on the occasion of his assumption of his
post. Recognizing his skills, extensive experience, and
dedication to the ideals and principles of the Charter
.of the United Nations, we are confident that under his
stewardship the Organization will march forward in the
pursuit of the establishment of a world public order
based on peace coupled with justice.
86. The Council is meeting once again to consider
another act of aggression perpetrated by Israel.

93. The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
prescribed Article 41 as a means to deter aggression,
to punish aggressors and to deny aggressors the enjoyment of the fruits of aggression. The drafters also
entrusted primary responsibility
to the permanent
members of the Security Council for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Such responsibility
involves readiness and commitment by the big Powers
concerning the application of sanctions against aggressors in accordance with Article 41.

87. The first phase of such consideration was the
unanimous adoption by the Council of resolution 497
(1981) on 17 December 1981, In that resolution the
Council decided that the Israeli decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied’
Syrian Golan Heights was null and void and without
international legal effect. It demanded that Israel, the
occupying Power, should rescind forthwith its decision. It also decided, in the event of non-compliance
by Israel, to meet, not later than 5 January 1982, to
consider taking appropriate measures in accordance
with the Charter.

94. In the light of the foregoing, my delegation
views with grave concern the declared intention of the
Government of the United States to veto any draft
resolutions embodying the application of sanctions
against Israel. We cannot separate that intention from
the attitude of the United States in blocking the adoption by the Council of similar draft resolutions concerning the two previous acts of aggression perpetrated by Israel against the Iraqi nuclear installation
and against Lebanese and Palestinian civilians in Beirut
and southern Lebanon.

88. Israel’s response was not only a refusal to rescind
the annexation, but also a total rejection of the Council’s resolution. That response was manifested in the
statements made by several Israeli spokesmen as well
as in the two reports submitted by the SecretaryGeneral [S/14805 mu-i S//482/].
89. Israel’s response is another glaring example of
its defiance of the injunctions of the Council and its
contemptuous attitude towards the will of the international community.
It is imperative, therefore, for
the Council to embark on the second stage of its consideration of the Israeli act of aggression by taking
against Israel the appropriate measures prescribed in
Chapter VII of the Charter.

95. Had it not been for the continuous and massive
flow of assistance rendered by the Government of the
United States to Israel, the Israeli authorities would
not have dared commit acts of aggression against the
Arabs. Israel, similarly, would not have dared treat
the Council’s resolution with defiance and contempt.
96. In view of those facts-especially
the systematic
refusal by the United States to apply sanctions against
Israel and its application of various types of sanctions
in other situations-my
delegation feels entitled to
present the following pertinent questions.

90. The case before the Council is very clear. It has
two elements. The first is the annexation of the Golan
Heights, which is an act of aggression in accordance
with article 3 of the Definition of Aggression contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution
3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974. The article defines
an act of aggression, inter rrlicr, as:

97. First, why is it justifiable for the United States
to seek the application
of sanctions through and
9

universally recognized by the international
munity”. [Ibid., ptmr. 133. ]

outside the Council against another State for the
detention of 50 hostages, and not justifiable to seek
similar sanctions against Israel for holding hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians and other Arabs as hostages in detention under the yoke of Israeli Nazi-like
occupation?

He further stated that the sanctions “arise solely from
the violation of international law” [ihid., parrr. 1.361.
103. We believe that the issue before the Council
now is more serious than the one of two years ago. At
least it involves the violation of norms and principles
of international
law. Everybody agrees on that fact.
including the United Kingdom and France. We therefore expect that these two important States will vote
in favour of the draft resolution applying sanctions
against Israel, just as they voted in favour two years
ago with regard to the hostages.

98. Secondly, why is it permissible for the United
States to apply sanctions against another State fat
actions taken I+ir-11is a dissident trade union, and not
permissible to apply the same sanctions against Israel
for brutal actions ~+ri-~is the whole Arab population
lof the occupied Arab territories, who are all dissident
concerning the alien occupation of those lands?

.

com-

99. Thirdly, why is it acceptable to the United States
to stipulate that the application of a trade treaty with
1a State should depend upon that State’s granting permission to its natives-mainly
those of the Jewish religion-to
emigrate to Israel, and not acceptable to
attach a similar stipulation to trade treaties with Israel,
depending on that State’s granting permission to the
native Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland and property from which they were uprooted and
expelled? This is more pertinent since the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights3 grants every person the
right to leave as well as to return to his country.

104. The Council is facing a historic and fateful
moment: either it lives up to its responsibilities
or it
fades into oblivion. Our cherished hope is that the
Council will choose the former course and thus apply.
sanctions against Israel.
105. The PRESIDENT
(intcrprettrtion
jkm
Russir/n): The representative of Israel has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply. I now call on him,
106. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Today’s meeting of the
Council is, I believe, the seventh since 6 January on
the agenda item before us. We have met virtually every
day since Wednesday of last week to deliberate on what
presumably is the central issue confronting the international community these days.

100. The gamut of these questions leads us to either
or both of the following conclusions: the Arabs are not
entitled to proper and equal treatment, and/or Israel is
considered infallible and above the law; in other
-words, to rephrase the British axiom “The King can
do no wrong”, “The Arabs can do no right and Israel
can do no wrong”.

107. Certainly a deliberate attempt is being made
here to create that impression, however false, and to
that end apparently mobilization
has been ordered
within a certain group of States to lend their support
to creating that artificial impression. Thus we have
had here a procession of States participating in this
debate. Let me mention just a few of them: Bulgaria,
Mongolia,
Czechoslovakia,
the sovereign and independent Republic of the Ukraine, the German Republic
which for some reason calls itself democratic, Hungary, Poland-and
I think I might add to this category
also the equally democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
There is one problem, though, dealing with this category, and that is the intriguing absence of the sovereign
and independent Republic of Byelorussia, which so
far has not made its appearance. But who knows what
lies in store for us? It may still appear.

101. In January 1980, exactly two years ago, a draft
resolution was submitted by the United States to
the Council for the application
of sanctions as a
means to secure the release of 50 American hostages
’ [S/13735]. On 13 January, the day the draft resolutions was put to a vote, the representative of the United
Kingdom invoked norms of international law as justification for voting in favour, He said:
t
“Statements in the last two months by my Prime
Minister, by other British Ministers and by myself
in the Security Council, on 1 and 29 December 1979
I2175th rrnd 2182tzd mccjtinas], can leave no doubt
about our convictiqn of the illegality of the Iranian
authorities’ action in terms of international law and
in terms of long hallowed practice between States.”
[219ist wweting, pwrr. 1181

108. Some of us have had the feeling over the past
few weeks that there may be other international problems confronting the international community.
The
Council, it would seem, is not aware of their existence. Not for the first time there seems to be a certain
divergence between the real world and the world as
experienced and viewed by the Council.

102. The representative of France resorted to the
same justification
in voting for the draft resolution.
He stated:
“France, like all the other members of the Security Council, has condemned the detention in Iran of
American nationals and diplomats, in violation of
the principles,
conventions
and practices most

109. Whatever doubts may have persisted in our
minds with regard to the priorities of the Council were
certainly dispelled this afternoon by the appearance of
10

the representative of Poland. We had been looking
forward very much indeed to his statement. Some of
us were hoping against hope that we might find some
enlightenment
on some of the problems confronting
us. It is true that he did speak about solidarity-solidarity with Syria. It is gratifying to know that he supports solidarity, although it is not quite clear whether
he writes it with a small “s” or a capital “S”.

tion with the agenda item before us. it will become
very obvious to him why this historical background
is not only necessary but also highly pertinent.
118. In London, in 1941, Mr. Raczynski
Inter-Allied Council:

told the

“The future frontiers of Poland should safeguard
the country’s security . . . ; they should assure
Poland’s vital need of wide access to the sea adequately protected from foreign interference”.

110. But this is not the only problem that the representative of Poland has failed to address himself to.
I believe he could have made a useful contribution to
this debate, and since he took time out to participate
in it-and, as he informed us, his Minister for Foreign
Affairs on 21 December, one week after 13 December,
also took time out to address himself to the question
before us-he could have educated us on some interesting and pertinent questions arising in connection
with the item before us. Certainly some of us would
have been greatly interested in hearing about the
evolution of his country’s boundaries,

That can be found in Whiteman’s
LAW, volume 3, page 284.

Digest

oj Pntcr-

notiontrl

119. Now, those demands of Poland were reaffirmed
in the General War Aims formulated by the Polish
National Council in 1942:
“Poland should maintain the security of her frontiers . , . by having a large access to the sea and by
obtaining [a] frontier with Germany which should
be extended sufficiently towards [the] west as well
as straightened and shortened.”

I1 1. I know that all these things happened a long
time ago-36 years ago or so- but still they may be
somewhat relevant. Since he did not see fit to enlighten
us on them, I hope he will forgive me if I take the
liberty to do so. So let me very briefly recapitulate
some of those boundary problems,

That is contained
page 285.

in the same volume of Dipxt,

on

120. I anticipate the possible objection that all these
demands were made by the London-based Government-in-exile, so let me inform the representative of
Poland that on 22 July 1944 the Soviet-sponsored
Polish Committee of National Liberation, better known
as the Lublin Committee, issued a manifesto to the
Polish people in which it called for

112. In 1941 the Polish Government-in-exile
stated
its demand for the re-establishment
of Poland after
the Second World War within secure boundaries.
On 24 .September
1941, the Polish Acting Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Raczynski, told a meeting of
Inter-Allied Council held in London . . .
113. The PRESIDENT
(interprctrrtion
jhrn
Russitrn): I call on the representative of Poland on a point

“struggle for restoration to the motherland of Polish
Pomerania, Opole, Silesia, and East Prussia, for
free access to the sea, for Polish frontier posts on
the Oder. Poland never again will be threatened by
German invasion.”

of order.
114, Mr. WYZNER
(Poland): I am not quite sure
what we are talking about in the Council. As far as
I can see from the agenda before us, it is “The situation in the occupied Arab territories: ((I) Resolution 497
(1981); (h) Report ofthe Secretary-General (S//4821)“.

121. A year later, at the Postdam Conference,
those Polish demands were basically acceded to. Let
me quote from Whiteman’s Digest of Intcvxationd
LOI\?, volume 3, page 347:

115. We are all engaged in a very serious consideration of this important matter. I would appreciate it
very much if all speakers around this table would confine themselves to this problem and kindly leave aside
problems that are completely external to the discussion
in which we are engaged now.

“pending the final determination of Poland’s western frontier, the former German territories east of a
line running from the Baltic Sea immediately west
of Swinemunde, and thence along the Oder River to
the confluence of the western Neisse River and
along the western Neisse to the Czechoslovak frontier, including that portion of East Prussia not
placed under the administration
of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics , . , , shall be under the
administration of the Polish State and for such purposes should not be considered as part of the Soviet
zone of occupation of Germany.”

116, The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtion
frwm
Russian): As President I would say that speakers should
confine themselves to the agenda item. I call upon the
representative of Israel to continue.
117. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): I am exercising my right
of reply, and I think that if the representative of Poland
will be patient with me for a minute or two, when I shall
have a number of questions to ask of him in connec-

122. So what I should like to know is this: Could the
representative of Poland enlighten us about the Polish
I1

administration in those areas? Is the population of those
areas in 1982 identical with that of f94.5-for instance,
in cities like Wroclaw and Szczecin and Poznan?
And if the administration
is Polish pending the conclusion of the peace treaty, what law and what jurisdiction applies in those areas?

129. Who else rushed to Syria’s support in the Coup
cil? Libya, of course-another
country extreme&
well qualified to speak on matters of internation& II
aggression. But in this particular case Libya pert@”
may be forgiven, for it has special links with @rla
-confederation
or union: perhaps the Syrian reprc:
sentative could enlighten us on the current state of
relations between the two countries. So it was no1
unexpected and certainly not inappropriate for LibYn
to make an appearance here. But I think it was also
helpful, because there are certain things which the
Syrian representative
wishes to conceal from the
Council, but his Libyan allies have no such corn’
punction.

123. I believe that the relevance of my questions
is now fully evident to the representative of Poland.
Is there no limit to hypocrisy, Mr. Wyzner?
124. But Mr. Wyzner is not alone. He is in good
company. I have here in front of me some samples
from some other participants who came to the support
of Syria-very
appropriately
so. Let me start out
with this interesting pair, Viet Nam and Cuba. Of
course there are many common aspects to these two
countries125. The PRESIDENT
(interprefcrtion
from Russirrnj: I would ask the representative
of Israel to
address the agenda item and not divert attention to
*other matters.
126. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I think I am fully entitled,
in exercise of my right of reply, to point out to the
Council the qualifications of those who speak about
aggression in international
relations and their contributions to the maintenance of international
peace
and security.

/I

133. The representative of Jordan made his second
statement here today. He spoke among other things
of the double-standard
applied by the United Nations
with regard to Israel on the Arab-Israel conflict. He is
right. Were it not for the double-standard against my
country, the situation in the Middle East would have
been very different a long time ago. Were it not for the

I think I can stop here. I need not even refer to Iraq’s
contribution to international
peace and security. It is
too well known.
12

I
)

“The Saudis say that the enemy must withdrasv
from the occupied Arab territories. That is not the
problem. The problem is the existence of the enemy
itself. The existence of the enemy itself conflicts
with that of the Arab nation. Either we stay or Israel
stays; anything else is nonsense. The Arabs have
the right to tell the whole world that the Zionist
entity constitutes a danger to the Arab existence.
and therefore the Arabs should fight it.”

132. In concluding this part of my reply, and since
the representative of Hungary was also good enough
to participate in this debate, let me tell the COURC~I
that while he was speaking I was reminded of a
Hungarian
proverb which says: “Kin&
v<lj rllfr II
f$b12, nc’ tncnj~rz ki CI nclrpr^tr”. In English translation
it is: “He who carries butter on his head should not
go out into the sun”. The amount of butter that has
been spoiled here in the course of this debate is enormous-enormous
indeed.

“The Iraqi Federation of Friendship Societies
with Peoples of the World believes that world public
opinion should be informed of the dirty, inhuman
and immoral crime which was committed by a gang
of criminals of the Assad and Khomeini rkgimes by
detonating and demolishing
the Iraq Embassy in
Beirut and due to which scores of innocent people
from the Embassy staff and others fell victim,”

lI

I

13 I. I have already made reference to the German socalled Democratic Republic, which appeared together
with the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and the
Democratic
Republic of Yemen. What these three
have in common is that they are equally democratic.
They surely must be very proud of their own contribution and of each other. They fully confirm the saying
that “Birds of a feather flock together”.

128. Another participant was Iraq. There cannot be
the slightest doubt as to the sincerity of the Iraqi statement. The Iraqi lamentation in this particular case is as
sincere as was the lamentation
of the Syrian representative last June in the Council on the Iraqi complaint. What Iraq really thinks about its neighbour it
brought to our attention last week in a press release
of the Iraqi Mission published on 5 January as an
official publication of the Permanent Mission of Iraq
to the United Nations, In it we read:

;
y
[
i

130. Let me quote what Colonel Qaddaf’i, the levelheaded ruler of Libya, told the National Conference
of Libya last week, on 5 January:

This in fact is the question of the Syrian represenlative, just as it is of his ally Muammar Qaddafi, even if
here in the Council he tries, somewhat unsuccessfully
-to tone down from time to time the thrust of this
argument.

127. Viet Nam and Cuba, these two countries of the
tropical Gulag, these two countries that have introduced into international relations the tragic phenomenon of boat people, two countries that are engaged in
international aggression in Asia and Africa and elsewhere: they come before the Council to sermonize
about the need to combat aggression. How apt and how
appropriate it is, indeed, that they should come to the
support of Syria.

i

1
:
i
i

fact that the Organization has been willing to tolerate
for 34 years the ongoing aggression against my country by practically all its neighbours-until
recently
all its neighbours-the
situation in the Middle East
would have been very different. But the .United Nations, for reasons well known to all of us, has been
willing to tolerate this; has been willing to tolerate the
fact that, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Arab countries,
including
Jordan, have
totally disregarded Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter, which prohibits not only the use of force but
even the threat of force, and have been disregarding
Article 2, paragraph 3, which provides for the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. Yes, indeed,
there is a double-standard,

said diplomat
solidarity.”

has declared

its devotion

to this

137. So it is all the more heartening to see that the
representative of Jordan is still devoted to this show
of solidarity for a country which has been accused
by his Government of being involved in acts of sabotage and terrorism in his country.
138. In introducing his draft resolution, the representative of Jordan was again very selective in his
references to the Definition of Aggression. But we have
been through that before. Last week he shared that
distinction with the representative of Syria. And lest
it be forgotten, may I remind the Council again that
what the representative of Jordan has again overlooked is the Definition of Aggression contained in
the annex to the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly [rrsolrrtion
3314 (XXIX)]. Let me quote
from it again, namely, articles I and 2:

134. But I could not help feeling that, at the same
time, the representative of Jordan also injected a
humorous dimension into our debate. He of all people
introduced the draft resolution supporting the Syrian
complaint. I think members of the Council may be
interested in being informed of an official announcement made by the Government of Jordan, only last
night, and broadcast on Amman Radio. In that announcement, the Jordan Ministry of the Interior blamed
Syrian intelligence for an explosion which had occurred
in a shop in Amman on 11 January, three days ago.
That blast injured five people, including an employee
of the Indian Embassy, as well as one of the persons
who planted the bomb.

“Aggression is the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity or
political independence of another State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, as set out in this Definition.
“E.up/trnrrtory
‘State’:

note: In this Definition

the term

“(N) Is used without prejudice to questions of
recognition or to whether a State is a Member of the
United Nations;

135. The Jordanian announcement blames a Syrian
diplomat-so
we are being told that right now there
are diplomatic
relations between the two countries
-named
Hisham Mustafa Kanbar, for recruiting the
two civilians for Syrian intelligence. One of them was
previously employed as a chauffeur of the Syrian
Ambassador in Amman and the Syrian diplomat had
instructed the two to engage in terrorist acts against
a number of Amman shops which sell liquor in an
attempt to frame religious extremist groups for the
acts. The Syrian diplomat prepared the bomb with
his own hands, instructed the two in its use and personally gave it to them the morning of the explosionOne of them was injured when the bomb exploded in
his hand, while he was attempting to plant it in the
store; the other escaped by crossing the border into
Syria. Following the explosion, the Syrian diplomat
also left Amman for Syria.

IL . . .
“The first use of armed force by a State in contravention of the Charter shall constitute primer
.frrcie evidence of an act of aggression . . .”
139. This has been disregarded-deliberately
disregarded-by
both the representative of Jordan and
the representative of Syria. And we are being told-the
representative of Syria reminded us of this-that
Syria itself was a member of the Committee that prepared that definition. I think this only aggravates that
omission; this only aggravates the attempt to mislead
the Council.
140. But this is not the only example of attempts to
mislead the Council by the representative of Syria.
In his statement on 6 January [2322nd meting,
ptrrtr. 1771, he read out what he alleged was a quotation from an article by Mr. Mordecai Bentov, who
was a member of Israel’s Cabinet of National Unity,
in AI-Htrmishmtrr of 14 April 197I. We took the trouble of going back to the issue of 14 April ofAl-Humish/?n/1’. I must inform you, Mr. President, that there is
no article by Mr. Bentov to be found in that issue.

136. All that is part of the official announcement of
the Jordanian Government.
And then the Jordan
Ministry of the Interior concludes:
“The Government of Jordan deplores the criminal explosion and emphasizes that such acts conducted by diplomats serving in Jordan stress that
without any doubt the Government of the aforementioned
diplomat”-that
is Syria-“strives
by
way of such despicable actions to continue to sabotage the Arab effort to achieve Arab solidarity
-and this at a time when the Government of the

141. Another attempt by the Syrian representative
to mislead the Council occurred in his statement last
13

week, Let me quote from that statement.
representative said:

The Syrian

extraneous statements pertaining
than that which is on the agenda.

to issues bother

148. This afternoon we are meeting to discuss tlrz
blatant and latest act of aggression of annexing tl.,c
territory of a sovereign independent State, narrrcI,,”
the Syrian Arab Republic, without remorse, With,,,t
apology, and without rescinding, as demanded by the
Council, the application of the laws, jurisdiction
rind
administration
of Israel in the occupied Golan Heights,

**In its resolution 100 (19.531, the Council asked
Israel to suspend drainage work in the demilitarized
zone-another
request which went unheeded.”
[Ibid., ptr,rr . 40. ]

Here again, the representative of Syria was apparently under the illusion that nobody would check on
his statement. We did. And what we found was rather
interesting.

149. But before I begin my rebuttal, I must say th;,t
I am somewhat curious in regard to the statement
made in Hungarian by the representative
of Israel,
I was under the impression that he hailed from Czechoslovakia, and now I find that he seems to be pro
ficient in Hungarian. So it would be interesting, for my
own information and for the information of the other
members of the Council, to know which it is, for the
representative of Israel is seated here representing ;I
territory called Palestine, and anyone who hails fron, a
country other than Palestine has no right to speak On
behalf of that territory of Palestine.

142. First of all, resolution 100 (1953) has a paragraph
-paragraph 2-which says:
“]The Security Council] notes with satisfaction the
statement made by the Israel representative at the
631st meeting regarding the undertaking given by
his Government to suspend the works in question
during that examination.”
143. Nor is that all. We also went back to the verbatim record of that meeting-the
631st meeting of
the Council. We see in that verbatim record that the
then-representative of Israel told the Council:

150. Secondly, it is baffling indeed that the representative of a country which has managed to achieve:
the incredible and dubious feat of imprisoning a quarter of a million citizens of the occupied territories of
Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza over the relatively short period of 14 years should be sitting here
in judgement on other Member States and interfering
with their internal affairs. He has no right whatsoever
to vilify the representatives whose conscience, courage and fidelity to the Charter have prompted them to
speak on behalf of the Charter of the United Nations
and its stipulations in cases of aggression.

“I am empowered to state that the Government
of Israel is willing to arrange such a temporary suspension in the demilitarized
zone for the purpose
of facilitating the Security Council’s consideration
of this question.” [63ist nm~ting, ptrrcr. 41
“The Government of Israel, in hereby accepting
this idea, wishes in every way to assist the Security Council in its examination of the problem . . .”
[ihid., pmr . 61.

15 1, I am surprised that the representative of Israel
is confused as to what the definition of aggression is.
I believe that I read a statement in which I quoted the
considered opinion of the General Assembly in 1974
at its twenty-ninth session, in which it meticulouSlY
described what an act of aggression is: it is armed
attack, occupation -even temporary occupation--or
annexation of all the territory of another State or Part
thereof. That is the definition of aggression.

At the same meeting, Mr. Zafrulla Khan, the representative of Pakistan, said: “For my part, I welcome
the statement by the representative of Israel” [ikid.,
ptrrtr. 81. Perhaps the most interesting quotation that
we have found is the following remark by Mr. Zeineddine of Syria: “The statement just made by the
representative of Israel does indicate some change in
the lsrael Government’s view” [ibid., prrro. 151.
144. So we have come a long way since 1953. And
the representative of Syria apparently believes that
falsification of the Council’s records can proceed with
impunity.

152. Because of the bankruptcy of the representative of Israel, it is clear that, confronting a conseuslrs
of the world community in the face of a crime unPrecedented since the Second World War in conquering*
colonizing and acquiring the territories of other Peaples and States, he has chosen to divert attention lo
all the other regions of the world-or,
at least, most Of
them.

145. While I apologize for the time I have taken,
I should like to conclude with one request: let us make
sure that no more butter is wasted.
146. The PRESIDENT
(inteqm~ttrtion
from Russiun): I now call on the representative
of Jordan.

153. Now, the representative of Israel spoke of the
Polish situation, even though it is not permissible tQ
discuss or even mention this matter without the r-equest of the legitimate representative of the Government and the people of Poland. And yet he urnentioned something about a request for an outlet to ‘he

147. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President, thank
you for calling on me to make a statement in reply to
the Israeli representative’s
totally irrelevant
and
14

sea, forgetting that for 20 years his country’s forces
have been unleashed against the Palestinian people,
which formed the majority of the population, and have
managed by brutal force, massacres and expulsion to
uproot the legal and lawful inhabitants of Palestine,
leaving a truncated part of Palestine-the
West Bank
and Jerusalem-cut
off from the Mediterranean for the
first time in possibly a millennium,
if not longer.

and mutilated the landscape: and they made no secret
of their determination to annex territory the moment
they seized more than 40 per cent of the lands and even
more of the water resources, leaving our hapless and
defenceless civilian population with no means of
livelihood.
158. It is in no way out of generosity or respect
for international law that they have not yet annexed
the West Bank. They are biding their time until the
moment comes when they have settled enough of theit
intruders there and sequestrated a preponderance
of the occupied territories of the West Bank and
Jerusalem. Then we shall see the kind of annexation
which occurred in the Golan Heights. Their annexation of the Golan Heights has nothing whatsoever to
do with anything other than the fact that there are only
remnants left of the original inhabitants of the Golan
Heights numbering 200,000 souls who are now in the
Diaspora as refugees living in other parts of Syria;
the remaining people in the Golan Heights number a
mere 12,000 to 13,000.

154. The representative of Israel has talked about
whatever is happening between Arab countries,
oblivious of the fact that all the Arab countries all
the way from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf
regard themselves, as an article of faith, as belonging
to one nation. They are peoples; but they are one
nation. Whatever happens between them is an internal
matter within a united Arab nation. These incidents
happen in every country in the world. If we wanted
to talk about incidents that happen in the United States,
all we should have to do is listen to television broadcasts every evening, particularly the local 6 o’clock
news, and we would then see the magnitude of the
incidents which happen in the metropolitan New York
*area and elsewhere.

159. Now, whose property is the Golan Heights?
It is the property of the 200,000 Syrians whose habitual
home was the Golan Heights for 6,000 to 7,000 years
of history. It is one of the oldest countries in the world
and one of the main cradles of civilization.

155. But I must remind the representative of Israel
that the Arab countries are a nation one and indivisible. They consist of provinces; they were vivisected
by the colonial Powers, which made them into separate entities-a
situation which the entire Arab nation, leadership and people acting in concert are trying
to surmount and overcome through functional, structural and other means. We are approaching this reunification because the present situation has become so
cumbersome, As a matter of fact, had we retained our
unity, which was deliberately disrupted by the colonial Powers, there would have been no Israel to usurp
the lands of the Palestinian people. I am referring to
the Sykes-Picot Agreement, which divided the entire
territory of natural Syria into so many provinces. They
are all our territory. We do not differentiate between
Damascus and Amman. We are one people. We may
differ in opinions: we may differ in approaches; we may
differ in methods. That is only natural and common in
the behaviour of practically every nation on earth.

160. I should like to remind the representative of
Israel how Arnold Toynbee has described Israel in
his monumental books on history. He has described
it as a fossil of Assyrian civilization. And now, because of the division imposed upon us by colonial
Powers for temporary reasons of olden days, the
Israelis are trying to devour this land piece by piece,
even though it constitutes the heartland of the Arab
land.
161. I regret that the representative of Israel has
seen fit to engage in diversionary tactics and to vilify
so many esteemed and principled Members States
simply because they expressed an honest opinion on
which no two leaders in the world can disagree: that
Israel has committed an unbridled act of aggression
against a sovereign independent State, one of the
founders of the United Nations. The result of his
bankruptcy is that he has touched on almost all other
parts of the world. Even his reference to Poland was
a reference to 1940, The year 1940 happened to be one
of the peaks of the Second World War, before we had
a Charter or a United Nations. Since 1945, the Charter
has been our guideline, and it is clear on what the
rights and duties of States are, what the. rights of
citizens are and what constitutes aggression.

156. It is therefore a futile effort on the part of the
representative of Israel to try to drive a wedge between
the various Arab provinces. We do have our differences, but we are united in our common goal of reunifying our entire Arab homeland from the Atlantic to the
Arabian Gulf.
157. We are today discussing the situation in the
Middle East and the latest Israeli act of aggression in
annexing the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, which
is an integral part of the Arab homeland. This has
come on top of the prior annexation of Holy Jerusalem,
a city holy to hundreds of millions of people throughout the world; it has come in addition to the colonization of more than 40 per cent of the occupied West
Bank and Jerusalem. They have literally transformed

162. Up to this moment the representative of Israel
has not said one word pertaining to the central issue of
our entire debate: Israel’s annexation of the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights. The Council adopted a resolution on I7 December 1981 [resolution 497 (/W/)] in
which it decided, after condemning and denouncing
15

that act of annexation, that Israel should rescind it.
Is the representative of Israel in a position to tell us
that Begin and his clique are willing to abide by the
rules of international law and the United Nations?
Or are lie and his group above the law? If so, I do
not believe that there would be any necessity for the
representative of Israel to waste his time attending the
meetings of the Council to divert and distract the attention of the entire membership from the item on the
agenda, which is the situation in the Middle East. If
he wants to introduce any other item, he is entitled,
as everyone else is, to do so, and then every State will
be in a position to state its position on the particular
subject,

169. We are proud of Cuba, which has defied the
entire unjust system that was imposed on it by tl,e
United States. We are proud of Cuba, which we have
freely elected Chairman of the non-aligned movebent,

163. This has been a brief reply because I know that
the intent is to divert our attention and I regret that
I partially fell into the trap of derailing our debate onto
issues extraneous to it.

171. I reserve my right to continue my statement.
which comprises 12 pages. I do not want to take up
any more of the Council’s time this evening.

170. At the very moment when the Security Cou,,il
was resuming its deliberations
concerning lsrneli
lawlessness-its
lawless annexation
of the Syrian
Golan Heights-Reuters’
tickers were informins ,,s
that the Jewish Agency and the Golan Settlement cc)rmittee, in charge of colonization of the Golan Heights,
had announced their plans to quadruple the number
of settlers in the occupied Syrian territory. We sR5+’
this also in the Drrily Ne~c~s of 7 January 1982.

172. The PRESIDENT
(intc~rpwtcrtion
from Rtr.p
sian): I now call on the representative of Israel, who
wishes to make a statement in exercise of his right of
reply.

164. The PRESIDENT
(interprctrrtion
~IWIYI Rrrssion): I call on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic who wishes to make a statement in exercise
of his right of reply.

173. Mr. BLUM (Israel): With regard to the statement we have just heard from the representative of
Syria, let me tell him in the Council that article 5 fully
supports my contention: No consideration,
of whatever nature, can justify the Syrian aggression against
my country. No excuse, no pretext offered by the
Syrian representative,
can justify the fact that he
refuses to sit down with us and negotiate with us on
all the outstanding issues between our two countries,
in accordance with Security Council
resolutions
242 ( 1967) and 338 ( 1973). So he has no excuse for the
ongoing Syrian aggression against my country.

165. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): The
hour is late and my reply is long. However, out of
respect for the members of the Council, I shall be
very brief now and answer in full tomorrow,
166. I do wish to state one thing: no raising of voices
in the Council, no threats, no vilifications,
no pressures, no smearing or slandering, no blackmail,
can
stop anyone from supporting the Syrian Arab Republic, a victim of Israeli aggression. To us, Viet Nam is
a heroic country because Viet Nam broke the back
of the United States and of Israel: the Israelis were
getting their training in Viet Nam with the Green
Berets. Mr. Dayan was one of them. I do not know if
Mr. Blum also participatedin
the Viet Nam war, getting
his training in anti-guerrilla activity.

174. With regard to the s’tatement made by the representative of Jordan, I believe he made a slip of the
tongue. As he knows, the country which I have the
honour to represent here is Israel, as my nameplate
also indicates.

167, Syria is honoured by the fact that so many countries have expressed their views not only to protect
Syria-to
remove the aggression against Syria-but
also to defend the Charter of the United Nations, particularly its purposes and principles. Yet I should like
also to remind the Israeli representative that he misquoted the Definition of Aggression [G~~~eral Assembly
wsolrrtion 3314 (XXIX), mnexl.
He forgot one paragraph-article
5, paragraph l-which
reads: “No
consideration of whatever nature, whether political,
economic, military”-and
I stress the word “military”--” or otherwise,“-and
I stress the words “or
otherwise”--”
may serve as a justification
for aggression.”

175. He had some queries about what he perceived
as my linguistic versatility,
Let me very briefly tell
him that some of us do speak foreign languages.
176. The Potsdam Conference, which I was quoti?g
from, was in 1945, Mr. Nuseibeh, not in 194*-ln
July and August 1945, after the San Francisco Conference and after the adoption of the Charter of the
United Nations.
177. We have heard from the representative of Jprdan that the Arab nation is one and indivisible, @lCh
of course means that it has fully achieved its s?
determination,
which is now manifested in the eXtstence of 21 independent
and sovereign Arab States
Members of the United Nations.

168. The entire Israeli reply to the Secretarv-General
was based on the premise that Syria is the aggressor.
The Israeli representative has not read the paragraph
I have just quoted; he does not want to read it; he does
not like it.

178, The representative of Jordan, in his stateflent*
also created the impression that his country was a land16

;

locked State. It is not, of course; it has an outlet
to the Red Sea. But with regard to access to the Mediterranean, I am sure the representative
of Jordan
knows that Israel has on more than one occasion indicated its readiness to negotiate with Jordan for Jordanian access and free port facilities on the Mediterranean. This could be one of the topics that we could
profitably discuss when we sit down to negotiate
peace, in compliance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

unfold and reveal. For recklessness is the protective
shield for their lawlessness. That is why he has attempted to bring into the debate issues that have
absolutely no relevance to the deliberations and are
extraneous to the discussions. Thus he mentions certain inter-Arab differences, differences among the
member States of the League of Arab States. And they
do exist, because the League is to a very large extent
a framework of Arab nationhood, to which the representative of Jordan has referred. The fact that historical
and objective conditions have rendered the Arab
nation into separate sovereign and independent States
is only an indication of the degree of dynamic interaction among the Arab people and the Arab States.
But in our serious debates, that fact does not at all
deflect us from our national commitments to the integrity and sovereignty of Arab national territories.
That is why Arab differences, which are transitionally
presumed, cannot be taken as in any manner deflecting us from the absolute national commitment to
the integrity and the sovereignty of Syria over the
Golan Heights.

179. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpwtrrtion
Jhn
R/ISsion): Mr. Maksoud, to tihom the Council extended
an invitation
[2322nd meeting] under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, would like to make a
further statement. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
180. Mr. MAKSOUD:
We have witnessed this afternoon a characteristic attempt at filibustering the proceedings of the Council. This is a deliberate attempt
to reduce the Council’s responsibilities from protecting
security and peace in the world against annexationist
and aggressive acts into a sort of playing to the gallery.
This is an attempt, by Israel to defuse this thrust of
international anger at its obvious violation of the Charter of the United Nations of resolution 497 (1981) and of
other resolutions of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly. It is an attempt to discredit the
Council by transforming it from a credible and effective
mechanism into a platform from which Israel repeats
its abuse of any of the international
critics of its behaviour patterns. Because of its inherent incapacity to
answer the criticisms, it seeks to destroy the credibility of the critics. This is the diplomatic, intellectual
and political terrorism that seeks to cover up the military and aggressive terrorism of which the annexation of the Golan Heights constitutes only the latest
manifestation.

183. Furthermore,
the Israeli representative has
sought to define aggression as an act against sovereignty, implying that a sovereign Israel has been a
victim of aggression by Syria in the past. The Security Council, Members of the United Nations, the
whole world-all
have asked repeatedly where the
sovereignty of Israel starts and where it ends. If there
is today any action in the Golan Heights which has
been included in the broad definition of Israeli sovereignty over it, does that constitute aggression against
Israel and its sovereignty? If the United Nations or the
Arab nation determines that the settlements in the
occupied territories and the occupation of East Jerusalem and its annexation in violation of the Security
Council resolution are illegal acts, does that constitute violation and aggression against the sovereignty
of Israel? Where does this sovereignty start and
where does it end?

181. This attempt to discredit the Council, as well
as the entire operations of the United Nations, and to
reduce the United Nations to a sort of department
where one has to be present, but which should not be
of any consequence, constitutes one of the major
aspects of aggression against the United Nations itself.
This inherent indifference to the debate, to the deliberations of the Council is manifested by the attempt to
deflect attention from the non-compliance
of Israel
with Council resolution 497 (l981), by venting instinctive prejudices
and through semantic acrobatics,
reviving the cold war. It is an attempt to appeal to a
very limited and restricted constituency in the United
States. Thus Israel seeks to paralyse the decisionmaking processes and project itself as the sole instrument of confrontation
and cold war in the region. It
does this by hurling repeated insults at the representatives of various countries who have spoken before
the Council.

184. And the representative of Israel has the temerity to say that Syria refuses to negotiate with Israel
-an Israel that is in occupation of Syrian territory.
He says that Arab States whose territories are occupied and Palestinians whose rights are so openly
violated must negotiate under duress-as if compliance
with resolutions of the General Assembly and of the
Security Council becomes a matter of sacrifice on the
part of Israel. Why should Council resolutions 242
( 1967) and 338 ( 1973) assume the aura of being sacrosanct and resolution 497 (198 I) be totally dismissed by
the Israeli representative? Talk about double standards! Israel not only defies with contempt the resolutions of the Council but, equally, uses the filibustering
techniques that have been manifested so blatantly this
afternoon.

182. This is an expression of the recklessness in the
proceedings which the Israeli representative seeks to

185. The PRESIDENT
(intc~rprrttrtio~z Jon
sion): I call on the representative of Israel.
I7

Rus-

sentatives of Israel forget other rights which existed
before. They are completely forgotten. The rights of the
Palestinians are completely forgotten.

186, Mr, BLIJM (Israel): As the representative
Of
syria has kindly reminded us, we should not raise our
voices here jn the Council. And we should certainly
not be influenced by the raising of voices by some
speakers.

192. We will not find a negotiator like the GOWIDmerit of Egypt in the Arab world any more. It is finished. Seek another man: you will not find him. WC
will not negotiate on the rights of the Paiestinnins.
We in Palestine, Jordan and all the other Arab nations
are one nation, as the representative of Jordan said.
Israel is the intruder. Israel has occupied Palestine.
Syria did not occupy Israel. Israel did not exist: Israet
was imposed by the United States of America on our
region to destroy our life, to control the strategic routes
of the region and also to control our oil and our weulth.
This is the character of Israel.

187. Let me very briefly reply to Mr. Maksoud.
and other Arab countries members Of the League
of Arab States refused to negotiate with US and to
recognize our existence and our right to exist before
1967, at a time when we did not control the Golan.
So 1 think he is misleading the Council when he tries
to create the impression that the Arab aggression
against Israel started in 1967, as if I had contended
that, My point precisely all along has been that ever
since the establishment of Israel in 1948, and even
before that, Arab States, including Syria, Jordan and
others, have been engaged in ongoing and unrelenting
aggression against the very existence of Israel, which
they refuse to recognize.
Syria

193. Israel lies everywhere. For Israel peace means
annexation. We have been deflected in our debate from
discussing the resolution that the Council adopted on
17 December last [wsolz~tion
497 (/9$/)]. It was never
mentioned by the Israeli representative,
The clarlse
in which the Council demanded that Israel should
rescind forthwith its decision to annex the Golan W;IS
never mentioned, The Israeli representative
talked
about almost all other countries, because those cuuntries have decided to uphold the Charter of the United
Nations. If the Charter is not applied in this case of
Israel’s blatant aggression against Syria, if the United
States still exerts pressure on some Western countries not to vote in favour of the draft resolution calling
for sanctions against Israel, then I see no future and
no purpose for a United Nations. But Israel will not
be able to destroy the United Nations.

188. Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
contain the guidelines for a negotiated peace in the
Middle East. They were both adopted after the sixday war of June 1967. So I think it is again misleading
for Mr, Maksoud to maintain that negotiations cannot
take place so long as the situation created in the wake
of the six-day war is not undone. Quite to the contrary. What resolution 242 (1967) requires is that we sit
down, accepting the existing strrtlls yzro, to negotiate
-without any prior conditions and following the guide~lines laid down in the resolution-a
peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israel conflict. This Syria has been
unwilling to do; this Jordan has been unwilling to do;
and this is the rejectionist position for which Mr. Maksoud speaks, however much he raises his voice.

194.

189. The PRESIDENT
tinter~r~tcrtion from RrrsI call now on the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

The show was beautiful today;

I enjoyed

it.

195. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I should simply like to thank the representtitive
of Syria for all his very useful clarifications
of the
issues.

sirrn):

190. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic):
The Israeli representative abuses our intelligence.

196. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab
Republic):
I thank the representative of the United States for her
very courteous reaction, but I did not understand
it.
Could she elaborate a bit? I did not understand
it.

l9l I Israeli representatives always start by speaking
“of 1967. The problem is not only that since 1967. The
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people
started in 1948. This is the crux of the problem. Israel
must withdraw unconditionally
from our territory.
Israel must recognize all the rights of the Palestinians:
their national right to establish a State, their right to
return to their homes and property and their right to
live free Of external interference, These are the conditions that would lead to a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement in the Middle East. Israel will never
Pronounce these words before the Councj] because
we know the Israeli nature. This colonialist, settler
and racist State cannot and does not wish to have
Peace. The word “peace’” is only a slogan that has
been flown for Years and years. After every war we
hear about a new “peace” from territories that Israel
has been occupying from that moment, The repre-

197. Really, I am very annoyed because I cannot
understand it. I want to understand. Is she denying me
the right to understand? Is this constructive
ambiguity,
or is it imperialist insinuation?
198.

Please explain to me. I beg you.

199. The PRESIDENT
(htmy.wtt~rim
~?OI~T RH.v.sicrn): The representative of Cuba wishes to spenk in
exercise of his right of reply. I invite him to take ;I
Place at the Council table and to make his statement.
200. Mr. LOPEZ DEL AM0 (Cuba) (intcrprcttrtjc~n
fi(j/?? Sp~~ni.sh): Since this is the first opportunity
I h:;ve
had to address the Council, permit me to do what ~jils
18

already been done formally by the Permanent Representative of my country and greet the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Javier PCrez de CuCllar, a distinguished
diplomat from our continent, and publicly express to
him, as we already have in private, our most sincere
congratul’ations on his assuming the post of SecretaryGeneral. We wish him every success in his complex
and delicate tasks and we offer him the full support
of our delegation in his work.
201. The representative of Israel has today offered
us a parody of the Johnny Carson show, though his
presentation has been much inferior in content and
format and the Council is not a television studio.
202. We know that this year the United States has
had a tremendous surplus of cheese but we did not
know that Israel had a surplus of butter. The representative of Israel has poured butter all over us in an
attempt to have the gravity of the situation slip away.
The Council is meeting in order to consider Israel’s
attempt to annex part of the Syrian territory. The
Zionist Government feels entitled to make use of the
territory and to dispose of the lives of the Palestinian

people and other Arab neighbours, and it respects none
of the decisions of the United Nations or the criteria
expressed by international public opinion.
203. These aggressors prrr c.\-~~~ll~~nc~c
cannot confound anyone with their diversionary tactics, nor can
they offer excuses for their criminal acts.
204. We express the hope that the members of the
Council will act with the requisite wisdom and firmness and will adopt the measures necessary to halt
Zionist arrogance, which is one of the greatest threats
to world peace.

NOTES
1 ()fJic,i(l[ R~(w,d.~
qf l/w GPI~~~IW/ As.wmbly,
Thirty-sixth
sior~. P/PwI:~ Mwtings,
I I th meeting,
para. 127.
1 United Nations,
T,er,ty Strirs.
vol. 75, No. 973. p. 287.
.’ General Assembly
resolution
217 A (III).

.~PY-

HOW

TO OBTAlN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLKATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section
New
SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et Ies agences
mnnde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre librairc
ou adressez-vous
a : Nations
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas panes de1 mundo. Cons&e
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nntions.

DE LAS

NACIONES

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS

Unidas estln en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccibn de Ventas,

New York

--
