S/PV.8200

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8200th meeting

Thursday, 8 March 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Oosterom. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Netherlands)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Macdonal Álvarez
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Akhinzhanov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Söder
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-06410 (E)
*1806410*

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Angelino Alfano, Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Italy, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Recalling the Security Council’s latest note 507 on
its working methods (S/2017/507), I wish to encourage
all participants, members and non-members of the
Council alike, to deliver their statements in five minutes
or less. Note 507 also encourages briefers to be succinct
and to focus on key issues. Briefers are encouraged to
limit initial remarks to 15 minutes or less.
I now give the floor to Mr. Alfano.
Mr. Alfano: I am honoured to address the Security
Council concerning the priorities of the Italian
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I especially want to
thank the Dutch presidency for this opportunity. This
briefing is yet another example of the great spirit of
cooperation between Italy and the Netherlands during
our split term in the Security Council. Today, I am here
because I strongly believe that the OSCE is crucial for
our regional security, among many other reasons.
First, the OSCE is among the most inclusive regional
and multilateral platforms in the world. Its geographical
diversity stretches from Vancouver to Vladivostok.
Secondly, all OSCE States have equal participatory
rights. One voice is as important as another. Thirdly,
the absence of a rigid legal structure enables the OSCE
to respond quickly and flexibly to breaking political
events. Fourthly, consensus is a strength in the OSCE.
The search for a common denominator has reinforced
the sense of an OSCE community and facilitates the
implementation of our actions.
2/18

08/03/2018

Given all the security risks that we face in Europe,
a forum like the OSCE dedicated to security and
cooperation is of great value to us, because, even when
dialogue is not conclusive and does result in a solution,
it nevertheless continues to build trust among parties.
Trust is fundamental to defusing or resolving crises;
over time, trust brings results. In the OSCE, trust is
an important element, because discussions are inspired
by the principles of equality and neutrality. We are
constantly reminded that security is a global public
good. No nation has ever been secure in isolation for
as long as we can trace back in history. We all share
responsibility for one another’s security. For this reason,
I firmly believe in the principle of comprehensive
security that guides the OSCE; its ability to work in
partnership with other security structures, such as
NATO, the United Nations and the European Union;
and its members’ determination in working towards a
confidence- and security-building agenda.
The motto of our OSCE chairmanship is “dialogue,
ownership, responsibility”. We strongly believe that
these are the key ingredients for further strengthening
multilateralism in an organization that reaches out
to more than 1 billion people. Multilateralism is a
defining factor of Italy’s foreign policy. Our support for
the OSCE is inspired by effective multilateralism, and
the OSCE has proved this effectiveness in many ways.
A good example of this is the structured dialogue on
the current and future challenges and risks to security
in the OSCE area, an informal format in which we can
have a frank, inclusive and substantive dialogue on
complex security issues.
Our
motto
—
“dialogue,
ownership,
responsibility” — has a specific meaning. We want
to follow an approach that looks equally at the EuroMediterranean, the Euro-Atlantic and the Euro-Asian
regions and their connections; that is open, transparent
and inclusive; and that is firm on principles, but
flexible and creative on ways to defend those principles
more effectively.
These are extremely complex times. The crisis
in and around Ukraine is testing the core values that
we share. We have faced a crisis of mutual trust and
confidence, and there is only one way to rebuild trust:
more dialogue, more political will, more concrete
actions on the ground.
That is why my first mission as Chairman-in-Office
was to Kyiv, Moscow and Donbas. I wanted to send a
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

strong and clear message: that we expect new steps to be
taken for the implementation of the Minsk Agreements.
The positive results include, first, the success of the
Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE, which is a
crucial instrument for averting a dangerous escalation
of the crisis despite the difficult conditions. Allow me to
underscore once again the fact that we place the highest
priority on the safety of the monitors, who must be able
to carry out their work with the least possible risk.
Secondly, there is the acknowledgement by both
Ukraine and Russia of the need for a United Nations
support mission. We obviously are following the
contacts under way to this end. Coordination with the
OSCE is essential given its extensive experience on
the ground. It is also important for the United Nations
and the OSCE to complement each other in their
different missions.
Beyond the Ukrainian crisis, we are also focusing
our full attention on the so-called protracted conflicts.
With regard to Georgia, we support the Geneva
international discussions and are ready to promote
dialogue through informal initiatives as well.
Concerning Nagorno Karabakh, we continue
to support the work of the Minsk Group co-Chairs
for a definitive and shared solution to the conflict.
In Transnistria, we would like to build on the
positive momentum. My Special Representative
for the Settlement Process is in contact with all the
relevant actors.
In the past, our security divide was mainly between
East and West. Today, security concerns between East
and West are still significant, and the OSCE’s role is
very relevant. However, we also need to look towards
the South and the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean is
a small sea, almost the size of a large lake when seen
on a globe, but much of our global security is at stake
there. It is therefore crucial to intensify dialogue and
cooperation with the OSCE partner countries of the
southern shores of the Mediterranean.
Last year, in the framework of the OSCE, we
organized the Palermo Mediterranean Conference. As
the Council is aware, the spirit of Helsinki, more than
40 years ago, inspired the rapprochement between East
and West during the Cold War period. Today the spirit
of Palermo nourishes and strengthens the dialogue for
peace and security in the Mediterranean. The spirit
of Palermo means the capacity to build a genuine
partnership among the 57 OSCE countries and the

S/PV. 8200

Mediterranean partners, rediscovering the core mission
of the organization as a plural and inclusive multilateral
platform. This is the same approach that inspired our
mandate in the Council last year.
We are dedicating particular attention to
transnational threats such as terrorism; radicalization;
the illicit trafficking of arms, drugs, cultural goods
and hazardous waste; the links between terrorism and
organized crime, international money-laundering and
the sources of funding of terrorist groups. Fighting
corruption is also central to our agenda, because
corruption deeply affects the rule of law and undermines
the relationship, built on trust, between Governments
and their citizens.
Cybersecurity is another strategic priority. We
are promoting initiatives to increase the awareness of
decision-makers and the private sector as to how the
Internet can affect peace and security. Last September,
here at the United Nations, Italy, France and the United
Kingdom launched a new initiative putting together
States and Internet service providers to respond to the
misuse of the Internet. We need to do much more to put
terrorism offline.
During our OSCE chairmanship, we also intend to
keep a strong emphasis on growth, innovation, human
capital, good governance and the transition to green
energy, contributing to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, an agenda that
was defined by the United Nations globally and that is
being implemented regionally, also through the work of
the OSCE. In fact, the OSCE has always fostered the
view of comprehensive security as encompassing both
sustainable development and human rights.
I also want to underscore the importance of gender
equality and women’s empowerment. Not just because
today is International Women’s Day, but also because
these issues have always been key priorities for Italy.
As a member of the Council, we worked to mainstream
gender-related issues throughout the United Nations
system, especially in United Nations peace operations.
Again, here at the United Nations, we have emphasized
the fundamental role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution by establishing a Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network. We in the OSCE are dedicating
great attention to the implementation of the OSCE
Action Plan for the Promotion of Gender Equality.
Regarding the human dimension, this year
is a special one because it marks the seventieth

18-064103/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Defending and promoting human rights is an
important precondition for long-lasting peace, security
and sustainable development. If fundamental rights are
protected through the legal system and in everyday life,
the rule of law is affirmed and security is guaranteed.
If there is no such protection, conflicts multiply and
social and political instability easily arise.
In that regard, one of the priorities of our mandate
in the Council was the fight against human trafficking.
During our presidency in November, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2388 (2017) in
order to defend the rights and the dignity of refugees
and migrants. Similarly, as Chairperson of the OSCE,
we are raising the attention of the Organization to this
heinous and intolerable crime, with a specific focus on
women, children and minors.
At the same time, we remain committed to defining
frameworks for safe and regular migration, based on
shared responsibility and international solidarity. It
is crucial to engage countries of origin, transit and
destination at the same table. That is also why we
favour the approach, led by the United Nations, in
the negotiations for the global compact for migration
and refugees.
The fight against all forms of intolerance and
discrimination is another main priority for Italy.
Therefore, it is no coincidence that the first major
event of our OSCE chairpersonship was the Rome
International Conference on Anti-Semitism, bringing
together Jewish, Muslim and Christian political and
religious leaders on that critical issue. Throughout this
year, we want to devote greater attention to countering
all forms of intolerance and discrimination. We cannot
shy away from combating intolerance, because history
has already taught us too many tragic lessons in
that regard.
We will only achieve security when we recognize
that we are all part of the same human race and that
defending human dignity is the key to our liberty. In
fact, that is a rooted value both in the United Nations
and in the OSCE and it is what best defines the longstanding partnership between our two organizations
in order to prevent conflicts and to promote stability
and cooperation.
The President: I thank Mr. Alfano for his briefing.
4/18

08/03/2018

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Söder (Sweden): Let me begin by welcoming the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Minister Alfano,
to the Security Council. The OSCE, as the largest
regional security organization under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, has an indispensable
role to play in upholding the rules-based order in the
European region to promote cooperation and security. I
thank the Minister for his comprehensive briefing and I
would like to assure him of our full support.
The Secretary-General has clearly outlined
the importance of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and his ambition to further enhance cooperation and
coordination with those organizations. In that regard,
there is clear potential for greater United NationsOSCE collaboration, particularly in the search for
solutions to conflicts in Europe, which the SecretaryGeneral has identified as a key priority. The OSCE’s
three dimensions of security are an operationalization
of the broad concept of security, which the United
Nations has also made its own, with sustaining peace
at its heart. Through closer collaboration on issues of
mutual concern, the United Nations and the OSCE can
increase the strength and effectiveness of the work of
both organizations.
The OSCE represents one of the most advanced
levels of security cooperation in any region in the world.
Its strength lies in a set of fundamental principles, to
which we, as members, have all committed. However,
today there are challenges to what we have agreed.
For that reason, it is essential that the OSCE focus on
its core business. A frank and open dialogue among
participating States, aimed at restoring respect for our
commonly agreed principles and commitments — as
enshrined, most notably, in the Helsinki Final Act and
the Paris Charter — is needed. It is essential that the
comprehensive concept of security and the OSCE’s
role be upheld. In particular, it is vital that the OSCE’s
human dimension and autonomous institutions
are safeguarded.
Trust lies at the heart of conflict prevention and
conflict resolution. Russia’s ongoing aggression against
Ukraine, its illegal annexation of Crimea and military
actions in eastern Ukraine seriously challenge the
rules-based European security order and erode that
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

trust. Rebuilding trust and confidence can happen
through a renewed respect for the common principles
and commitments to which we have all agreed. We
therefore welcome the Italian chairpersonship’s
emphasis on substantive dialogue on issues that are at
the core of the OSCE mandate.
Sweden will always be clear, consistent and
principled when it comes to violations of the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as on the European
rules-based security order. We strongly support
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine,
which must be given full, safe and unhindered access
throughout Ukraine. A possible United Nations peace
mission in eastern Ukraine must have as its objective
the restoration of Ukraine’s sovereignty and its
internationally recognized borders. The Minsk process
needs to be pursued and there must be delivery on
its commitments.
The protracted conflicts in Georgia, Moldova and
Nagorno Karabakh are of great concern to the common
OSCE acquis. Through the OSCE and the European
Union, we continue to support peacebuilding measures
and conflict resolution in Georgia, including through
co-chairpersonship of the Geneva international
discussions and the European Union Monitoring
Mission on the ground. In those contexts, it is of
particular importance that the United Nations and
the OSCE reinforce their cooperation and dialogue
and coordinate activities to jointly pursue conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. We see a good example
of informal cooperation on the ground in Ukraine,
where the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission are
both operating.
Women’s participation in all aspects of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace must be ensured.
We welcome the Italian chairpersonship’s intention to
mainstream a gender perspective into all of its activities.
Gender aspects, including the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), must be an integral part of all
our security-related work, both in Vienna and in the
field missions.
In conclusion, the Council, by working together
with the OSCE, can more effectively promote human
rights, the rule of law and democracy, and ensure peace
and security in Europe. That collaboration could be a
model for United Nations cooperation with other regions
that are in need of regional collaborative and security

S/PV. 8200

arrangements. In doing so, the Council can make full
use of Chapter VIII of the Charter and encourage the
settlement of disputes through regional arrangements.
Ms. Macdonal Álvarez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for me to
address you, Mr. President, and all members of the
Security Council on behalf of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia. We thank His Excellency Mr. Angelino
Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Italian Republic, for his briefing
on the situation in Europe in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
Bolivia welcomes the programme of the Italian
chairpersonship of the OSCE for 2018 and its intention
to promote an inclusive rapprochement that respects
cultural differences, as well as its desire to pay
particular attention to the fight against all forms of
racism, xenophobia, intolerance and discrimination,
including those based on religious beliefs, and to
strengthen the spirit of Helsinki and multilateralism.
To that end, we believe that it is important that any
conflict within States be resolved first and foremost
internally, with respect for the principle of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and with strict
adherence to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. We understand that in order to do so,
preventive diplomacy, dialogue, consultations, good
offices, mediation and negotiations through subregional
and regional organizations can also be considered.
We believe that it is equally important to respect the
principle of no threat or use of force in the resolution of
conflicts. In that regard, we support Italy’s proposal to
encourage the exchange of best practices and ongoing
dialogue among all parties in order to stabilize all
conflict in European States.
We highlight the ongoing role of the OSCE in
bolstering relations among its member States through
dialogue, especially when, despite divergences, it has
been able to promote important consensus in various
situation that have needed it. We commend its work in
the promotion of comprehensive security by addressing
transnational threats while focusing on terrorism
in order to prevent it and counter radicalization and
violent extremism. We agree that in order to succeed,
we must adopt a comprehensive approach that includes
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms and
addressing the root causes of conflicts. We must also

18-064105/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

prioritize education and promote the role of women
and children.
In that regard, we welcome the fact that Italy has
focused on mediation with regard to its economic
potential and that it combats intolerance and
discrimination and promotes pluralism and inclusion
in their stead. We encourage the spirit of Palermo in
facing these challenges, and we hope that its Protocol
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, and its Protocol against the Smuggling
of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime, will be successfully implemented.
We hope that the channels of communication
between the United Nations and the OSCE through its
Liaison Office in Vienna will maintain and enhance
their collaboration for the sake of international peace
and security, and that they can achieve the goals they
have set for themselves in the context of the priorities of
that regional organization in a balanced and inclusive
manner — in the interest of international peace
and security.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
Mr. Angelino Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Italy, and congratulate
his country on assuming the chairpersonship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) this year. Italy can count on our full support in
addressing the priorities of its chairpersonship, which
include conflicts in Europe, particularly Ukraine,
challenges in the Mediterranean, transnational threats
and, above all, respect for human rights — the keystone
of peace and international security.
I would like to focus on two points: the central
role of the OSCE in our efforts to put an end to the
Ukrainian crisis and the other priority challenges on
which we, member States of the Security Council and
the United Nations, must support the OSCE.
The Ukrainian crisis is one of the gravest and
most dangerous violations not only of the founding
principles of the OSCE, established in Helsinki more
than 40 years ago, but also of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The OSCE has been able
to respond appropriately to avoid the escalation of the
conflict. It has acted responsibly by rapidly deploying a
Special Monitoring Mission and by assuming thereafter
6/18

08/03/2018

a central role in supporting the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, which remain the only possible path
to a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
France is determined, in collaboration with
Germany, to pursue its mediation efforts using the
Normandy format. Each result obtained in this format
and implemented on the ground counts. We saw evidence
of that in December with the exchange of prisoners
between the Ukrainian State and the separatists. Only
progress in this format will support the implementation
of the Minsk agreements by the parties. We count on
the Council to fully support their efforts to that end as
soon as possible.
We remain more convinced than ever that the OSCE,
through its Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, has
a vital role to play in ensuring the implementation of
political decisions on the ground. In that connection,
the Special Monitoring Mission must be able to fully
exercise its mandate without hindrance. We once again
call for its staff to be granted freedom of movement
and condemn in the strongest terms any violation of
that principle, whether in the form of intimidation,
threats or denial of access to certain areas. The OSCE’s
participation in the holding of future local elections in
Donbas will also be necessary, although the modalities
have yet to be determined.
Finally, our general goal remains the restoration
of Ukraine’s control over all its territory within
the internationally recognized borders. I recall,
in that regard, that France strongly condemns and
does not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea
and Sevastopol.
My second point relates generally to the role of
the OSCE in the promotion of peace and security in
Europe. Given the diversity of the threats we face, we
encourage the OSCE’s 57 members to abandon their
political postures and to embrace instead the spirit of
Helsinki, which made it possible, over 40 years ago,
to reach a common vision of security in Europe.In that
context, we believe that the work of the OSCE now
needs to focus on the following issues.
The first is the resolution of regional conflicts.
Moving past the Ukrainian case, we cannot be
satisfied with the persistence of stagnant conflicts on
the European continent, be it in Nagorno Karabakh,
Transnistria or the separatist territories of Georgia.
We are convinced that the role of the OSCE is central
in all such cases, both in connection with and within
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the framework of the established mediation formats,
in order to promote dialogue and restore confidence
which, as Minister Alfano and Deputy Minister Söder
have stressed, are the key to resolving the conflicts.
Secondly, we must preserve the instruments of trust
and military transparency on the European continent.
The arms control treaties and confidence-building
measures developed in the OSCE’s political-military
dimension are unique and constitute pillars of the
European security architecture. It is essential to
preserve their implementation and relevance, including
by adapting them to modern realities. We are in favour
of continuing discussions within the framework of the
OSCE Structured Dialogue.
Thirdly, the preservation of the human dimension
must remain central to the work of the OSCE, in line
with the wishes of the Italian chairpersonship. This
human dimension is central to the functioning and the
identity of the OSCE. It is also key to finding longterm solutions to crises. To reject or marginalize that
dimension can only undermine the prospects for peace
and security in Europe. Like the Italian chairpersonship,
we seek to promote the universality and indivisibility
of all fundamental rights.
Finally, the OSCE must develop its operational role
in response to certain emerging regional challenges.
That applies, in particular, to combating human
trafficking, preventing radicalization and addressing
the impact of climate change on security. Doing so is
important for each of these key challenges to security
in Europe. The OSCE must develop concrete responses
that are not merely public statements of position.
I will conclude by recalling the strong convergences
that exist between the actions of the OSCE and those of
the United Nations. Those two organizations share a
common approach that combines security, development
and human rights. It is our duty, in the Council, to
continue to support the efforts of the OSCE in all crises
in which it is called upon to act.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by welcoming Mr. Angelino
Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy. I also seize this opportunity to
congratulate him on Italy’s chairpersonship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2018. I wish him every success in his
presidency. I would also like to thank him for his
valuable and comprehensive briefing today.

S/PV. 8200

The recurrent annual briefing of the OSCE is
commendable. It reaffirms the commitment of the
organization to promoting cooperation with the United
Nations in order to maintain international peace
and security. In that context, the State of Kuwait, as
a non-permanent Security Council member, looks
forward to strengthening cooperation between
the Council and the League of Arab States. Such
cooperation should be framed within an institutional
context, similar to the cooperation that the Council
enjoys with the African Union and the European Union.
We also call for an annual briefing from the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, similar to that we
have received today.
Experience has proven that, in the light of the
heightened armed conflicts and the difficulties and
obstacles it faces in certain situations, the United
Nations needs the support of regional organizations,
pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is clear
that regional and subregional organizations are the
most qualified and cost-effective entities in helping
to understand the realities of some conflicts. They are
also the best equipped to analyse information related to
the maintenance of peace and security in their regions.
The Arab States, particularly those on the
Mediterranean, share the same concerns and challenges
of the OSCE, including illegal migration, trafficking
in persons, terrorism, transnational organized crime,
counter-terrorism, extremism, racism and hatred of
religions. Here, I emphasize that violent extremism
and terrorism are threats to all values and cultures and
not limited to any religion, race, culture and identity,
as they also disregard human rights. We must all
therefore strengthen our cooperation and redouble our
efforts in order to overcome those challenges. In that
context, I reaffirm that the State of Kuwait is keen to
foster international cooperation in combating violent
extremism and terrorism by adhering to all relevant
Security Council resolutions, in addition to cooperating
with United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
including the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism.
As the geographically largest regional security
organization, the OSCE adds significant value to our
common pursuit of international peace and security.
Its activities cover Europe, Asia and Euro-Asia and
are complementary to those of the United Nations. The
OSCE has greatly contributed to United Nations efforts,
particularly during the three pre-conflict phases of

18-064107/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

early warning, preventative diplomacy and mitigation
efforts, while also working towards peaceful settlement
and contributing in the efforts to rebuilding peace.
We cherish the hope that OSCE efforts will tangibly
contribute to overcoming long-standing crises that need
radical solutions, such as those in Nagorno Karabakh,
Georgia and the Balkans, in addition to addressing the
conflict in Ukraine, which is entering its fourth year.
We hope that all relevant parties will fully implement
resolution 2202 (2015) and the 2015 Minsk agreements
so as to achieve a comprehensive and balanced solution
to this issue through dialogue, in particular within the
Normandy format. We commend the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission for its efforts in that regard,
including the facilitation of dialogue among all parties
to the conflict.
In conclusion, we wish Minister Alfano every
success during his term as Chairmperson-in-Office of
the OSCE in achieving Italy’s foreign policy aims and
priorities, which he outlined in his briefing, as they are
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations in the maintenance of security,
stability and peace in the world.
Mr. Akhinzhanov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
would like to thank His Excellency Minister Alfano,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.
Kazakhstan welcomes the priorities of the OSCE
Italian chairpersonship, under the motto, “Dialogue,
Ownership, Responsibility”. We commend its intention
to focus efforts on strengthening the organization’s
effectiveness in responding to the conflict cycle and
arms control by deepening the OSCE Structured
Dialogue, which was previously initiated by the German
and Austrian chairpersonships.
We encourage the OSCE to further develop
its preventive toolbox in order to tackle existing
conflicts and growing challenges, such as terrorism,
radicalization, trafficking in human beings and the
uncontrolled influx of migrants. In doing so, we are
ready to stand side by side all participating States.
We support the OSCE key priority to seek a peaceful
resolution to the conflict in and around Ukraine, on the
basis of the Minsk agreements. We also reiterate our
strong support for the activities of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, to the work of which
Kazakhstan representatives contribute.
8/18

08/03/2018

In the same vein, we welcome the three-day visit of
the Adviser to the Special Representative of the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office for the Transnistrian settlement
process, Alfredo Conte, to Moldova on 20 February.
His meetings on the ground are important steps in the
ongoing confidence-building process. We also welcome
the meeting of the co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk
Group with the Presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia
in February.
The position of Kazakhstan regarding conflict
remains crystal clear and unchanged. My country
adheres to a balanced and realistic approach to
conflict resolution that is based on the fundamental
principles of international law. As a member of the
Security Council, we stand for the implementation of
its relevant resolutions, while as an OSCE participating
State we also reaffirm the importance of the regional
platform provided by the OSCE. The outcome of the
recent Munich Security Conference clearly shows the
necessity for a more cooperative approach, focusing on
the Structured Dialogue and a positive, unifying agenda.
In addressing transnational threats, we also
encourage the promotion of cooperation among the
OSCE and other regional organizations, such as
the Eurasian Economic Union, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization, which
play an important role in strengthening regional and
subregional cooperation and security in Eurasia. We
welcome the plan of the Italian chairpersonship to
actively involve its Mediterranean and Asian partners
by fostering joint work.
I would like to thank the Italian chairpersonship
for entrusting Kazakhstan with chairing the OSCE
Economic and Environmental Committee. We
believe that the secondary priorities of the Italian
chairpersonship that aim to enhance dialogue on the
issues of promoting economic progress and security
through innovations, including in the spheres of the
environment, human capital and good governance,
open new avenues for mutually beneficial cooperation.
I would like to highlight the fact that Italy’s priorities
correspond closely to those outlined by my President,
Nursultan Nazarbayev, in his recent addresses to the
nation in January and March. They focus on the issues
of economic and social security of people and the
development of human capital, among others.
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

We very much welcome the initiative of OSCE
Secretary General Thomas Greminger to create a new
generation of OSCE field missions, and we offer the
grounds of Expo 2017 in Astana to serve as a platform
for the establishment of an OSCE centre for green
economy and connectivity. We count on the support of
the Italian chairpersonship and participating States.
The OSCE remains one of the key United
Nations partner organizations. As security challenges
continue to evolve, we need to deepen United NationsOSCE cooperation. As in the 2010 Kazakhstan
chairpersonship of the OSCE, and later on, we support
a comprehensive approach to security issues through
inclusive dialogue, joint ownership and common
responsibility, where no one and no concern is
left behind.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea would like to welcome to the Security Council
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Italy, Mr. Angelino Alfano. We also
thank him for his comprehensive and substantive
briefing on the programme and activities planned under
the OSCE Italian chairpersonship this year.

S/PV. 8200

under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We therefore believe that it is very important for the two
organizations — the OSCE and the United Nations — to
maintain close cooperation in order to strengthen the
role of the OSCE in implementing United Nations
decisions concerning European conflicts and for the
benefit of international peace and security. We also
encourage greater collaboration among the OSCE and
African regional and subregional organizations, within
the framework of expanding Euro-Mediterranean and
Euro-Atlantic multilateral relations.
In that context, I take this opportunity to endorse
the priority issues on the agenda of the OSCE Italian
chairpersonship, which focus on achieving a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Ukraine. We also stand by its
priority to address protracted conflicts through existing
formats. Protracted conflicts often generate social and
economic instability, nurturing terrorist groups and
their supporters, organized crime and a lack of social
cohesion, which in turn nourishes radicalization,
violent extremism, racism, xenophobia and intolerance.
It is encouraging that the efforts of the OSCE are geared
towards finding peaceful and sustainable solutions to
the conflicts in its territory.

The global context in which we must maintain
peace and security and find lasting solutions to ongoing
conflicts is both increasingly complex and diverse. The
levels of complexity go beyond conflict between two
States. Terrorist groups and armed groups, organized
crime, commercial interests and other elements of
globalization, such as the movement of people, hinder
the ability of States, regional groups and the United
Nations to find sustainable solutions and guarantee
peace and security for all the men and women of the
world. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea therefore
commends the programme of the OSCE Italian
chairpersonship and the motto it has chosen, “Dialogue,
Ownership, Responsibility”.

Moreover, the major efforts of the OSCE, its
independent institutions and its missions on the
ground have so far prevented the situations in the
so-called protracted conflicts in Georgia, Nagorno
Karabakh and Transnistria from intensifying. For
that reason, we would be pleased if the OSCE Italian
chairpersonship were to work with the same focus that
has been maintained to date, in collaboration with the
United Nations wherever possible, towards the longawaited solutions to all of those equally important
issues, which paralyse the continuity and daily life of
the affected communities in the same way. We believe
that a new approach and greater resolve are necessary
to put an end to those crises, while respecting the
principles of sovereignty and independence of States,
in accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

The need to strengthen multilateralism is critical to
the Security Council and its allies, such as the OSCE,
in fulfilling their commitments. We all have something
to contribute and we all have a role to play. With 57
participating States and in its capacity as one of the
largest regional security organizations, the OSCE was
created to complement and assist, within the framework
of its mandate, the mechanisms of the United Nations

One of the strategic objectives of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea’s membership of the Security
Council, as a representative of the African continent, is
to ensure the fair and humane treatment of immigrants
and refugees. We would therefore highlight and endorse
the Italian chairpersonship’s objective of addressing
the challenges and opportunities arising from the
Mediterranean, such as migration. In so doing, we

18-064109/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

welcome the chairpersonship’s intention to address the
migratory situation, not only in terms of security, but
also with respect to economic potential and the fight
against intolerance and discrimination. The Republic
of Equatorial Guinea applauds Italy’s determination
to promote pluralism, inclusion and intercultural and
interreligious dialogue as the bedrocks of international
peace and security.
Today, on International Women’s Day, we also
highlight the focus of the OSCE chairpersonship
on ensuring a gender perspective in its work and in
implementing its gender action plan. If we may, we
would also like to encourage the chairpersonship, in line
with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and subsequent resolutions on this important
issue, to incorporate into its gender actions plan the
relevant recommendations of the Secretary-General’s
report of 14 August 2017 (A/72/323), on the programme
of activities for the implementation of the International
Decade for People of African Descent, focusing on
women and girls of African descent, and other similar
reports that promote the inclusion and better treatment
of women and girls of other European minority groups
in peace and security processes.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the excellent
mediation efforts of the OSCE to achieve peaceful
solutions to conflicts, in line with the implementation
and full respect of agreements. We again emphasize the
importance of closer cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE, which is the only mechanism
for peaceful solutions and greater stability in the OSCE
regions. Allow me to wish every success to Italy’s
Chairperson-in-Office in fulfilling his priorities.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome the convening of this meeting and the
presence of Minister Angelino Alfano, to whom we
wish every success during the Italian chairpersonship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). He delivered a valuable briefing on
the priorities that he will spearhead this year at the
helm of the OSCE, many of which are convergent with
those of the United Nations and, consequently, the
Security Council.
In line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, Peru believes it necessary to develop
and strengthen synergies with regional organizations
in order to more effectively prevent and respond to
conflict situations. We take this opportunity to highlight
10/18

08/03/2018

three areas in which we believe that the OSCE plays a
fundamental role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The first area is the effectiveness of the OSCE’s
comprehensive security vision and corresponding
regulations, which recognize the fulfilment of security
and human rights as two sides of the same coin, with
a view to acting collectively to prevent and address
modern vulnerabilities, challenges and threats. Despite
the emergence of revisionist discourse, we believe that
the current vision is clearly valid and relevant. If we
are to promote peaceful and inclusive societies, ethnic,
religious and cultural diversity must be understood as a
value, never as a threat. In that regard, we applaud the
fact that the spirit of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime has spread
across the Mediterranean to protect migrants, including
women and children, the victims of various conflicts
and humanitarian crises and those who fall victim
to criminal organizations that traffic in persons.
Comprehensive security is focused on individuals.
The second area is the OSCE’s remit and leadership
in the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime. We wholeheartedly agree with the
OSCE on the importance of identifying the nexus
between terrorism and transnational organized crime to
effectively combat those scourges. We must understand
and address their perverse dynamics, which work to
benefit them both and to harm our collective security
and our societies and institutions. Peru believes that
regional organizations should promote implementation
of the various elements of our international regulatory
framework, such as Security Council resolutions,
while taking into account the particular challenges of
each region.
The third area concerns the credibility and value
of the mechanisms of political support and peaceful
settlement of disputes that the OSCE offers to its
members in Europe and Central Asia. We believe
that the legacy of its work constitutes a reference for
all regional mechanisms aimed at promoting peace
and security.
Finally, we emphasize the consistency of the
principles of dialogue, ownership and responsibility
that are reflected in the OSCE’s theme for this year,
with a sustainable peace-centred approach that the
United Nations has championed.
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would first like to
thank Foreign Minister Angelino Alfano for his
comprehensive briefing. We could not agree more
with the idea of relaunching the spirit of Helsinki,
and he can count on our support this year. We fully
support the priorities of this year’s Italian chairship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), particularly finding a solution to the
crises in and around Ukraine, addressing protracted
conflicts, strengthening the dialogues on girls and
on good governance, combating discrimination and
intolerance and promoting freedom of religion or belief
and interreligious dialogue.
In recent years the overall political and military
situation in Europe has deteriorated significantly,
owing to ongoing violations of the principles and
commitments to which we all subscribe. We believe that
better use could be made of the OSCE as a platform for
dialogue, mediation and conflict prevention. Obviously,
and unfortunately, the Russian aggression against
Ukraine remains a key issue for the Organization.
We appreciate the fact that Mr. Alfano’s first visit in
his capacity as OSCE Chairperson-in-Office was to
Ukraine and Russia. A lack of genuine dialogue and
trust is what has led us to this moment, and it continues
to misdirect us. The illegal annexation and occupation
of Crimea and the continued aggression in Donbas will
have devastating consequences for the Euro-Atlantic
security system. We cannot allow the use of force to
become an accepted instrument in relations between
sovereign States.
In the context of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict,
we should not ignore the role of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, which still represents the eyes
and ears of the international community on the ground.
Poland is one of the biggest contributors to the Mission,
with 40 monitors and analysts, and we will continue
to support it. Not only should we work to reform and
further enhance the Mission, we should ensure that
it can fully execute its mandate. All attacks on the
Mission and its monitors by Russian-backed militants
must cease immediately. Russia’s return to the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination will be crucial if
stabilization efforts in Donbas are to succeed.
We would like to reiterate Poland’s strong support
for the work of the OSCE autonomous institutions,
particularly the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, which is located in Warsaw. Its role in
identifying challenges, especially within the contexts

S/PV. 8200

of security and of assistance to OSCE participating
States in the implementation of their commitments
in the area of human rights and democracy, cannot
be overestimated. Poland is proud that by hosting
the Office and its flagship event, the annual Human
Dimension Implementation Meeting, Warsaw has
become a European centre for dialogue on democracy
and human rights.
We need to make better use of the existing
instruments aimed at rebuilding trust and confidence,
notably the Vienna Document, the Treaty on Open Skies
and the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe.
We are concerned about the fact that Russia continues
either to violate their provisions or act contrary to their
spirit. Any further erosion of them would be highly
regrettable and could have tragic consequences. In that
context, we would like to emphasize that modernizing
the Vienna Document remains a crucial element of the
discussion on risk reduction and confidence-building.
The OSCE’s mediating role in the protracted
conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria and
Georgia are also worthy of mention. The diplomatic
efforts that the Organization coordinates can influence
decision-makers in creating the atmosphere of trust and
stability that the local communities in those regions
have awaited for so long.
As the looming threat of terrorist activities fuels
the ongoing migration crisis, we must stand united in
order to combat racism, xenophobia, intolerance and
discrimination, and pay special attention to education
in our efforts to halt the spread of radicalization and
poorly understood nationalism. Education is the
best prevention.
On International Women’s Day, a liberating day,
I want to pay tribute to all the ordinary women who
have played extraordinary roles in the history of their
countries and communities. We hope that the OSCE will
strive to keep up the momentum in its current efforts
to further implement programmes aimed at increasing
women’s participation in the political and public
arenas, building the capacities of women’s networks,
combating violence against women and implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), which emphasizes women’s
involvement in conflict prevention, crisis management
and post-conflict rehabilitation.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire would like to thank Mr. Angelino
Alfano, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International

18-0641011/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Cooperation of Italy and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), on behalf of his country, Italy, for his briefing
on the programme of his chairship during his mandate.
We welcome the convening of this meeting, which is
part of the overall framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
area of international peace and security, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The work of the OSCE in Europe and that of the
Economic Community of West African States, for
example, in West Africa, shows clearly that regional
organizations can be effective tools for supporting the
United Nations in conflict prevention and resolution.
We need hardly recall the OSCE’s peacekeeping and
international security efforts, which are a major part of
preventive diplomacy in its area of remit. In that regard,
my delegation commends the ongoing support that the
organization provides to the mechanisms established
to resolve the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh,
Abkhazia and South Ossetia and to advance the peace
talks concerning Transnistria and Georgia. We also
appreciate its role in helping to stabilize Kosovo and
monitor the implementation of the Minsk agreements
on eastern Ukraine.
Côte d’Ivoire calls for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE, which, with
its 57 member States, continues to be one of the most
significant collective-security entities in the world. We
welcomes the priorities outlined by the Chairperson-inOffice, which are geared towards dialogue, ownership
and responsibility and based on a proactive approach
to security, encompassing its political, military,
economic, environmental and human aspects. We also
welcome the focus on migration issues and the fight
against corruption and new transnational threats, such
as terrorism, cybercrime and trafficking in persons.
In conclusion, the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire
wishes Italy every success in implementing its priorities
in chairing the OSCE with the aim of achieving the
organization’s goals and objectives.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I
thank Foreign Minister Alfano for his briefing on
the activities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and for his leadership of
the organization. The United States greatly appreciates
the OSCE’s efforts in promoting security, stability
and good governance in the region and throughout the
12/18

08/03/2018

world. We offer our full support to the organization and
to Italy in its chairship.
The OSCE has been critical to developing a robust
European and Eurasian security architecture. The
United States greatly appreciates the contributions it
has made over more than 40 years in helping to underpin
stability, security and prosperity throughout the region.
As an OSCE participating State, the United States
supports its partners and reaffirms its own commitment
to that crucial effort. In order to strengthen the OSCE’s
utility and preserve its function as a primary forum for
an open dialogue on core European security concerns,
we strongly support the continuation of its structured
dialogue on current and future challenges and risks.
That initiative has opened up productive and frank
deliberations among participating States, fostering
mutual understanding and cooperation in addressing
the leading challenges of our day.
One of the greatest security and humanitarian
challenges the OSCE is facing today is the continuing
crisis in eastern Ukraine, where Russian acts of
aggression have claimed more than 10,000 lives. Russia
and the forces it arms, trains, leads and fights alongside
have perpetuated the conflict for too long. The United
States commends the OSCE’s efforts to resolve the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. We recognize in particular
the essential role of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, which remains the international
community’s best source of impartial information
on the significant toll that the conflict in eastern
Ukraine has taken on the country’s people, land and
infrastructure. The fact that Russia, a member of the
OSCE, continues to drive the conflict is a terrible irony.
The OSCE’s role in facilitating humanitarian work
has been critical to alleviating the suffering caused
by four years of aggression. We applaud the courage
and dedication of the Monitoring Mission’s unarmed
monitors and strongly support efforts to ensure their
safety in carrying out their critical mission.
The United States continues to support the Minsk
agreements and their full implementation as the best
path to restoring Ukraine’s territorial integrity and
alleviating the suffering in the Donbas region. While
both sides must implement their Minsk commitments,
Russia can single-handedly bring peace and end the
conflict by withdrawing its forces. We also call for
an end to Russia’s occupation of Crimea, which has
contributed to needless violence, displacement and
death for too long. Beyond Ukraine, the United States
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

welcomes and supports the OSCE’s continuing efforts
to resolve the conflicts in Nagorno Karabakh, Georgia
and Transnistria. It must remain focused on those
protracted conflicts in order to underscore the fact
that frozen and status-quo conflicts are completely
antithetical to the peace, stability and security priorities
of the OSCE and the international community.
The OSCE’s crucial role in strengthening security
and stability, addressing the humanitarian needs of
conflict-afflicted populations and promoting good
governance in its region cannot be overstated. The
United States fully supports the OSCE’s comprehensive
approach to addressing critical security challenges.
We also unequivocally affirm its importance as a
partner to the United Nations and in particular to the
Security Council in protecting and promoting peace
and prosperity.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
congratulating Mr. Angelino Alfano, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy, on his assumption of the
post of Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I would
also like to thank him for his comprehensive briefing
and for outlining the priorities of his chairship in
addressing current threats and challenges to peace and
security in the Euro-Atlantic, Euro-Mediterranean and
Eurasian regions.
We welcome the significant contribution that the
OSCE, as one of the world’s largest regional security
organizations, continues to make in support of the
maintenance of international peace and security. Its
comprehensive approach to security, which includes
its political, military, economic, environmental and
human dimensions, is in line with the new global
paradigm aimed at ensuring sustainable peace and
development. In that connection, we take note of the
OSCE’s efforts in conflict prevention and resolution as
well as post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding.
We particularly appreciate the important role that
it is playing in the efforts to resolve the protracted
conflicts, and newer ones, in South-Eastern Europe,
Eastern Europe, the South Caucasus and Central
Asia, in cooperation with the United Nations and the
European Union.
Dialogue and negotiation remain the only way
to find durable political and diplomatic solutions to
some of the difficult and extremely delicate peace
and security challenges affecting member States of

S/PV. 8200

the OSCE. Where reaching a peaceful settlement is
concerned, we cannot overemphasize the importance of
political will and commitment on the part of the parties
to some of these conflicts. Enhancing the necessary
trust and dialogue between and among the parties is
also very critical to making tangible progress. We are
pleased to note that the Italian chairship has made that
one of its important priorities.
As in other regions of the world, the growing threats
of terrorism and violent extremism pose a significant
security challenge to OSCE member States, and the
role that the OSCE has been playing in preventing
and combating terrorism, by promoting a coordinated
approach among member States, is very important.
In that context, it is only appropriate that the Italian
chairship is placing a greater emphasis on sustaining
durable peace in the OSCE area by promoting a holistic
approach to countering terrorism. There can be no doubt
that transnational security threats, including the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons, moneylaundering, drug trafficking and, most importantly,
human trafficking, are among the most serious threats
to the security and stability of Europe. It is therefore
fitting that Italy has chosen the Mediterranean region,
where most of those transnational organized crimes
originate, as one of its geographic areas of focus during
its chairship.
Promoting cooperation with other relevant regional
and international organizations will be vital for the
OSCE, not only in countering terrorism but also in
other dimensions of its work. Ethiopia attaches great
importance to the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in line with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we appreciate the partnership between the OSCE and
the United Nations, which has been maintained through
high-level dialogues and information-sharing, as well
as cooperation in the field.
Lastly, we wish the Italian chairship success in
implementing its priorities in the work of achieving
greater security and stability in the entire OSCE area.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Foreign
Minister Alfano for his briefing. The United Kingdom
fully supports the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its efforts to
achieve stability, peace and democracy for the people
of Europe, including through dialogue. Like the United
Nations, the OSCE is a pillar of the international rules-

18-0641013/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

08/03/2018

based system, and respect for its fundamental principles
must be restored.

our European Union partners to ensure that sanctions
remain fully in place.

Nowhere in Europe is that more important than in
Ukraine. I would like reaffirm the United Kingdom’s
full support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, including in Crimea. Those
are words with which we open so many Security
Council resolutions. They are fundamental to all
States Members of the United Nations. Yet last month,
we marked the fourth anniversary of Russia’s illegal
annexation of Crimea. That act, by a permanent
member of the Council, showed complete disregard
for the Charter of the United Nations and trampled
on international law. In addition to annexing Crimea,
Russia has destabilized eastern Ukraine and continues
to fuel the conflict, at enormous human and material
cost to the Ukrainian people.

We must retain the Council’s focus on Ukraine.
Next Thursday, the United Kingdom will co-host an
Arria Formula meeting to discuss this blatant violation
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. The chaos, violence and ongoing loss of life
resulting from Russia’s military operations clearly
merit the Council’s time. We must be ready to remain
seized of the issue.

As always, it is the civilians who suffer most.
Since the conflict began, more than 10,300 people have
lost their lives, almost 25,000 have been injured and
3.4 million are in need of humanitarian assistance,
particularly along the line of contact. We have
seen reports that more than 1,000 Russian military
personnel and mercenaries have lost their lives, so
the Russian people are also mourning their children.
Only by means of a truly sustainable ceasefire and
genuine political will, through the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, can the conflict be brought to
an end. We welcome the most recent recommitment to
the ceasefire by the Trilateral Contact Group. However,
past ceasefires have been broken and have not resulted
in sustained improvements to the security situation.
While the conflict continues, the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, ably directed by
Chief Monitor Apakan, must be permitted to carry
out its mandate in full and granted complete, safe and
unhindered access to all Ukraine, including Crimea
and the parts of the border with Russia that are not
under Ukraine’s control. The increasingly aggressive
behaviour and threats that we seeing directed at the
OSCE monitors are deeply worrying, and we have not
forgotten the sacrifice of paramedic Joseph Stone on
23 April last year. If, as Russia claims, it truly cares
about the people of the Donbas region, it should end the
fighting that it started, withdraw its military personnel
and weapons and cease its support for the separatists.
Russia should also show a genuine political will to end
the conflict and abide by the Minsk agreements that it
signed. Until those steps are taken, we will work with
14/18

We welcome and support Italy’s intention to
prioritize tackling modern slavery and addressing
the challenges associated with migration, including
corruption and trafficking. In addition, we support
Italy’s focus on the implementation of the OSCE
Action Plan for the Promotion of Gender Equality and
on protracted conflicts, which continue to undermine
security in the OSCE region. Those are areas where the
OSCE’s cross-dimensional approach can add real value.
We are keen to work with Italy to ensure that OSCE
activities complement, rather than duplicate, the work
of United Nations agencies and other organizations.
The OSCE’s autonomous institutions and network
of field operations can and do make a significant
contribution to the promotion of security, stability,
democracy and the rule of law across the region.
However, it is able to do so only when Member States
stand up for the principles that guide it. It is the task of all
of us on the Security Council to stand up for those who
suffer acts of aggression from larger neighbours, for the
Charter of the United Nations and for international law.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Angelino Alfano,
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy, for his substantive briefing on
the work of the OSCE and the issues on its agenda.
We have always proceeded from the assumption
that the work of the OSCE is particularly important to
the European continent, and we have always supported
strengthening European institutions and agreements on
treaty and legal regimes in our shared security area.
Russia is firmly committed to the Helsinki principles
for relations between States and to political obligations
undertaken in that regard. Unfortunately, our calls for
reasonable dialogue and practical implementation of
the principles of equal and indivisible security in the
West have so far gone unheeded. Some of our partners
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

continue to prefer to see things in terms of the Cold War,
portraying Russia as a threat to peace and security and
forming closed clubs in which some countries’ security
can come only at others’ expense. The result of all that
has been that today the Euro-Atlantic architecture,
of which the Charter of the United Nations and the
Helsinki Final Act remain the cornerstones, is being
severely tested.
In these complex realities, it is more important
than ever to strengthen multilateral cooperation,
including through international organizations. That
cooperation should be regular and multifaceted, and
should cover every aspect of security. It is the OSCE’s
job to help to realize the purposes and principles of
the United Nations in the context of its mandate and
the area within its purview. We are ready to cooperate
constructively with the Italian chairship of the OSCE
and we share its desire to strengthen multilateralism
for peace, security, stability and cooperation among
the States of the region. We have great expectations
for the increased cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations, especially considering what has
already been achieved so far. We have especially
noted the intensive collaboration between the OSCE
secretariat’s Transnational Threats Department and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
combating the illegal trade in drugs and small arms,
terrorism, organized crime, corruption and moneylaundering, as well as in countering human trafficking
and illegal migration. An important area of cooperation
between the two organizations is the implementation
of the Security Council’s anti-terrorism resolutions,
as well as in fighting the ideology of terrorism, as is
provided for in resolution 2354 (2017).
In the area of international security information,
the OSCE complements the global United Nations
efforts to develop confidence-building measures
through the use of information and communications
technologies. We urge it to join efforts to develop and
implement additional concrete confidence-building
measures in the interests of providing cybersecurity.
Those platforms should not be used for unfounded
accusations in that regard.
We value cooperation between the United Nations
and the OSCE on the ground, as has occurred through its
Mission in Kosovo, as well as their collaboration in the
Geneva talks on Transcaucasia aimed at establishing a
direct dialogue between Georgia, Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. We support the Italian chairship’s priority

S/PV. 8200

of continuing the OSCE’s efforts to assist in settling
regional conflicts, and we are willing to cooperate with
settlements for Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh.
We did not plan to talk specifically today about the
situation in Ukraine outside the context of the OSCE’s
activity. Ultimately, it is far from the only issue it is
dealing with. However, the statements by a number of
representatives have compelled us to bring it up.
In order to understand the reason for the
deteriorating situation in Ukraine, we have to go back
practically to the very beginning and recall how the
problems in Ukraine first started. Our assessments of
the origin and current situation of what I emphasize
is an internal Ukrainian crisis do not coincide, to put
it mildly. Four years ago, with the direct involvement
of the West, there was a coup d’état in Ukraine.
Those who came to power decided to rid Ukraine of
everything Russian and the Russian language that was
native to millions of the country’s citizens, and to tie
them to a paradigm of development to which they never
consented and could not accept. There was absolutely
no desire for reconciliation with the new authorities
in Crimea or eastern Ukraine. Crimeans freely chose
unification with Russia. In Donbas they were attacked
with bullets and shells.
For the whole of those four years, Kyiv has not only
been at war with its own citizens, it has persistently
cultivated hatred for Russia in society and has
permitted an orgy of nationalism and xenophobia, with
the full connivance of our Western partners. Without
Kyiv’s acknowledgement of the depravity of those
policies, it is unlikely that anything will change for the
better. The key to resolving the problems in Ukraine
lies in the hands of the Ukrainians themselves, and
only the Ukrainians. But Kyiv chose a convenient
formula, dumping the blame for all of its problems and
its unwillingness to engage in a dialogue with its own
citizens on the infamous Russian aggression, which no
one has been able to present evidence of. And of course
the Western curators are hardly burning with a desire to
put Kyiv on a constructive path.
Resolution 2202 (2015) enshrined the Minsk
agreements as the basis for settling the situation in
Ukraine. However, right from the beginning, Kyiv
worked to sabotage the process and rewrite the
agreements’ intentions, while the recently passed law
on the so-called reintegration of Donbas has officially
buried the Minsk package of measures. We can cite

18-0641015/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

numerous other examples of the provocative actions of
the Ukrainian authorities, such as their discriminatory
language policy, the indulging of neo-Nazist
movements, the countless violation of laws by its own
citizens and the fomenting of hatred against Russia.
They turn a blind eye to the scandalous vandalism of
Russian cultural centres; seizing Russian businesses
has virtually become official policy; and they have
created an atmosphere of totalitarian suppression of
all opposition voices. Opposition journalists are being
murdered, and I could continue this list. But the West
prefers not to notice. The Kyiv authorities have been
indulged by their sponsors and given carte blanche
to say and do whatever they feel like. As long as that
continues and Kyiv continues to undermine the Minsk
agreements, as long as it refuses to talk directly to its
own citizens while falsely presenting Russia as a party
to the conflict but not themselves — alas, we can expect
nothing good and no genuine settlement.
For our part, we are directly interested in
normalizing the situation in Ukraine as soon as possible,
and we are doing everything we can to facilitate that.
But I would like to remind everyone, including those
who spoke today, that before Ukraine can regain control
of its borders, it must first comply with the political
elements of the agreements, which are a condition for
regaining that control, and not the other way around.
That is what the Minsk agreements say. I advise those
who are so fond of referring to them to read them again.
We support the efforts of the OSCE in the Trilateral
Contact Group and the work of the Special Monitoring
Mission in Donbas, which is acting as the international
observer for the implementation by the parties — Kyiv,
Donetsk and Luhansk — of the Minsk agreements,
which are the sole basis for a settlement of the crisis
in Ukraine, as affirmed in resolution 2202 (2015). We
hope that the Italian chairship will continue to ensure
the objectivity of the work of the Special Monitoring
Mission, as well as focusing the OSCE’s representatives
in the Contact Group on developing a direct dialogue
among the parties to the conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to once again emphasize
that Russia sees the OSCE as an important mechanism
for building an equal and indivisible system of panEuropean security and wants to strengthen its role and
prestige. We believe firmly that in order to increase the
OSCE’s prestige, it is essential to define its priorities.
The necessity for reform is long overdue. At issue are
its adoption of a charter and rules for its executive
16/18

08/03/2018

structures’ operations, as well as introducing order
and transparency in many other areas. It is not an
exaggeration to say that strengthening the OSCE and
ensuring that it attains the current goal, as outlined
in Astana in 2010, of establishing a free, democratic
and indivisible security association from Vancouver to
Vladivostok, is in the interests of all States Members
of the United Nations. We urge it to concern itself not
with imaginary threats but with real ones. We all know
what they are. Instead, we should think together about
a renewed long-term international security system
that would be built on the principles of respect for the
interests of other countries, international law and the
key role of the United Nations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence in the Security Council today
of Mr. Angelino Alfano, Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Italy, and we thank him
for his briefing.
All over the world, a wide spectrum of challenges
with increasingly complex risks are quickly emerging.
No country can respond to them alone, and no country
can remain immune. Global issues require global
solutions. Collective security requires collective
maintenance. While the United Nations is at the core
of the international collective-security architecture,
regional and subregional organizations also enjoy
unique advantages in resolving regional hot-spot issues.
China supports enhancing the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, with the aim of jointly
maintaining international peace and security. The
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations should firmly uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations while working diligently to address hot-spot
issues through dialogue and consultation and engaging
actively in preventive diplomacy with the aim of
defusing and resolving disputes peacefully.
The OSCE is an important partner of the United
Nations. In recent years it has been actively engaged in
preventive diplomacy, promoting security and mutual
trust among countries in the region and mediating
regional disputes, efforts that China appreciates and
applauds. We welcome Italy’s decision to designate
dialogue, ownership and responsibility as its working
18-06410

08/03/2018

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

motto during its chairship-in-office, and to respond
actively to terrorism, illicit smuggling, transnational
crimes and refugee crises, among other challenges.
China supports practical and effective cooperation
between the Security Council and the OSCE in the
areas of peace and security, and we are eager to see the
OSCE continue to play an active and constructive role
in upholding regional peace, security and stability.
We welcome all the positive efforts being made by
all the parties concerned, including the OSCE, to find a
peaceful solution to the Ukrainian issue. We hope that
all the parties concerned will work to fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Minsk
agreements, with the aim of reaching a comprehensive,
lasting and balanced solution to the question of Ukraine
through dialogue and consultation. The international
community should continue to support the diplomatic
efforts of all the parties concerned to arrive at a political
settlement of the Ukrainian issue so as to collectively
restore peace, stability and development in Ukraine as
soon as possible.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands.
I would first like to pay tribute to Foreign Minister
Alfano for his briefing today in his capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE.). It is a privilege to
see him back in the Council during the second year of our
split term. The cooperation between the Governments
of Italy and the Netherlands during our split term on
the Council for 2017 and 2018 is a great example of
European cooperation and political leadership.
Today I will focus on three points — the OSCE
as a regional security organization, the OSCE as an
organization for dialogue and the situation in Ukraine. As
a crucial regional organization, the OSCE complements
the work of the Security Council on the basis of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. It plays a
central role in early warning, conflict prevention and
resolution in the region. It also plays a crucial role in
the quest for peaceful settlements of the protracted
conflicts on the territories of Georgia, Moldova and
Azerbaijan, which must be resolved in accordance with
international laws and OSCE commitments.
My second point concerns the OSCE as an
organization for dialogue, whereby it offers its
57 participating States a unique platform for

S/PV. 8200

promoting peaceful solutions to conflicts in Europe,
based on commonly agreed principles. Through its
comprehensive security approach, the organization is
able to deal with all the dimensions of security, including
its political, military, economic, environmental, and
human aspects. Its field offices and independent
institutions — the High Commissioner on National
Minorities, the Representative on Freedom of the
Media, and the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights — play an important role in that regard
that I would like to highlight. In this way, the OSCE
provides space for dialogue within all three dimensions,
and does so in an inclusive manner.
That brings me to my third point, the situation in
eastern Ukraine. The ongoing foreign interference in
Ukraine constitutes a serious violation of the founding
principles of the OSCE. I reiterate my country’s full
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We call on all the parties involved to
fully implement the Minsk agreements. That should
begin with the withdrawal of heavy weapons and a
sustainable ceasefire. The OSCE’s role in the Trilateral
Contact Group and the Special Monitoring Mission are
crucial to the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
It is absolutely essential that the Special Monitoring
Mission be allowed to do its important work without
impediments. The monitors must have full, safe and
unhindered access to all parts of the conflict zone. Any
obstructions of the Mission’s work or threats to its staff
are unacceptable and must stop immediately.
In the context of Ukraine, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands would like to recall resolution 2166 (2014),
which demanded that those responsible for the downing
of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 be held to account
and that all States cooperate fully with the efforts to
establish accountability. We mourn the victims of
the downing of MH17 and would like to express our
sympathy with their families and loved ones.
In conclusion, today is 8 March, International
Women’s Day. In that context, I particularly welcome
Mr. Alfano’s words highlighting the importance of
gender equality, in line with the 2004 OSCE Action
Plan for the Promotion of Gender Equality. We greatly
appreciate Italy’s active role in initiating a network of
Mediterranean women mediators, through which we
believe it will move the OSCE forward in that area. As
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, we believe that Italy will
build bridges as successfully as it did during its time on

18-0641017/18

S/PV.8200

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

the Council. We pay tribute to its leadership both at the
OSCE and the United Nations.

18/18

08/03/2018

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-06410
