A/57/273–S/2002/875

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
6 August 2002
Original: English

General Assembly
Fifty-seventh session
Item 162 of the provisional agenda*
Measures to eliminate international terrorism

Security Council
Fifty-seventh year

Identical letters dated 1 August 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and President
of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you the report prepared by the Policy Working
Group on the United Nations and Terrorism, a group which I established in October
2001 to identify the implications and broad policy dimensions of terrorism for the
United Nations and to formulate recommendations to me.
The Policy Working Group’s report aims to prioritize the Organization’s
activities regarding terrorism, and includes a set of specific recommendations on
how the United Nations system might function more coherently and effectively in
this very complex field. I am currently considering the Group’s recommendations.
I should be grateful if the present letter and report could be circulated as a
document of the General Assembly and of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

* A/57/150.

02-51297 (E)

060902

*0251297*

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Annex
Report of the Policy Working Group on the United Nations
and Terrorism
Summary
The Policy Working Group considered that the United Nations should
concentrate its direct role in counter-terrorism on the areas in which the Organization
has a comparative advantage. In general terms, the United Nations should uphold,
bolster and reassert the leading principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter, the core of which are undermined and threatened by terrorism. The
Organization’s activities should be part of a tripartite strategy supporting global
efforts to:
(a)

Dissuade disaffected groups from embracing terrorism;

(b)

Deny groups or individuals the means to carry out acts of terrorism;

(c) Sustain broad-based international cooperation in the struggle against
terrorism.
In efforts at dissuasion, the Organization has made and ought to continue to
make its contribution through norm setting, human rights and communications. The
United Nations has a primary role in preparing for the adoption and effective
implementation of legal instruments. It should institute a periodic review of the
existing treaty regime, and must underscore the linkages between instruments of
international criminal law and counter-terrorism conventions.
At the same time, the United Nations must ensure that the protection of human
rights is conceived as an essential concern. Terrorism often thrives where human
rights are violated, which adds to the need to strengthen action to combat violations
of human rights. Terrorism itself should also be understood as an assault on basic
rights. In all cases, the fight against terrorism must be respectful of international
human rights obligations.
In its public pronouncements, the United Nations should project a clear and
principled message, underscoring the unacceptability of terrorism, highlighting the
Organization’s role in addressing and preventing it, and ensuring that the fight
against terrorism does not obscure the core work of the United Nations. These
messages must be targeted to key audiences — particularly to achieve a greater
impact in dissuading would-be supporters of terrorist acts. The work of the
Department of Public Information and the United Nations information centres must
be enhanced to this end.
The unique mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee places it at the centre
of United Nations activities to deny opportunities for the commission of acts of
terrorism. The United Nations system as a whole must ensure its readiness to support
the Committee’s efforts to achieve the implementation of measures to counter
terrorism. One specific area in which United Nations agencies can provide assistance
in this process is through the development of model legislation for Member States’
compliance with international instruments and pertinent resolutions.

2

A/57/273
S/2002/875

3

A/57/273
S/2002/875

4

A/57/273
S/2002/875

5

A/57/273
S/2002/875

I. Introduction
1.
The terrorist attacks on the United States of
America on 11 September 2001 caused the
international community to focus on the issue of
terrorism with renewed intensity. Within the span of a
few weeks, the Security Council unanimously passed
resolutions 1368 (2001) and 1373 (2001), the General
Assembly adopted resolution 56/1 by consensus, and
convened a special session. Each of those steps served
to underline the depth of shared international
commitment to an effective, sustained and multilateral
response to the problem of terrorism.
2.
The Policy Working Group on the United Nations
and Terrorism was established at the behest of the
Secretary-General in October 2001, within that context
and to those ends. Its purpose has been to identify the
longer-term implications and broad policy dimensions
of terrorism for the United Nations and to formulate
recommendations on the steps that the United Nations
system might take to address the issue.
3.
The Policy Working Group is chaired by Kieran
Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and is comprised of the following members:
Hans Corell, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and The Legal Counsel; Antonio Maria Costa,
Executive Director of the Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention and Director-General of the United
Nations Office at Vienna; Nitin Desai, UnderSecretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs;
Jayantha Dhanapala, Under-Secretary-General for
Disarmament Affairs; Michael Doyle, Assistant
Secretary-General and Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General; Ibrahima Fall, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs; Ibrahim Gambari, UnderSecretary-General and Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General for Special Assignments in Africa;
Edward Luck, Director, Center on International
Organization of the School of International and Public
Affairs, Columbia University; David Malone,
President, International Peace Academy; Edward
Mortimer, Director of Communications, Executive
Office of the Secretary-General; Giandomenico Picco,
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for
the United Nations Year of Dialogue among
Civilizations; Bertrand Ramcharan, Deputy United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
Michael Sheehan, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Danilo Türk, Assistant

6

Secretary-General for Political Affairs; and Brian
Urquhart, former Under-Secretary-General. Mark
Quarterman of the Department of Political Affairs
serves as the Secretary of the Group.
4.
The Group determined that its report should place
the role of the United Nations in the struggle against
terrorism in context, prioritize the Organization’s
activities regarding the issue, and contain a set of
specific recommendations on how the United Nations
system might function more coherently and effectively
in this very complex field.
5.
The Policy Working Group established subgroups
to address the following specific issues:
(a) International
legal
instruments
international criminal justice issues;

and

(b)

Human rights;

(c)

Activities of the United Nations system;

(d) Weapons of
weapons and technology;

mass

destruction,

other

(e) Use of ideology (secular and religious) to
justify terrorism;
(f) Counter-Terrorism
Security Council;

Committee

of

the

(g)

Media and communications;

(h)

Non-United Nations multilateral initiatives.

The subgroups were composed of members of the
Policy Working Group, United Nations officials and
outside experts. The subgroups made every effort to
include diverse perspectives on the problem. Each
subgroup prepared a detailed report. Their principal
purpose was to develop the background information
and policy recommendations that form the basis of the
present report.
6.
The
Policy
Working
Group
established
relationships with groups both within and outside the
United Nations system, including the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office for
Drug Control and Crime Prevention, the International
Peace Academy and the Center on International
Organization at Columbia University. The International
Peace Academy drafted two background papers and
organized two meetings for the Group, at which
academic experts provided background information
and conceptual ideas. The Center on International

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Organization held four round-table discussions on
various topics related to terrorism, which were
attended by academic experts, policy analysts,
representatives of Member States and United Nations
staff. The Center also commissioned eight papers on
terrorism that were discussed during the round-table
meetings. Expertise of the Office for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention was channelled into the Group’s
deliberations through the participation of its Executive
Director as a member, and through the work of the
subgroups on international legal instruments and
international criminal justice issues and on activities of
the United Nations system.
7.
In January 2002, the chair of the Group submitted
to the Secretary-General a programme for the
preparation of the present report. In March 2002, the
chair submitted a note to the Secretary-General, setting
forth
key
recommendations
for
possible
implementation pending the completion of the final
report. Efforts are under way to implement many of
those recommendations.
8.
The members of the Group realize that their work
will not end with the submission of the present report.
If the Secretary-General agrees to some or all of the
attached recommendations, it will be necessary to
prepare an implementation plan with details on any
additional resources or modifications in mandates that
are required. The Group is ready to continue its efforts
to see this project through to its conclusion.
General considerations
9.
It is important to state what the Policy Working
Group did not attempt to do. Rather than taking a
comprehensive
approach,
the
Group
focused
specifically on areas in which the United Nations
would have a comparative advantage and could make a
fresh and tangible contribution to the international antiterrorism effort. The Group has not attempted to devise
a definition of terrorism, identify its diverse roots or
address specific instances of terrorist activity. The
Group does not believe that the United Nations is well
placed to play an active operational role in efforts to
suppress terrorist groups, to pre-empt specific terrorist
strikes, or to develop dedicated intelligence-gathering
capacities. Rather, the Group has focused on practical
steps that the United Nations might take in the
following areas of activity: (a) dissuading disaffected
groups from embracing terrorism; (b) denying groups
or individuals the means to carry out such acts; and

(c) sustaining broad-based international cooperation in
the struggle against terrorism on the basis of respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
10. Counter-terrorism activities are carried out
through bilateral and multilateral cooperation among
national agencies devoted to law enforcement,
intelligence and security. By and large, such measures
do not require the Organization’s involvement. On the
other hand, as the responses of a number of Member
States to the Counter-Terrorism Committee have
indicated, there may well be places where the United
Nations system could assist in providing or organizing
capacity-building efforts related to law enforcement,
criminal justice and the implementation of the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
11. The Group is mindful of the multiple ways in
which terrorism challenges the core principles and
mandate of the Organization, as derived from the
Charter of the United Nations. Terrorism is, and is
intended to be, an assault on the principles of law,
order, human rights and peaceful settlement of disputes
on which the world body was founded. However,
despite its relatively wide use as a technique, terrorism
is not a single phenomenon, but must be understood in
the light of the context from which terrorist activities
arise. It is not a problem that primarily springs from
any single ethnic or religious group. Rather, terror has
been used as a tactic in almost every corner of the
world, making no distinctions as to the wealth, gender
or age of its victims, who are largely civilians. To be
sure, we have seen in our time terrorism being used as
a strategy.
12. Most terrorist acts have been carried out by
specific groups with limited agendas, using small
weapons, and within the boundaries of individual
States. Transnational networks of the type that
perpetrated the 11 September attacks are a relatively
new phenomenon. Nevertheless, the international
implications and linkages of the more traditional form
of terrorism should not be overlooked. Over time,
groups based in one country may take on a
transnational character, carrying out attacks across one
border, receiving funding from private parties or a
government across another, and procuring arms from
multiple sources. Terrorism in a single country can
readily become a threat to regional peace and security
owing to spill-over effects, such as cross-border
violence and the creation of refugee populations. It is

7

A/57/273
S/2002/875

therefore difficult to draw sharp distinctions between
domestic and international terrorism.
13. Without attempting a comprehensive definition of
terrorism, it would be useful to delineate some broad
characteristics of the phenomenon. Terrorism is, in
most cases, essentially a political act. It is meant to
inflict dramatic and deadly injury on civilians and to
create an atmosphere of fear, generally for a political
or ideological (whether secular or religious) purpose.
Terrorism is a criminal act, but it is more than mere
criminality. To overcome the problem of terrorism it is
necessary to understand its political nature as well as
its basic criminality and psychology. The United
Nations needs to address both sides of this equation.
14. While terrorist acts are usually perpetrated by
subnational or transnational groups, terror has also
been adopted by rulers at various times as an
instrument of control. The rubric of counter-terrorism
can be used to justify acts in support of political
agendas, such as the consolidation of political power,
elimination of political opponents, inhibition of
legitimate dissent and/or suppression of resistance to
military
occupation.
Labelling
opponents
or
adversaries as terrorists offers a time-tested technique
to de-legitimize and demonize them. The United
Nations should beware of offering, or be perceived to
be offering, a blanket or automatic endorsement of all
measures taken in the name of counter-terrorism.
15. The phenomenon of terrorism is complex. This
does not, however, imply that it is impossible to adopt
moral clarity regarding attacks on civilians. Terrorism
deserves universal condemnation, and the struggle
against terrorism requires intellectual and moral clarity
and a carefully differentiated implementation plan.
16. Just as terrorists seek to undermine the core
principles and purposes of the United Nations, so it is
through a determined effort to bolster and reassert
these guiding principles and purposes that the world
body can best contribute to the struggle against
terrorism. The lack of hope for justice provides
breeding grounds for terrorism. Where United Nations
efforts to reduce lawlessness and despair in the world
succeed, terrorism will find no nourishment. The
Group therefore suggests that it is in the realm of
norms, human rights, justice and communications that
the comparative advantages of the United Nations will
be most apparent and that it will make the greatest
difference. Through its conventions, resolutions,

8

statements and actions, the Organization can help to
dissuade disaffected groups from choosing the terrorist
path and those who aid, abet or excuse terrorist acts
from maintaining those ties or sympathies. The
universal character, global reach and international
legitimacy of the United Nations constitute important
assets upon which it can draw in this effort. The
Secretary-General’s credibility in so many different
quarters may equally be of great use in specific cases.
17. Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) is at the
same time a comprehensive and a specific statement of
the international community’s desire to deny terrorists
the tools of their trade — finance, secrecy, arms and
shelter — but it certainly was not the first. Through the
years, a number of conventions, agencies and
programmes — United Nations and non-United
Nations — have sought to curb the access of terrorists
to the means of carrying out their violent attacks. This
is no easy task, and it demands the sustained and
specific cooperation of a variety of national, regional
and global agencies and arrangements. The Group
envisions the United Nations system playing an
important role in the effort by building on its
substantial work on disarmament and curbing weapons
of mass destruction, on implementing the provisions of
Council resolution 1373 (2001), and on narrowing the
space available to terrorists through post-conflict
peace-building and related preventive measures.
18. The Group understands that these two tasks —
dissuasion and denial — demand a response that is
both multi-layered and coherent, that unfolds within a
multilateral framework yet allows each participating
organization, State and agency to contribute what it
does best. The United Nations has a key place in this
effort, but it needs to work out a sensible division of
labour with the many other players. Given that this is
the first attempt at a United Nations system-wide
strategy for dealing with terrorism, careful attention
must be paid to the institutional, bureaucratic and
financial questions, the answers to which can help to
ensure an integrated response to this unprecedented
challenge. More fundamentally, the Organization is
uniquely situated to provide the political cohesion and
principled purpose required to sustain broad-based
international cooperation to oppose terrorism.
19. In pursuing this tripartite strategy of dissuasion,
denial and cooperation to counter terrorism, the United
Nations cannot and must not retreat from the other
pressing issues on its wide agenda. In this regard, the

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Group was mindful of the address by the SecretaryGeneral during the general debate at the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, in which he stated
that the problems, such as poverty, HIV/AIDS and
environmental degradation, that faced the global
community before 11 September 2001 remained just as
urgent afterwards. The Group further recognized that
many of the Organization’s existing programmes could
help to reduce the appeal of terrorism and the pool of
human, material and financial resources that sustain it.
As a result, the Group decided to recommend neither
substantial modifications to the Organization’s agenda,
nor organizational changes within the United Nations
system or the diversion of major resources to the
struggle against terrorism. The Group, in its review of
the activities of the United Nations system, recognized
that the Organization’s terrorism-related efforts would
be more effective if better coordinated, supported by
modestly enhanced resources, and shaped by a more
sharply defined strategy and priorities.
20. The present report begins by focusing on
international legal instruments, human rights and
behavioural norm setting — which can be powerful
instruments for dissuasion. The second section
addresses three key tools for denial: the United Nations
efforts at disarmament and curbing weapons of mass
destruction; implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee; and the contributions that
United Nations peace-building and conflict-prevention
efforts can make to narrowing the space in which
terrorists operate. The third section considers ways of
sustaining cooperation among the Member States, of
working with non-United Nations multilateral
initiatives, and of fostering greater coherence within
the United Nations system. The report concludes with a
concise, prioritized list of recommendations for future
United Nations efforts to counter terrorism.

II. Dissuasion
A. International legal instruments
21. The Policy Working Group believes that the
setting of international norms through the continuing
promotion and adoption of international legal
instruments, the protection of human rights and the
dissemination of a clear principled message should

remain a central priority of United Nations efforts on
this issue.
22. International efforts in the past decade have
resulted in the adoption of international instruments
and other measures at the international and regional
levels that create a legal framework to combat
international terrorism. These include 19 international
and regional instruments (see appendix), as well as
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The international community, led by the
Security Council, has unequivocally determined that
international terrorism represents a threat to
international peace and security. International action
pursued within the framework of the international legal
instruments represents the most effective and
legitimate response to that threat.
23. The effectiveness of any international legal
regime depends on its implementation and support by
States. The United Nations system should intensify
efforts to raise awareness of the relevant instruments
relating to international terrorism and transnational
organized crime. The existing international legal
instruments relating to terrorism do not create an
integrated system, however, and gaps remain. In
addition, the pace of their ratification remains too slow.
24. Disarmament is a particularly important area for
legal norm setting. Additional mechanisms are needed
to ensure compliance with obligations and
responsibilities and to enhance transparency.
25. International
terrorism
and
transnational
organized crime are often closely interrelated and
connected, for example, through the trafficking of
drugs and arms, and money-laundering. Therefore, a
comprehensive programme to counter international
terrorism will be more effective if it is coordinated
with the struggle against transnational organized crime.
As the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime a enters into force, the
United Nations Office at Vienna (where the secretariat
of the Convention is located) will have an important
role to play in further exploring the links and in
promoting such coordination.

B. Human rights
26. The protection and promotion of human rights
under the rule of law is essential in the prevention of
terrorism. First, terrorism often thrives in environments

9

A/57/273
S/2002/875

in which human rights are violated. Terrorists may
exploit human rights violations to gain support for their
cause. Second, it must be understood clearly that
terrorism itself is a violation of human rights. Terrorist
acts that take life violate the right to life set forth in
article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. b Third, it must also be understood that
international law requires observance of basic human
rights standards in the struggle against terrorism. The
struggle against international terrorism will be further
enhanced if the most serious crimes committed by
terrorists are tried before the International Criminal
Court and prosecuted under its Statute (provided that
the relevant national court cannot or will not
prosecute). Since the Statute covers the category of
crimes against humanity, which includes murder and
extermination committed as part of a widespread or
systematic attack on any civilian population, certain
terrorist acts might therefore be tried under the Statute.
27. The struggle against terrorism should be carried
out in keeping with international human rights
obligations. The Secretary-General, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and other
international leaders have highlighted this point. In
addressing the Security Council on 18 January 2002,
the Secretary-General stated:
“While we certainly need vigilance to prevent
acts of terrorism, and firmness in condemning
and punishing them, it will be self-defeating if we
sacrifice other key priorities — such as human
rights — in the process.”
28. The various international instruments on human
rights include clear limitations on the actions that
States may take within the context of the fight against
terrorism. States should be made aware of the
responsibilities placed upon them by the various
human rights instruments and reminded that key
provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights cannot be derogated from.

C. Behavioural norm setting
29. The United Nations also has an important role to
play in convincing communities that terrorist methods
are unacceptable. However, the United Nations
Secretariat
traditionally
communicates
with
Governments, and has tended to be more effective in
reaching the elite than aggrieved communities within

10

Member States. These objectives require both a clear,
consistent message and innovative engagement with
the media and Member States.
30. Three overarching goals should lead United
Nations public communication efforts in this arena:
first, to reach those who are not convinced that
terrorism is unacceptable, and to persuade them that
there is no valid cause for which it can be used;
second, to highlight the Organization’s role in
addressing and preventing it; and third, to prevent the
core work of the United Nations from being obscured
by the Organization’s response to terrorism.

III. Denial
A. Counter-Terrorism Committee
31. The Counter-Terrorism Committee, a committee
of the whole of the Security Council established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), is unique, both in
the breadth of its mandate and in the innovative work.
It has been compared to the various sanctions
committees created by the Security Council because,
like those committees, it monitors the implementation
by States of Council resolutions. However, the
character and scope of the Committee’s mandate and
working methods represent an important innovation
and open new possibilities for inter-State cooperation.
32. In its unanimous adoption of resolution 1373
(2001) on 28 September 2001, the Security Council for
the first time imposed measures not against a State, its
leaders, nationals or commodities, but against acts of
terrorism throughout the world and the terrorists
themselves. It is one of the most expansive resolutions
in the history of the Council, with a focus on ensuring
that any person who participates in the financing,
planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts,
or who supports terrorist acts, is brought to justice, and
that such acts are established as serious criminal
offences in domestic law and regulation with
punishments that duly reflect their seriousness. The
Council called upon States to submit to the CounterTerrorism Committee reports on their implementation
of the resolution. The Committee has established
subcommittees to review those reports, with the
assistance of experts in relevant fields, and it conducts
each review in partnership with the State that
submitted the report. That partnership may lead the

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Committee, United Nations agencies and/or certain
other States to provide a substantial degree of technical
assistance and cooperation to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
33. The Counter-Terrorism Committee should be at
the centre of United Nations activities related to
terrorism, with the United Nations system as a whole
providing it with the necessary assistance. In order to
allow the Committee to make use of the various
resources available in the United Nations system and to
create a veritable network on terrorism issues, it may
become necessary to consider strengthening the
support that the Committee receives from the
Secretariat.

B. Weapons of mass destruction, other
weapons and weapons technology
34. There is no reliable assessment of the quantity
and quality of weapons, dual-use and related materials,
devices and technologies in the possession of groups
and individuals associated with terrorism. It is clear,
however, that as long as stockpiles of any kinds of
weapons-related materials, devices or technologies
exist, terrorists may seek to obtain them.
35. Historical experience indicates that, in most
cases, terrorists are more likely to continue to use
conventional
techniques
that
are
technically
undemanding and not dangerous for them to handle. Of
course, the latter point does not apply to individuals
and groups that are willing to risk or give their lives
when carrying out terrorist attacks. In the light of the
11 September attacks on the United States, it has
become tragically clear that the calculated use of
civilian technologies, such as commercial airplanes as
weapons against civilian targets, is a possible terrorist
technique. Since 11 September, there is a greater
probability of imitation and inventiveness in the
planning and execution of terrorist attacks.
36. The Director-General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has stated that he considers the
theft of a nuclear weapon and terrorists possessing the
means and competence to manufacture and detonate a
nuclear explosive relatively unlikely. The deliberate
exposure to nuclear material leading to harmful effects
on people, property and environment is a more
plausible option. A “dirty bomb” scenario, in which
radioactive material is dispersed by a conventional

explosive, can be included as part of this option.
Numerous difficulties remain, however, in defining the
nuclear terrorist threat, given the hundreds of
confirmed cases of nuclear smuggling (some involving
small amounts of weapon-usable materials), as well as
significant uncertainties about the status of such
materials in States that are known to possess nuclear
weapons. While the weaponization and use of large
quantities of chemical and biological agents is regarded
as unlikely because of the sophisticated scientific and
technological requirements for their production, the
recent anthrax scare in the aftermath of 11 September
has shown that small-scale operations using these
agents could cause societal disruption and have
economic consequences, in addition to the human cost
and psychological effects.
37. Terrorists continue to make extensive use of
small arms, light weapons and explosives for a variety
of terrorist acts. Small arms and light weapons are
relatively inexpensive, extremely durable and easy to
carry and conceal. As previously stated, networks and
strong operational links among terrorists, drug
traffickers and arms brokers make it easier to transfer
this category of weapons across borders. Diversions
from governmental depots and illicit production are
major sources of the illicit trade in these weapons. The
Programme of Action c adopted in 2001 by the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects observed that
such trafficking fuels organized crime and terrorism.
The Programme of Action urges States and appropriate
international or regional organizations to provide
assistance to combat the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons linked to drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime and terrorism. The Protocol against
the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in
Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, d which supplements the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
offers an instrument against illicit trafficking which
involves organized criminal groups as defined by its
parent Convention.

C. Prevention and resolution of armed
conflicts
38. Terrorism is often related to armed conflict.
While the prevention and resolution of armed conflict
should not primarily be conceived of as anti-terrorist

11

A/57/273
S/2002/875

activities, they can assist such activities by narrowing
the space in which terrorists operate. The United
Nations has a long history of working to prevent and
resolve armed conflict. In his report on the prevention
of armed conflict (A/55/985-S/2001/574 and Corr.1),
submitted in 2001 to the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Secretary-General placed the
prevention of armed conflict firmly within the Chartermandated scope of the Organization’s activities. The
Secretary-General set forth a plan for enhancing the
capacity of the United Nations to assist States in
preventing conflict and engaging in peace-building
activities in post-conflict societies that involved two
types of strategies — operational prevention and
structural prevention. Operational prevention refers to
immediate measures taken in the context of imminent
or actual crisis, and structural prevention comprises
longer-term measures to remove the causes of conflict.
39. Operational prevention is relevant because any
measures that alleviate crises and prevent armed
conflicts from developing or expanding could lower
the likelihood that terrorist acts related to such
conflicts would occur. While there is not necessarily a
direct cause and effective relationship between armed
conflict and terrorism, containing a crisis, and showing
evidence of progress towards resolving the issues
underlying it, may lessen support among aggrieved
communities for the terrorist groups that purport to
represent them.
40. In paragraph 99 of the above-mentioned report,
the Secretary-General provided the following
definition of developmental assistance aimed at
structural prevention: “It can ... facilitate the creation
of opportunities and the political, economic and social
spaces within which indigenous actors can identify,
develop and use the resources necessary to build a
peaceful, equitable and just society”. If such efforts
assist societies to resolve conflict peacefully within the
rule of law, grievances that might have been expressed
through terrorist acts are more likely to be addressed
through political, legal and social means. In addition,
effective structural prevention measures would
strengthen the capacities of States to avoid the type of
protracted armed conflict that weakened Afghanistan
and enabled the rise within its territory of transnational
terrorist networks.
41. The Policy Working Group believes that
preventive action, especially measures to strengthen
the capacity of States, can help to create inhospitable

12

environments for terrorism. Anti-terrorist concerns
should not drive preventive activities. However, in
particular conflicts in which terrorism has been
prevalent, the United Nations system should, in its
development of preventive and peace-building
programmes, be mindful of including measures, such
as those set forth in the recommendations contained in
section V below, that reduce the space for terrorist
activities and increase the capability of States to
address terrorist threats.

IV. Cooperation
A. Non-United Nations multilateral
initiatives
42. Over the past two decades, multilateral
institutions and regional organizations have launched a
variety of counter-terrorist initiatives which have
gained momentum with the growing threat of
international terrorism in the wake of the 11 September
attacks.
43. Many regional organizations have adopted
conventions that deal explicitly with the issue of
terrorism, thus complementing on a regional level the
12 international conventions on terrorism. Most of
them establish common extradition procedures, state
the aim of cooperation and call for the exchange of
information. The European Union has taken a leading
role in the field of police and judicial cooperation, not
least because of its high degree of integration.
Measures include: a common arrest warrant; a common
list of terrorist organizations; routine exchange of
information between member States and the European
Police Office (Europol); the establishment of Eurojust
(a coordination body composed of magistrates,
prosecutors and police officers); joint investigative
teams of police and magistrates across national
boundaries; and an effort to establish a common
definition of terrorist activities for criminal justice
purposes. On a more global scale, Interpol does
important work, on which regional organizations could
build. With 179 member States, Interpol collects,
stores, analyses and disseminates intelligence about
suspected individuals and groups and their activities.
44. Secretariats of some regional organizations have
established specialized units, task forces or designated
posts that focus on terrorism. Such steps establish clear

A/57/273
S/2002/875

delineations of responsibility, especially for facilitating
inter-organizational cooperation, and provide clear
points of contact.

B. Coordination and coherence in the
United Nations system

45. Certain organizations have taken action to curb
the financing of terrorism. The Financial Action Task
Force on Money-laundering, an intergovernmental
organization created by the Group of Seven
industrialized countries but now comprising 28
member States, plays a leading role in setting standards
and effecting the necessary changes in national
legislation on terrorist financing. On 31 October 2001,
the Task Force issued eight special recommendations
on terrorist laundering which commit member States to
a wide range of legislative and regulatory action. The
United Nations has been involved in this area through
the activities undertaken within the framework of the
Global
Programme
against
Money-laundering,
implemented by the Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention which works in close coordination with the
Task Force.

48. Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September,
virtually all component parts of the United Nations
system have taken steps to incorporate activities to
counter terrorism within their respective areas of work.
Many of these entities have enhanced their mandates to
develop counter-terrorism measures and to provide a
constitutional basis for action.

46. Various multilateral groups provide technical
assistance to States to help them to develop or enhance
a variety of legal, financial and other actions to counter
terrorism. Finally, many organizations have put
enhanced emphasis on the importance of interregional
political and religious dialogue. The European Union
and the Organization of the Islamic Conference have
launched a cross-cultural dialogue at the level of
foreign ministers.

50. There is an enormous gap between mandates and
resources. The Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
Centre for International Crime Prevention of the Office
for Drug Control and Crime Prevention has two
Professional posts and the Centre itself, whose
technical assistance and capacity-building tasks were
expanded to include terrorism, has 34.

47. The potential role of the United Nations in
working with regional multilateral efforts fits within
the Organization’s roles of norm setting, coordination,
cooperation and capacity-building. The norm-setting
role has been described elsewhere in the present report.
In supporting coordination and cooperation, the United
Nations should be guided by the following principles:
First, the current ad hoc interaction between the United
Nations and regional organizations should be made
more systematic. Second, coordination mechanisms
already in place should be used to avoid duplication of
effort and waste of resources. Third, where possible,
the United Nations should help regional organizations
involved in counter-terrorism to develop a division of
labour based on comparative advantage. Fourth, a
better flow of information among regional
organizations and the United Nations should be
established.

49. The resulting overlaps and duplications in the
efforts of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes are natural responses to an emergency and
in
most circumstances
they provide useful
opportunities for learning, as variations in programmes
allow for the identification of best practice. Much more
serious, however, are significant gaps in the overall
repertoire of responses, and gaps between the
individual mandates of organizations and the resources
available to meet them.

51. The Policy Working Group believes that there is a
need for a senior-level group within the United Nations
system to meet periodically to assess the system’s
activities on terrorism, and recommend steps to ensure
its effectiveness and coherence. The Department of
Political Affairs, as the focal point of the United
Nations system, on terrorism, could monitor the issue
on a regular basis from a political perspective, ensure
that the system is represented at international meetings
as appropriate, and act as convenor of the proposed
senior-level group which, in order to make maximum
use of existing structures, should be the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security.

V. Recommendations
52. The recommendations below are grouped in
accordance with the main tasks identified above. In
each category, the recommendations have been
presented in descending order of priority.

13

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Dissuasion
International legal instruments
Recommendation 1
The importance of signing, ratifying and
effectively implementing the 12 United Nations
counter-terrorism conventions and, in particular, the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorisme of 1999, should be stressed to
Member States. Both the Secretary-General and senior
officials can convey this message in bilateral meetings
and other forums. The basic premise of this message
should be that counter-terrorism must be firmly
grounded in international law.
Recommendation 2
The periodic review of the status of ratification
and the action taken by States to implement the
existing treaty regime on anti-terrorism should
continue to be carried out every year by the Office of
Legal Affairs, and, if requested by the General
Assembly, analytical reviews of that regime should
also be carried out.
Recommendation 3
In order to supplement anti-terrorist actions, an
appeal should be made for the expeditious signature,
ratification and entry into force of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, a
and its three protocols. f
Human rights
Recommendation 4
All relevant parts of the United Nations system
should emphasize that key human rights must always
be protected and may never be derogated from. The
independence of the judiciary and the existence of
legal remedies are essential elements for the protection
of fundamental human rights in all situations involving
counter-terrorism measures.
Recommendation 5
The Department of Public Information should be
requested, in consultation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
publish a digest of the core jurisprudence of

14

international and regional human rights bodies on the
protection of human rights in the struggle against
terrorism.
Governments
and
human
rights
organizations could find such a compilation of direct
use in the development of counter-terrorism policies.
Recommendation 6
The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights should convene a consultation of
international, regional and subregional organizations
and non-governmental organizations on the protection
of human rights in the struggle against terrorism.
Smaller, regional gatherings should also be considered.
The Office of the High Commissioner should also
make maximum use of its field presences and its
regional experts, as well as the findings of the human
rights treaty bodies and special rapporteurs.
Non-legal norm setting
Recommendation 7
The United Nations system, under the leadership
of the Secretary-General, should deliver a consistent,
clear, principled message when addressing the issue of
terrorism, as follows:
(a) The targeting of unarmed civilians is wrong
in all circumstances;
(b) Governments must ensure that there are
avenues to enable citizens to express concerns and
grievances;
(c) Military force should be used only in strict
adherence with the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. Such use of force must be
exercised in accordance with the international laws of
war. The targeting of civilians and the disproportionate
use of force beyond legitimate military objectives
violate international humanitarian law;
(d) Security cannot be achieved by sacrificing
human rights.
Recommendation 8
The Department of Public Information should
initiate a review of how the United Nations can reach
local populations that support terrorist aims, in a form
that is designed to be “heard” by those communities.
Country teams should be used to the greatest extent

A/57/273
S/2002/875

possible to determine the best means of conveying
messages to target audiences.
Recommendation 9
Review and enhance the outreach of the United
Nations information centres to civil society, including
the growing number of institutes and think-tanks in
Arabic-speaking countries.
Recommendation 10
The activities of the United Nations related to the
fight against terrorism should be promoted through,
inter alia:
(a) Public information regarding the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee, including the
dissemination of positive examples of its work such as
the assistance provided by the Committee and donors,
and advances in regional cooperation;
(b) Dissemination of the work of United
Nations agencies on the broad range of problems that
relate to terrorism, including giving greater prominence
to the work undertaken by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and
other organizations of the United Nations system in
respect of educational initiatives, such as curricula
reform, that aim to increase understanding, encourage
tolerance and respect for human dignity, while
reducing mutual mistrust between communities in
conflict. Elements of the United Nations system which
address the issue of education should meet to
determine how best to mount a coherent worldwide
programme to assist countries in which the educational
systems need support or that are under the control of
groups advocating terror;
(c) Promotion of the role of international law in
combating terrorism.

agencies and programmes to be well informed of the
activities under way in this field of activity.

Denial
Counter-Terrorism Committee
Recommendation 13
It should be ensured that expertise developed in
the various United Nations system offices is made
available to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The
Committee should be consulted about ways to enhance
and make more sustainable the available Secretariat
support for its work. Consideration should be given to
convening a meeting of relevant United Nations actors
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee in order to
promote greater dialogue with the United Nations
system. The symposium on the theme “Combating
international terrorism: the contribution of the United
Nations”, held at Vienna on 3 and 4 June 2002, has
provided a first phase for such a process.
Recommendation 14
To assist Member States and regional bodies in
the implementation of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001), the Centre for International Crime
Prevention of the Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention could develop model legislation and
provide advice to ensure that existing laws designed to
fight domestic terrorism are amended in order to
ensure their effectiveness against terrorism. Since the
Centre is currently considering how best to organize
itself to carry out these tasks, the Group does not have
a specific recommendation on how this should be done,
other than to note that additional resources may be
required.
Recommendation 15

Recommendation 11
Continue emphasizing the importance to the fight
against terrorism of existing United Nations work in
the areas of human rights, democratic capacitybuilding, and social and economic justice.
Recommendation 12
Ensure better internal communication within the
United Nations system, so as to allow all departments,

States should be encouraged to view the
implementation of Council resolution 1373 (2001) and,
by extension, the mechanism of targeted sanctions, as
an instrument of democratic governance and statecraft
that would help States more effectively to control their
borders, regulate trade and control the activities of
illicit traffickers, terrorists, organized crime and other
non-State actors.

15

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Recommendation 16

Recommendation 20

Together with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, a dialogue should be
maintained with the Counter-Terrorism Committee on
the importance of ensuring respect for human rights
during the implementation of legislation, policies and
practices to combat terrorism.

Arrangements
through
which
specialized
agencies or related organizations can provide
assistance and advice to States on how to develop and
maintain adequate civil defence capability against the
use of weapons of mass destruction, other weapons or
technologies should be facilitated.

Recommendation 17

Recommendation 21

A network involving the United Nations system
and the Bretton Woods institutions should be created to
help Member States (in particular those needing greater
assistance) to implement the recommendations of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Relevant United Nations offices should be tasked
with producing proposals to reinforce ethical norms,
and the creation of codes of conduct for scientists,
through international and national scientific societies
and institutions that teach sciences or engineering
skills related to weapons technologies, should be
encouraged. Such codes of conduct would aim to
prevent the involvement of defence scientists or
technical experts in terrorist activities and restrict
public access to knowledge and expertise on the
development, production, stockpiling and use of
weapons of mass destruction or related technologies.

Disarmament
Recommendation 18
Consideration should be given to the
establishment of a mechanism under the Department
for Disarmament Affairs that would produce a biennial
public report on the potential use of weapons of mass
destruction in terrorist acts. This mechanism would
make use of existing United Nations resources and
specialized databases, as well as information received
from Member States, and could serve as a barometer of
terrorist danger. Furthermore, this mechanism could be
available to assist the Committee, either directly, by
providing analysis and advice, or indirectly, by
recommending appropriate cooperation between the
Security Council (or the Committee) and the relevant
operational agencies, such as the International Atomic
Energy Agency or the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons. The aforementioned report
could be linked to the periodic review of legislation
referred to in recommendation 2 above and, if deemed
appropriate, submitted to the General Assembly so as
to draw the attention of the membership to this
important issue.
Recommendation 19
The development of the technical capabilities of
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the World Health Organization to provide
assistance to States in the event of the threat or use of
weapons of mass destruction, other weapons and
technologies should be encouraged.

16

Preventive measures
Recommendation 22
The importance of effective post-conflict peacebuilding should be emphasized, not only to avert the
resurgence of violent conflict, but also to prevent the
development of situations of lawlessness in which
terrorist groups may thrive. The United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Political Affairs, and together with the Centre for
International Crime Prevention of the Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention, could set up a database
of best practice in these fields, which could be
developed and disseminated in order to help Member
States in their fight against terrorism.
Recommendation 23
Measures should be taken to ensure that the
mandates of peacekeeping operations are sensitive to
terrorism-related issues, providing, for instance, that
civilian police officers received appropriate training on
measures to identify and counter terrorist groups.
Recommendation 24
The Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention and the Department for Disarmament

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Affairs should study the links between terrorism and
organized crime, including drug trafficking, moneylaundering, illicit trafficking of arms and corruption,
which provide an environment that enables terrorist
operations to expand.

Recommendation 29
Measures should be taken to assign a clearer
responsibility and to allocate the needed capacity for
more effective liaison with Interpol and other policerelated activities, in order to ensure that information
flows through the United Nations system.

Cooperation
Coordination and coherence within the
United Nations system

Non-United Nations multilateral initiatives
Recommendation 25

Recommendation 30

Terrorism should be on the agenda for the next
high-level meeting of the Secretary-General with
regional organizations, scheduled to be held in 2003.

In order to clarify responsibilities, the
Department of Political Affairs should be identified as
the focal point of the United Nations system for
political and strategic issues related to counterterrorism, while the Centre for International Crime
Prevention of the Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention should take the lead in assisting Member
States in implementing the relevant conventions and
resolutions. The Office of Legal Affairs should
continue to assist Member States in the elaboration of
conventions against terrorism.

Recommendation 26
The above-mentioned meeting could develop an
international action plan in which the United Nations
would:
(a) Encourage closer cooperation among
regional organizations and promote the establishment
of an informal network of contacts;
(b) Call upon international financial institutions
and other donors to increase the resources and
technical assistance they provide to developing
countries to combat the financing of terrorism;

Recommendation 31
Improve coordination to avoid overlaps and gaps
in counter-terrorism activities should be improved by:

Recommendation 27

(a) Making counter-terrorism a regular (annual)
item on the agendas of the High-level Committee on
Programmes and of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination with the aim of
enhancing coordination among agencies, funds and
programmes;

The Department of Political Affairs, as the focal
point of the United Nations system on terrorism,
should maintain contact with regional and international
organizations in order to ensure that the United Nations
is consistently represented at an appropriate level at
international meetings on the subject.

(b) Tasking ECPS, chaired by the Department
of Political Affairs as the focal point of the United
Nations system on terrorism, to meet on the subject
every two months in order to achieve greater
coordination in the action taken by the United Nations
to counter terrorism.

(c) Cooperate with regional organizations in
identifying best practice in the field of counterterrorism and promote its adoption.

Recommendation 28
Action should be taken to ensure that existing
meetings for interaction with regional organizations
include cooperation in the fight against terrorism as a
priority issue in their agendas.

Notes
a

General Assembly resolution 55/25, annex I.

b

General Assembly resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

c

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, New York, 9-20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15),
chap. IV.

17

A/57/273
S/2002/875

18

d

General Assembly resolution 55/255, annex.

e

General Assembly resolution 54/109, annex.

f

General Assembly resolution 55/25, annexes II and III,
and resolution 55/255, annex.

A/57/273
S/2002/875

Appendix
These are the 19 global or regional treaties directly pertaining to the subject of
international terrorism:
1.

International Civil Aviation Organization, Convention on Offences and Certain
Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft. Signed at Tokyo on 14 September
1963. Entered into force on 4 December 1969.

2.

__________, Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft.
Signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970. Entered into force on 14 October
1971.

3.

__________, Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Civil Aviation. Signed at Montreal, Canada, on 23 September 1971.
Entered into force on 26 January 1973.

4.

United Nations, Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes
against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents.
Adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 3166 (XXVIII) of 14
December 1973. Entered into force on 20 February 1977 (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 1035, p. 167).

5.

__________, International Convention against the Taking of Hostages.
Adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 34/146 of 17 December 1979.
Entered into force on 3 June 1983 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1316,
p. 205).

6.

International Atomic Energy Agency, Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material. Signed at Vienna and in New York on 3 March 1980.
Adopted at Vienna on 26 October 1979. Entered into force on 8 February
1987.

7.

International Civil Aviation Organization, Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation,
supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Civil Aviation, done at Montreal on 23 September 1971. Signed
at Montreal, Canada, on 24 February 1988. Entered into force on 6 August
1989.

8.

International Maritime Organization, Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation. Adopted in Rome on
10 March 1988. Entered into force on 1 March 1992.

9.

__________, Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety
of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf. Adopted in Rome on 10
March 1988. Entered into force on 1 March 1992.

10.

International Civil Aviation Organization, Convention on the Marking of
Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection. Done at Montreal, Canada, on
1 March 1991. Entered into force on 21 June 1998.

11.

United Nations, International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings. Adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 52/164 of 15
December 1997. Entered into force on 23 May 2001.

19

A/57/273
S/2002/875

20

12.

__________, International Convention on the Suppression of Financing of
Terrorism. Adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 54/109 of 9
December 1999. Entered into force on 10 April 2002.

13.

League of Arab States, Arab Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism.
Signed at Cairo on 22 April 1998. Entered into force on 7 May 1999.

14.

Organization of the Islamic Conference, Convention on Combating
International Terrorism. Adopted at Ouagadougou on 1 July 1999. Not yet in
force.

15.

Council of Europe, European Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism.
Opened for signature at Strasbourg, France, on 27 January 1977. Entered into
force on 4 August 1978.

16.

Organization of American States, Convention to Prevent and Punish the Acts
of Terrorism Taking the Form of Crimes against Persons and Related Extortion
that are of International Significance. Signed at Washington, D.C., on 2
February 1971. Entered into force on 16 October 1973.

17.

African Union (formerly Organization of African Unity), Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism. Adopted at Algiers on 14 July 1999.
Not yet in force.

18.

South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, Regional Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism. Signed at Kathmandu on 4 November 1987. Entered
into force on 22 August 1988.

19.

Commonwealth of Independent States, Treaty on Cooperation among the
States Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States in Combating
Terrorism. Adopted at Minsk on 4 June 1999. Entered into force in accordance
with its article 22.
