xv
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS
OF THE SIXffl COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS
DE LA SIXIEME COMMISSION
permanente a
adresser au Secretaire general de
!'Organisation des Etats amer1cains, le priant d'assister aux sessions de l' Assemhlee generale

253 (III). Invitation

253 (III). Permanent invitation to the
Secretary-General of the Organization of American States to he
present at the sessions of the Gen•
eral Assembly

L'Assemblee generale
Deci.de de demander au Secretaire general d'in..

The General Assembly
Resolves that the Secretary-General be requested
to invite the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States to be present as an
observer at the sessions of the General Assembly.

viter le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Etats americains a assister aux sessions de l'Assemblee generale en qualite d'observateur.

Cent-cinquante et unieme seance pleniere,
le 16 octobre 1948.

Hundred and fifty-first plenary meeting,
16 October 1948.

of treaties and international agreements

254 (Ill). Enregistrement et publication des traites et accords internationaux

A

A

The General Assembly,
Considering that the United Nations Charter

L 'A,aemb/Je genbale,
Considerant que la Charte des Nations Unies

requires that treaties and international agreements be not only registered but also published
as soon as possible; and
Con:ndering that the practical value, for Governments, scientific institutions and all the circles
concerned, of publishing treaties and international agreements also depends in large measure
upon the degree of accuracy and precision of the
published translations,
instructs the Secretary-General to take all
the necessary steps to ensure that registered
treaties or agreements shall be published with
the least possible delay and that the translations
shall reach the highest possible level of accuracy
and precision.

impose non seulement l' enregistrement mais la
publication des traites et accords internationam
le plus t6t possible,
Con,ulerant que la valeur pratique pour les
Gouvernements, les institutions scientifiques et
tous les milieux interesses, de la publication des
traites et accords internationaui: depend aussi,
dans une large mesure, du degre d'exactitude et
de precision des traductions publiees,
Charge le Secretaire general de prendre toutes
les mesures necessaires pour que les traites ou
accords enregistres soient publies avec le mains
de delai possible et pour que Jes traductions
atteignent le plus haut degre possible d'exactitude et de precision.

254 (III). Registration and publication

I

Hundred and fift!J-.fifth plenan; meeting,
3 Nonember 1948.

Cent-ci"nquante-cinqu,·eme seance plenidre.
le 3 novembre 1948.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements (A/613 ),
Havine noted that relatively few treaties and
other international agreements have been registered to date, and that less than half of the number of States Members of the United Nations have
registered any treaties or other international
agreements,
Comi·deri"ng that all Member States have by
159

B

L',foembUe generate,
Ayant etudie le rapport du Secretaire general
sur l' enregistrement et la publication des traites
et accords internationaux (A/613);
Ayant note qu'a ce jour, un nombre relativement peu eleve de traites et autres accords internationaux ont ete enregistres et que moins de la
moitie des Etats Membres de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies ont fait enregistrer des traites ou
autres accords internationaux,
Connderant que tous les Etats Membres ont

Article 102 ofthe Chnrter, assumed the obligation
to register with the Serretari11t every treaty and
every international aureement entered into by
them after the coming into force or the Charter,
Having nuted that resolution 17 2 (II) 1 of 14 November 1947 drew the attention of MemLer
States to this oLligation,
ThBrr!fore requests that each of the MembPr
States take cognizance of its obligation uncler
Article 102 and tale immediate steps to fulfil
this oLligation.

assume, aux termes de l' Article 102 de la Charte,
I' obligation de faire enregistrer au Secretariat
tout traite et tout accord international conclu par
eux apres l'entree en vigueur de la Charte,
Ayant note que la resolution 17 2 (II) 1 du
t 4 novembre 1947 attire !'attention des Etats
Memhres sur cette obligation,
Demawk m conaJqueMJ que chacun des ttats
Membres prenne connaissance de l'obligation
que lui impose l'Article 102 ot qu'il prenne des
mesures immediates pour s'en acquitter.

Cent-anquan1Hinqumn1 ,Jana pUnim,

Hundr«l and fifty-fifth plenary matino,
S November 1948.

la S no,,emhre 19 48.

to the United
Nations of functions and powers
previously exercised by the League
of Nations under the International
Convention relating to Economic
Statisties, signed at Geneva on
14 December 1928

255 (III). Transfert a l'Organisation

TM GfflfflJl AumJ,ly,
D11tirou, of continuing international co-opera-

L'A..,,J,TJ, pale,
De.irfflle de maintenir la cooperation intel'-

255 (ID). Transfer

tion relating to economic statistics,

Approve, the Protocol which accompanies this
resolution;
Uro~• that it shall be signed without delay by
all thi, States which are Parties to the International Cunvenlion rchiting to Economic Statistics,
aigne<l at Geneva on U December 192 8 ;1
RNlOmmnu/, that, p<•ntling the entry into force
of the aforementioned Protocol, effect he given
to its provisions by the Parties to the Convention;
l111fruet1 the Secretary-General to perform the
functions con£erred upon him by the Protocol
upon its entry into force.

des Nations Unies des fonctions et
pouvoirs exerces par la Societe de1
Nations en vertu de la Convention
internationale concernant Jes sta•
tistiques economiques, signee a
Geneve le 14 decembre 1928

nationale en ce qui concerne les statistiquea
economiques,
Approuve le Protocole qui aceompagne la presente resolution;
Demands 1u'il soit signe sans retard par tous
les Etats qm sont parties la Convention intel'nationale concernant les statistiques economiques, signee a Geneve le 14 decembre t 928';
Rerommawk qu'en attendant l'entree en vigueur du Protocole ci-dessus mentionne, ses
dispositions soient appliquees par les parties
a la Convention;
DonM paur in,truction au Seeretaire general
de s'acquitter des fonctions qui lui soot confieea
par le Protocoie des son entree en vigueur.

a

Cent-soixantiema ,eance plilnibe,
le 18 tlOtMmbre 1948.

Hundr,d and si.ctielh plmary meetino.
18 November 1948.

PROTOCOLE AMENDANT LA CONVENTION INTERNATIONALE CONCERNANT LES STATISTIQUES ECONOMIQUES, SIGNEE A GENEVE,
LE U DECEMBRE 1928.

PROTOC.OL Al\fF.~nING THE J1TF.R1AT10NAL
f.O~YF.NTlON RELATING TO EC.O~OMI f. ~'f A'1'1ST1C8. SIGNED AT GENEVA ON 14 DECEM-

BER t<J28.
Th,) P,1rtiPs to the prrsent Protocol, considPring
that, uncfor thP l11tPrm11ional Convention rPlating
to Eronomir Stati~lir.s, sign"cl at G,•nPvn on 16 Decemhn t 928, tlw L"lll{IIP or Nalions WI\!! invPsted
with CPrtain duti◄-11 an.I fonctions for thi, rontinued
performance or which it iK n"Cl'SAAry lo makP provision in ronsPqnPnce or lhe dissolnt.ion of the
League of Nations, and con~i,lninr, Iha! it is Pxpedient that these duties and functions shonlJ be

Lrs Etats Parties au present Protocofo, considerant que la Convention international11 concernant les
statistiquPS economiques, signee it GPneve le 14 decembre 1928, a confie a la Societe des Nations certains devoirs et certainf's fonctions, et qu'en raison de
la dissolution de la Societe des Nations ii est necessaire dP. prendre des dispositions en vue d'en assurer
l'accomplissement sans interruption, et consid~rant
qu'il est opportun que ces devoirs et ces fonctions

l RPP n(fi.-inl R,,r,,,,-,1, ~, ,,.,, 11«,0M ..,,,ion of IM a-al A bi_,,. RP,nlut inn•, r•<rP 10 ~.
t RPP l,n,,u, nf Nnlinn• TrMllf -~""ea, \'Olume ex, 19S019SI, Nos. 1, 2. S and A, page 172.

1 V nir lP• n,,,.,,...,..,. n~,,/, ,1, 111 ,1,,._._ ....,;'"' ,I, I' A blh ,rhihnl,. RP•nlutinn•. r•fll" 10~
' SariJ1I
Na1ian,. R«-il •• Traill,, Volume ex, f 0301931, D.. 1, 2, S PI A, page 172.

tl,,

160
