68

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

into account the relevant activities already undertaken
by the various organs of the United Nations system,
l. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations
system and with a view to enabling the United Nations
system to deal adequately with economic emergency
situations and to respond more effectively to the resulting immediate needs of the affected populations in
developing countries, to submit proposals to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session, inter
alia, on:
. (a) Th.: elaboration of global criteria for identifying' such economic emergency situations;
( b) The possible establishment of procedures for
periodically reporting relevant information through
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with the Governments
concerned, to a central focal point, to be established where appropriate, which will process such information;
(c) The possible elaboration of procedures for submission, on the basis of such information, of proposals
to the Economic and Social Council for the proclamation, where necessary, of a state of emergency with
economic, social and structural consequences;
(d) The strengthening of the co-ordinating mechanism of the United Nations system within its existing
financial resources;
2. Invites the Economic· and Social Council to consider, as a matter of urgency, the above-mentioned proposals by the Secretary-General and to invite the governing bodies of the United Nations agencies concerned
to provide it with any comments they may have on this
matter.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3511 (XXX). United Nations Conference
on Desertification
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it decided to initiate concerted international action to combat desertification,
Having considered the progress report of the Secretary-General76 and the,relevant parts of the report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its third session77 on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX),
Noting decision 30 (III) of 30 Aprii 1975 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,78 in which it approved the proposals of the
Executive Director of the Programme on measures to
be taken in implementation of General Assembly reso~
lution 3337 (XXIX),
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
1958 (LIX) of 25 July 1975,
Stressing the need for additional research to clarify
a number of fundamental problems of desertification,
for the solution of which the requisite scientific knowledge is not yet available to the international community,
76 E/5689.
7 7 See Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), chap. Ill, sect. B.
78 /bid., Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex I.

Stressing further that the preparation of the United
Nations Conference on Desertification should provide
the international community with the basis for an
action-oriented, comprehensive and co-ordinated plan
of action, which should include the building up of indigenous and autonomous science and technology capacity in the areas concerned,
I. Requests the Secretary-General with the assistance of the competent bodies of the United Nations
concerned, particularly the United Nations Environment Programme, to intensify the efforts required to
ensure the appropriate preparation, at the technical
level, of the United Nations Conference on Desertification;
2. Reiterates its request to the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme to provide the financial and technical assistance necessary to ensure the satisfactory
preparation of the Conference, bearing in mind particularly the need to close the gaps in scientific knowledge
aqd technologies in this field;
3. Requests the Committee on Science and Technology for Development, with the assistance of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, to include in its programme of work on arid areas, in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1898 (LVII) of
1 August 1974, proposals to close the gaps in scientific
knowledge,and technologies concerning desertification;
4. Decides that the cost of the Conference will be
borne by the regular budget of the United Nations;
5. Requests the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to contribute to the financing of the demographic components of the studies prepared in implementation of General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX);
6. Requests the executive heads of the specialized
agencies to authorize their respective secretariats to
provide for their participation in the secretariat of the
Conference and in the ad hoe interagency task force,
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX);
7. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to act as the intergovernmental preparatory body for the Conference and
to ~ubmit to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
recommendations on th~ organization of the Conference.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3512 (XXX). Consideration of the economic and
social situation in the Sudano-Sahelian region
stricken by drought and measures to he
taken for the benefit of that region
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, particularly Council resolutions 1834 (LVI) of 14 May 1974
and 1874 (LVII) of 16 July 1974, and Assembly resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973 and
3253 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975,

Resolutioru1 adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with satisfaction the role played by the Office for Sahelian Relief Operations of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with
regard to emergency assistance, and the activities undertaken by the United Nations Sahelian Office with a
view to combating the effects of the drought and implementing the medium-term and long-term p_rogramme
adopted by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the economic and social situation in the SudanoSahelian region stricken by drought and the measures
to be taken for the benefit of that region, 79
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on measures to be taken for the recovery and rehabilitation of the Sudano-Sahelian region stricken by drought; 79
2. Expresses its gratitude for the assistance given
to the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region by
Member States, private organizations and individuals;
3. Urges Member States, the organs of the United
Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations to respond favourably, in an effective and continuing manner, to the requests for assistance formulated by the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel and by Governments, so
as to meet the medium-term and long-term needs of
the Sudano-Sahelian countries;
4. Requests the United Nations Sahelian Office to
continue its close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel
and its efforts to ensure co-operation and co-ordination between United Nations programmes and organizations with a view to the implementation of mediumterm and long-term assistance programmes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
action aimed at obtaining the financial assistance necessary for the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term projects submitted by the States members
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Control in the Sabel.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3513 (XXX).

United Nations Water Conference

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1761 C (LIV) of 18 May 1973,
Bearing in mind chapter IV of the report of the
Committee on Natural Resources on its fourth session, 80
which contains the comments made by members of the
Committee at that session,
Taking note of the relevant chapters of the report
of the Economic and Social Council on its fifty-eighth
and fifty-ninth sessions, 81
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 (LIX) of 31 July 1975,

69

l. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social Council to convene the United Nations Water
Conference in Argentina from 7 to 18 March 1977;
2. Endorses the arrangements for the preparations
for the Conference, as set out in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1979 (LIX);
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give ample
support to the Conference secretariat in its preparatory work, including, if necessary, arrangements for
the close collaboration of the relevant organizations
of the United Nations system;
4.. Requests the relevant organizations of the United
Nations system to co-operate closely with the Conference secretariat in the preparatory work;
5. Urges the United Nations Environment Programme to provide financial support for the preparatory work of the Conference in order to ensure its
success;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of Member States the nature and importance
of the water problems to be dealt with at the Conference, to give wide publicity to the Conference through
the Office of Public Information and the Centre for
Economic and Social Information of the Secretariat and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the action taken on the present resolution.
2441st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
3514 (XXX). Measures against corrupt practices
of transnational and other corporations,
their intermediaries and others involved
The General Assembly,
Concerned by the corrupt practices of certain transnational and other corporations, their intermediaries and
others involved,

Recalling paragraph 4 (g) of the Declaration on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Ord~~, 82 which pr4:>V}~es for the regulation and superv1s1on of the actIV1t1es of transnational corporations,
Recalling also the provisions of section V of the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order83 emphasizing, inter alia,
the need to formulate, ad9pt and implement the code
of conduct referred to in the report of the Commission
on Transnational Corporat~ons on its first session; 84
Recalling further the provisions of the Charter of
Ec<;momic Rights and Duties of States, 85 according to
which sue~ corporations should not operate in a manner th~t violates the laws and regulations of the host
countnes,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1721 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, 1908 (LVII) of 2 August 1974 and 1913 (LVII) of 5 December 1974,
Recalling the report of the Commission on Transnational Corporations on its first session,
1. Cond~mns all corrupt practices, including bribery,
by transnatronal and other corporations their intermediaries and others involved, in violatio~ of the laws
and regulations of the host countries;

10 A/10346.

so Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/5663).
8 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/10003 ), chap. IV, sect. E, and
chap. VI, sect. G.

82 Resolution 3201 (S-VI).
83 Resolution 3202 (S-VI).
84 Official Records of the

Economic and Social Council
Fift7-ninth ~ession, Supplement No. 12 (B/5655 and Corr.I)'.
Bv Resolution 3281 (XXJX).
