United Nations

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4325th meeting
Tuesday, 5 June 2001, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Teixeira da Silva
Mr. Cooney
Mr. Ward
Mr. Toure
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mantaha
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Kuchinsky
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Hume

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Letter dated 21 May 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2001/511).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-39884 (E)

*0139884*

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin by expressing my thanks to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting on the important issue of
Afghanistan. My delegation is pleased to participate,
under your presidency, in a debate of the Council on
this issue. I thank Mr. Haile Menkerios, Chairman of
the Committee of Experts, and his colleagues for the
commendable, accurate and comprehensive report they
have presented on how to monitor the arms embargo
and the closure of training terrorist camps in the
Taliban-held areas of Afghanistan. This report reflects,
among other things, the dedicated efforts of the
Chairman and the members of the Committee to
contribute to a viable and lasting political settlement of
the Afghan crisis.
I also thank Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso for
his introduction of the report and for his commendable
leadership of the sanctions Committee.
It is very unfortunate that the continual efforts of
the international community in recent years have not
yet brought about any practical change in the bellicose
and intransigent policy pursued by the Taliban on the
ground. Based on their war-oriented policy and their
total contempt for international opinion and demands,
the Taliban leadership, with a view to rendering
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000) ineffective by
conquering more ground, even broke with the pattern
set over the years and continued its military activities
during the past winter. Recent reports from
Afghanistan are also indicative of a new round of
offensives launched by the Taliban.
The decision by the Taliban to interrupt the
process of dialogue under the auspices of the United
Nations, which they explicitly undertook last
November not to abandon, is unacceptable and further
testimony to the wide disparity between their words
and commitment and their actions and practice.
The current increase in the military activity of the
Taliban comes at a time when war and drought are
plunging the country into a humanitarian crisis. As the
United Nations recently warned, the number of
Afghans made homeless by war and drought in 20012

2002 could more than double to over 1.6 million
people. On the other hand, according to the officials of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Taliban leadership has
recently embarked on increased harassment and threats
against aid workers, making the provision of
international assistance to war- and drought-stricken
people in Afghanistan more difficult.
In view of all this, the report of the Committee of
Experts has been released at a time when the disregard
of the Taliban for the demands of the international
community — set out, inter alia, in Security Council
resolution 1333 (2000) — has become more evident. It
is needless to recall that they are trying to flout a
resolution that truly expresses the sentiment of the
international community and was voted for, among
others, by three Islamic States members of the Council.
Therefore, it is essential that the international
community do its best to prevent a breach of the
resolution and thereby deprive the belligerent and
intransigent party of the means it needs to further its
military objectives at the cost of the continued
suffering of the Afghan people and of instability in the
region.
We believe that the report prepared by the
Committee of Experts is an important and appropriate
step in the direction of attaining that objective. The
authors of the report are successful, to a great extent, in
exposing the ways in which the Taliban procure
military means, finance their military machine and
organize other unlawful activities, including turning
their territory into a safe haven for terrorists. The
report refers rightly to the continual supply of arms and
ammunition to the Taliban and dismisses the claim that
their military machine survives on former stocks. The
Committee, among other things, correctly notes the
importance of putting an end to illegal flights to and
from the areas controlled by the Taliban and the need
to deny the Taliban access to turbine fuel and fluids
needed for use in armoured vehicles.
As to the closure of terrorist camps in the
Taliban-controlled areas, accurate reference is made to
the reliance of the Taliban on non-Afghan elements in
their efforts to defeat the United Front. In order to help
to close these camps and to reverse the multiple harms
arising therefrom, the international community should
pay attention to the need for the repatriation of these
elements, as underlined by the Committee. To this end,
the removal of obstacles in the way of their return to

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

their countries of origin and the encouragement of the
officials of those countries to cooperate would be of
great help.
In order to bring the military machine of the
Taliban to a halt, it is essential to put an end to the
trade in narcotics in Afghanistan. Although we
welcome the ban on opium poppy cultivation ordered
by the Taliban leadership, we doubt that it is driven by
religious reasons, as claimed by the Taliban. The order
was issued following a few years of abundant crops.
Moreover, it does not cover the stockpiling, transit and
processing of, and trading in opium and heroin. Had it
been driven solely and genuinely by religious
considerations, the Taliban leadership should have
banned illicit drugs in all their aspects and should have
ordered the stockpiles destroyed.
According to our information, the stockpiles of
drugs in Afghanistan are huge enough to feed the
market at a steady rate for about 10 years. We therefore
highlight the conclusion of the report emphasizing the
need to monitor the flow of drugs from Afghanistan as
an integral component of the arms embargo. Effective
control of the financing of the Taliban also requires
control of the financial support provided to them by
individuals and institutions in the region and beyond.
Most of Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries
face various difficulties and troubles emanating from
civil war and lawlessness in that country, and they need
assistance from the international community to cope
with the situation. In this context, the need for training
and equipment support from the international
community to modernize the border services of the
countries neighbouring Afghanistan is an appropriate
point referred to in the report. In that respect, it is
pertinent to refer to the crusade by the Iranian
Government against transnational drug mafias. Among
other things, that has led to the seizure of 263 metric
tons of drugs in the past year alone. Needless to say,
these endeavours, which have been undertaken at high
human and material costs, help to a great extent to
shield the other countries of the region, and far beyond,
from the effects of the lawlessness in Afghanistan.
As to the recommendations made by the
Committee, they are currently being considered within
the Iranian Government on the basis of the assumption
that monitoring is an indispensable tool for the
enforcement of resolution 1333 (2000). Pending the
result of the ongoing consideration, we believe that the

eventual stationing of Sanctions Enforcement Support
Teams in the region should, and could, be compatible
with the sovereign rights of the receiving countries.
Moreover, some aspects of the proposed mandate of
those teams and of the Office for Sanctions Monitoring
and Coordination need further clarifications, and more
details should be known to enable the relevant
Governments to comment. No doubt consultations
between officials of the countries concerned and the
members of the Security Council prior to any decision
being taken by the Council could pave the way for the
smooth implementation of any final decision.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Uzbekistan. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to speak at today’s
meeting. I would also like, at the outset, to extend my
thanks to the members of the Committee of Experts on
Afghanistan, headed by Mr. Haile Menkerios, for the
report they have prepared and for the very painstaking
work they have done in implementation of Security
Council resolution 1333 (2000). I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, Ambassador
Alfonso Valdivieso, for the useful work that has been
done in the Committee.
I would like to say that despite the limited time
frame of its mandate, the Committee of Experts on
Afghanistan has done an enormous amount of work.
Their report proposes a regime for effective monitoring
of the implementation of the requirements contained in
the Security Council’s resolutions to ensure the
adoption and implementation of the relevant decisions
on sanctions.
We agree with the statement that the effectiveness
of monitoring will depend on the direct involvement
and commitment of all countries to its implementation.
That, of course, also applies fully to us.
We also agree with the statement that the
financing of arms and ammunition purchases and of the
training of terrorists is integral to the overall problem.
Turning to paragraph 33 of the report, we agree
fully with the statement that the flow of arms into,
within and from Afghanistan is a major, long-term

3

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

cause of insecurity and instability in the central Asian
region. In that connection, we would note that
Uzbekistan is ready to participate actively in
discussions on the draft programme to monitor the
illegal arms trade with regard to the situation in
Afghanistan, which is to be submitted at the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, to be held in July of this year.
Uzbekistan also agrees with the view set out in
paragraph 7 of the Committee’s report that there is a
direct link between the funds obtained from the
production and sale of drugs and support for the
military activities and training of terrorists in
Afghanistan. In that regard, we support the
Committee’s conclusion in paragraph 61 of the report,
namely, that the flow of drugs from Afghanistan should
be monitored as an integral component of the arms
embargo. In this connection, it is particularly important
to take note of the view expressed in the report that
strengthening the capacity of Afghanistan’s neighbours
to monitor their borders is a key aspect of the measures
to be taken.
The Republic of Uzbekistan supports the proposal
made by the Committee to establish a United Nations
Office for Sanctions Monitoring and Coordination in
Afghanistan. Such an office would make it possible to
establish a focused mechanism to monitor respect for
the arms embargo and would help to close terrorist
training camps and coordinate the activities of existing
national structures of Afghanistan’s neighbours.
We consider constructive the proposal to establish
groups in States bordering Afghanistan to provide
assistance in the monitoring of sanctions. At the same
time, we must note that the organizational aspects of
that proposal will certainly require further work.
The Republic of Uzbekistan regards paragraph 45
of the report as one of the key provisions. That
paragraph emphasizes the need to establish a central
point for collating and analysing information provided
by Member States about terrorist camps. We support
the Committee’s conclusion that this database and the
collection of analysis of information from Member
States within a clear international structure will be one
of the most important elements in ensuring effective
monitoring.
we

4

In order to do that and to save time and money,
should strengthen the existing international

mechanisms and instruments for combating terrorism.
We regard it as logical and natural, therefore, that the
Committee should have concluded that the Office
should cooperate closely with the United Nations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention and the
secretariats of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Wassenaar Arrangement
in Vienna.
We believe that the Committee’s recommendation
in paragraph 45, regarding the central authority for
collecting information, could be carried out on the
basis of the existing counter-terrorism component in
the United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention in Vienna. That component could be
transformed into an international centre to combat
terrorism within this Office.
According to paragraphs 45 and 82 of the report,
in addition to the mandate of the existing component,
the tasks of the Office would include collecting and
analysing information about terrorist training camps,
and collating it before its subsequent submission to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. There would
also be wide distribution of information about the
camps. That would seem to be the most economical
and effective way of establishing the mechanism for
collecting information. We regard this proposal as a
natural and organic way of implementing the
recommendations of the Committee’s report, in
accordance with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1333 (2000). We hope that that proposal will
be understood and supported by all members of the
Security Council. In conclusion, I would like to say
once again that the Republic of Uzbekistan supports
the conclusions and recommendations in the report of
the Committee of Experts on Afghanistan sanctions.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I should like to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on once again
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
current month. It is, indeed, a pleasure to see you
presiding over the Council as the representative of a
country with which we value our strong fraternal
relations.
Since this meeting is ostensibly devoted to the
report of the Committee of Experts on the
implementation of sanctions, it is for the members of

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

the Council to discuss and examine the content of the
Committee’s report. For our part, we are in the process
of examining the recommendations and will formulate
our position on the proposed monitoring mechanism,
keeping in mind its feasibility, practicality and
effectiveness, given the length and porous nature of the
Afghan border.
While we categorically reject some baseless
allegations contained in the report, let me take this
opportunity to reaffirm, on behalf of my Government,
that Pakistan, as a responsible and law-abiding Member
of the United Nations, has been, and will remain, in
full compliance with Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1333 (2000). We have been extending our
fullest cooperation to the Security Council, and, as I
said earlier, we will continue to do so. We welcomed
the Committee of Experts to Pakistan, under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Menkerios, during its
fact-finding visit. We extended to it full cooperation in
good faith as part of our policy of compliance with all
Security
Council
resolutions,
without
any
discrimination. We are adhering to the resolutions on
Afghanistan, even though we are not in favour of
sanctions as a matter of principle. We believe that
sanctions are an unjust instrument, and that they are
never productive. They never produce the desired
results; they only hurt the common people. There are
no smart sanctions; there are only dumb sanctions. The
question is, what have these sanctions achieved?
There is a symbolic link between the sanctions
and the tragedy in Afghanistan. The latest sanctions —
those provided for in resolution 1333 (2000) — were
enacted in the very week last December that marked
the twenty-first anniversary of the invasion of
Afghanistan by the former Soviet Union. That invasion
triggered a tragic conflict which has yet to come to an
end. So much has happened since that fateful
December: the Berlin Wall has fallen; the cold war has
come to an end; the Soviet Union has become history;
the map of the world has changed; the dawn of the new
millennium has arrived; and, strangely enough, old
enemies have become new partners. Yet in
Afghanistan, the victims remain the same. The anguish
and pain of the people of Afghanistan remain
undiminished, while their torment continues unabated.
Afghanistan was the last battle front of the cold
war. It served as a catalyst to release energies that
eventually brought about an end to that era of
confrontation. The world as we know it today might

not be the same had it not been for the immense
sacrifices that the valiant people of Afghanistan made
for the cause of freedom and the free world. With the
end of Soviet occupation, the Afghan people rightly
expected an environment of peace and reconstruction
for their country, with external help and assistance.
Unfortunately, the international community did not
respond to the legitimate expectations of the Afghan
people, who found themselves left by the wayside.
After having used them to secure certain strategic
objectives, the international community abandoned the
Afghan people at the time when they needed the
maximum external support and involvement in order to
reconstruct their war-ravaged country and rebuild their
shattered lives.
The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan was
followed by a fratricidal civil war. The warlords —
some of whom are still there — who fought against the
Soviet occupation forces started fighting one another
after the Soviet withdrawal. The misery and suffering
of the Afghans continued unabated.
Obviously the plight of the Afghan people cannot
be attributed to the Taliban, who emerged on the scene
only some six years ago. The Afghans have been
suffering for more than two decades.
What has the international community done to
alleviate their sufferings during these two decades? The
Afghanistan problem is not about the Taliban. It is not
about terrorism or drugs alone. It is about 25 million
Afghan people who continue to suffer, and they
continue to suffer because they have given so much for
the cause of freedom. They suffered when they were
forced to fight the Soviet forces. They suffered when
warlords were pillaging the country. And they suffer
today because this esteemed Council, which is charged
with maintaining international peace and security, has
been enacting punitive measures against them.
These sanctions are said to be a smart and sharp
instrument, like a scalpel, to remove a tumour without
harming any other part of the body. We wish it were so.
Instead, the sanctions have achieved precious little and
yet destroyed much. One victim has been the peace
process initiated by the Secretary-General through his
Personal Representative, Francesc Vendrell. Mr.
Vendrell, who had made a spectacular breakthrough in
negotiations between the warring sides just before
resolution 1333 (2000) was bulldozed through this
Council, now finds himself on the sidelines, with the

5

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

United Nations being accused of bias, discrimination
and partisanship.

Afghanistan’s problems by addressing the bigger
picture.

Another victim is the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan. Much is being said about how the
sanctions have no, or very little, impact on the
humanitarian plight of the Afghans. This is blamed on
the protracted conflict and the drought. This is at least
what the world is being given to understand.

The time has come to stop the obsession with one
aspect of the Afghan problem and to concentrate on
solving the entire problem comprehensively. To start
with, efforts need to be made by all concerned to reengage the Taliban and to bring them back from the
position of insulation and intransigence. Engagement is
the only solution.

Well, while these two factors have contributed to
the humanitarian situation, they do not explain why
Afghans did not begin their internal and external
exodus until after December 2000, when this
resolution — 1333 (2000) — was adopted. After the
adoption of that resolution, what had been a trickle
became a flood. With almost 1 million internally
displaced Afghans — and this is not my figure; this is
the figure that has been given by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), a part
of this very United Nations system — and with almost
200,000 people becoming refugees after the adoption
of sanctions last year, no one can possibility deny the
link between the sanctions and the grave humanitarian
crisis afflicting the Afghan people. Innocent children
have been dying in the freezing cold. You, Sir, must
have seen the photographs in newspapers. Innocent
children have been dying in the freezing cold of winter
and the scorching heat of this summer, while the world
looks the other way.
The question is, why has the international
community turned its back on a nation of 25 million
people? It appears that an inimical and rigid mindset
prevails in this Council against a Government which is
in control of more than 95 per cent of the country’s
territory.
With peace becoming even more elusive than
before, the misery of the Afghan people increasing by
the hour, and the issues that motivated the sanctions
remaining unresolved, the sanctions have done every
harm, but no good. The scalpel has turned out to be a
bludgeon which has destroyed the body, while the
tumour festers unmolested.
The wrong done now needs to be corrected. The
damage done to the Afghan people needs to be
reversed, and the ground lost by the peace process must
be recovered. Isolation and ostracism have not helped,
and they will not help. The sanctions have to be lifted
and replaced with a system that aims at resolving all of

6

The peace process of Francesc Vendrell, which
the Secretary-General launched with great enthusiasm,
also needs to be put back on track. In addition, more
concerted efforts and generous financial assistance
should be forthcoming to alleviate the plight of
hundreds of thousands of Afghans, both inside
Afghanistan and in refugee camps in Pakistan.
It is important, however, that while providing
humanitarian assistance, international relief agencies
must respect the religious and cultural sensitivities of
the Afghan people. The international community also
needs to appreciate the efforts that the Taliban have
made to eradicate the cultivation of poppies, even at
the cost of added hardship to Afghan farmers. The time
has come to move away from the sanctions and towards
a comprehensive strategy — one that heals the wounds
and revives the body without damaging any part of it.
Pakistan shouldered the main burden of the
decade-long war against foreign occupation of
Afghanistan. At that time we sheltered more than 4.5
million Afghan refugees, and we are still bearing the
burden of the ongoing conflict, with the continued
presence of more than 2 million refugees in Pakistan
and an additional tens of thousands who have recently
arrived.
We have exhausted our patience and capacity to
absorb any more refugees. We shelter the largest-ever
refugee population anywhere in the world. What we
need now are practical steps by the world community
to deliver humanitarian relief inside Afghanistan to
prevent the Afghans from fleeing their homes for
neighbouring countries, and, for those already
displaced, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
international organizations should set up camps on the
other side of the Afghan border to prevent any further
influx into Pakistan.

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

Due to our proximity to Afghanistan, our
difficulties as a neighbouring country need to be
viewed from this perspective. Pronouncements from
afar may appear convenient, but are flawed in their
appreciation of the circumstances that are peculiar to
Afghanistan.
A one-sided arms embargo, for instance, is not
the solution. It encourages the side exempt from the
embargo to continue the conflict. There are credible
reports that the northern alliance still continues to
receive arms from the outside and is engaged in
launching offensives, and arms are coming not only
from the neighbouring countries, but also from those
outside the neighbourhood.
If the Council is really interested in solving
Afghanistan’s problems, it must instead impose a
comprehensive arms embargo — for which we have
been pleading for years — which should be imposed
under Chapter VII on all parties in Afghanistan. That
would give both sides the same incentive to return to
the negotiating table.
The Council, as part of its Charter obligation,
should seek to promote peace through engagement with
the realities on the ground, and not through isolation
and ostracism. The Council must not fuel the
continuation of the conflict through a one-sided arms
embargo. The Council should let the Secretary-General
pursue his peace mission through dialogue and
conciliation.
While we are giving the Security Council our full
cooperation — and will continue to do so — in the
implementation of the sanctions regime in Afghanistan,
unfair though it is, we would not like either the report
of the Experts Committee which is under consideration
by the Council or the creation of a monitoring
mechanism to be used to unjustly implicate Pakistan.
Baseless allegations, implicit or explicit, have been
rejected by us in the past, and we reject them now.
Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1333 (2000) must not be allowed to serve the narrow
ulterior motives of a few. We have said it before, and I
will say it again: no country in the world stands to gain
more than Pakistan from the return of peace and
stability in Afghanistan.
Accordingly, we follow a policy towards
Afghanistan that seeks to support and supplement
international efforts to promote a peaceful solution to

the conflict and, indeed, a comprehensive solution to
all of Afghanistan’s problems. It is a comprehensive
strategy we urge the international community to devise.
Pakistan will not lag behind in contributing to this
endeavour.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Ambassador Menkerios in his capacity as Chairman of
the Committee of Experts on Afghanistan appointed
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1333 (2000).
Mr. Menkerios: I should like at the outset, since
this is the first time the Committee is formally meeting
with the entire Council, to thank the Secretary-General
and the Council for the confidence they placed in me
and in my colleagues to come up with
recommendations on this very important issue. I should
like also to thank Ambassador Valdivieso and
Mr. Stephanides, as well as their offices, for the
valuable support and guidance they have given without
interfering with the process of the work of the
Committee. I should like also to thank the relevant
Missions, particularly the United States and the
Russian Federation — which were the sponsors of the
resolution — for their contribution, collaboration and
advice in the process of our work.
Having said that, I will not repeat once again an
introduction of the contents of the report, which has
been adequately presented by Ambassador Valdivieso.
If you will allow me, Sir, I will only try to elucidate on
some of the questions that were raised by the various
delegations in their comments.
I should like to say that we feel, of course,
rewarded by the comments that we have heard —
comments which we believe have done service to the
recommendations we have made. A few of the
questions that have been raised I believe are pertinent
and need to be explained.
There was one question regarding the extent to
which the Committee consulted with the countries
bordering Afghanistan with regard to their readiness
and willingness to cooperate with the placement of
people on the ground. I should like to say from the
outset that if we had one shortcoming, it was the fact
that we were not able to do this — first, because of the
shortage of time, and, secondly, because, as was
explained by the Chinese Ambassador this morning,
the Chinese border is a very short sort of border, and
no problems have been reported that would require
deeper investigation. But, basically, it was because of

7

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

the shortage of time that we were not able to visit
China. But that does not mean that we did not hold
discussions with representatives here at the Mission
and also in the field with Ambassadors.
We tried as much as possible, when we
generalized as to what the views of the countries
bordering Afghanistan were, to mention the countries
we visited and to exclude China, simply because we
may not have known, with respect to those particular
comments, what the Chinese position would be.
That is what we have done. We have provided a
framework — a framework based on our discussions
with those countries, all of which welcomed support in
these areas. We did not discuss the placement of
personnel on the ground, simply because that issue had
not been finalized when we were holding discussions
with them. But we understood that all of the countries
we visited do have support teams, or technical support
from the United Nations or other international
organizations, as well as bilaterally with friendly
countries — technical support with personnel on the
ground.
Therefore, we did not feel there was any
particular reason that they would in fact reject such a
move; and in general terms they welcomed it. So we
put it in the form of a general recommendation — to be
based, however, on an assessment visit to all those
countries to establish need in any or all of those areas
and to determine their readiness to accept this. A
concrete suggestion would then be made to them on the
basis of the assessment mission. So if there is a feeling
that there is no need, that would be taken note of at the
time of the assessment visit.
Concern was voiced by the representative of
Tunisia that some of the general recommendations had
not been widely discussed at the international level and
had not been the object of final agreement. That is true.
These are recommendations which have on the whole
been accepted, for instance, by members of the
Wassenaar Arrangement. Others have been viewed
positively on a general level. But they are still
proposals, and as such they will be presented at the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in all its
Aspects, to be held from 9 to 20 July.
We, however, see value in our recommendations,
given the need to create a more effective monitoring of
the illicit movement of small arms. The

8

recommendations we have included in this draft text
would prove positive if adopted on a wider scale.
There was a concern voiced both by Ireland and
by Norway about fuels that are used for military
purposes: that our recommendation is that regard
should not harm the humanitarian effort. That is a very
valid point. We have come to learn that some of the
fuels and, especially, the lubricants that are used for
military hardware are not used for flights that are
required for humanitarian purposes. These could be
identified, especially the lubricants that are needed for
heavy military machinery, which are not required for
humanitarian efforts. If there are any fuels that could
be used by both — since a precedent has already been
established by which flights are banned but by which
particular consideration is made for humanitarian
flights — fuels used for military purposes could be
banned, and then, if there is a need for humanitarian
flights, the same procedure for allowing flights to take
place could be used to allow the use of such fuel for
humanitarian purposes. We feel that is easier than
completely opening it up and enabling military
equipment to use these necessary fuels and lubricants.
Another question raised, again by Norway, was
whether it would be advisable to place monitoring
support teams in offices with other United Nations
agencies that are operating in Afghanistan, rather than
locating them outside Afghanistan. These technical
teams would be going to the neighbours of Afghanistan
to support their efforts. I think this remains to be seen.
The efforts of these teams need to be seen within what
we have tried to establish as an overall view of this
matter: that the sanctions must not be viewed in
isolation from all the other efforts that the United
Nations is making to resolve the problem in
Afghanistan. If they are seen as part and parcel of the
effort towards a political solution, of humanitarian
relief efforts and of economic support, then there will
be a greater need for all the various agencies involved
in the area to coordinate in terms of what they are
doing, rather than seeing them as one aspect of a
United Nations effort completely isolated from other
efforts being made.
We heard this when we were in the field also: we
tried to learn the views and opinions and to secure
information from the various United Nations agencies
operating there. Some said, “Look, we do not want to
say anything; we are engaged in a humanitarian effort,
and we do not want to have anything to do with the

S/PV.4325 (Resumption 1)

sanctions business, because that is going to jeopardize
what we are doing on the humanitarian front”. So the
concern is understandable, and it has been raised there
too. But we feel that this could change; it needs to
change. It all needs to be seen as a package, with each
component important to the operation of the others.
Moreover, most of these teams would be working
with the various ministries and agencies of the
countries themselves. If we were to send a team to a
particular country, it would be working directly with
the customs officers and with the ministry of the
interior that polices the borders, or perhaps with the
army, in trying to make their capacity to control their
borders more effective. Thus, it would not be a
committee that would sit in judgement and try to
oversee what the country is doing; rather, it would be
engaged with the country’s activities, so we do not feel
it would be seen in a negative way, as some described
it in our discussions there. We hope this will minimize
any negative view of these bodies.

Those in my view were the questions that needed
to be addressed. Our task was to come up with
recommendations that would be helpful to members of
the Council when they take decisions on this issue. We
are very glad that we could be of service.
The President: I thank Ambassador Menkerios
for responding to the issues and questions raised by
members during their statements, and I thank the other
members of the Committee of Experts for their
presence in the Council Chamber today.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
will remain seized of the matter, and will consider the
recommendations for action contained in the report of
the Committee of Experts.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

9
