United Nations

S/PV.5994

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5994th meeting
Tuesday, 14 October 2008, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Grauls
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Weisleder
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. De Vengoechea
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2008/617)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-54872 (E)

*0854872*

S/PV.5994

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2008/617)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, the Netherlands,
Norway and Pakistan, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/617, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to
whom I give the floor.
Mr. Eide: When I briefed the Council in July (see
S/PV.5930), I spoke about the outcome of the Paris
Conference in support of Afghanistan, which was a
success in several ways. The Conference provided
$21 billion for the reconstruction of Afghanistan, and it
also gave us a road map for how to proceed together
with the Afghan leadership; the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and the Paris Declaration. So
there was a road map then, and the road map remains.
Since then, we have, I believe, been distracted
from the commitments undertaken in Paris. The main
reason for that is the deteriorating security situation, as
we have seen over the last few months. In July and
August, we witnessed the highest number of security
incidents since 2002. It was an increase of up to 40 per
cent, compared to the same months of July and August
last year.
In the report before the Council (S/2008/617),
three characteristics of the security situation have been
highlighted. First, the influence of the insurgency has
spread beyond the traditional areas in the south and the
east and has extended to provinces around Kabul.
Secondly, there has been an increase in asymmetric
attacks, some of them very sophisticated, which has
contributed to an increase in civilian casualties. And
thirdly, there were more and sometimes deadly attacks
against aid-related and humanitarian targets, including
deadly attacks against non-governmental organization
and United Nations personnel.
During September, the month of Ramadan, we
saw a decrease in the number of incidents, as we had
expected.
On
International
Peace
Day,
on
21 September, we saw that hostilities were almost
brought to a halt, including by the Taliban, following
an appeal by the United Nations. That allowed us to
vaccinate 1.6 million children against polio, which was
a major achievement.
However, we are now seeing a new increase in
the number of incidents, and we must expect that the
number of incidents will continue to climb further over
the next weeks, with at least four good weather weeks
remaining after the end of Ramadan. We should be
prepared for a situation where we do not experience the

08-54872

S/PV.5994

same winter lull — the same reduction in the level of
hostilities — that we have experienced in past winters.
So the situation is challenging, and it is indeed
complex.
I would nevertheless caution against the kind of
gloom and doom statements of which we have heard so
many recently: many of them really go too far. Also,
some of them come from people who have scarcely put
their feet on the ground in Afghanistan. There are
positive developments that we must take advantage of,
and these positive developments affect some of the
critical elements in our common agenda to solve the
conflict. Let me mention three of them in particular.
First, the relationship between Afghanistan and
Pakistan has improved. Instead of acrimonious
statements, we now see a more constructive working
relationship emerging. Following President Karzai’s
attendance at the swearing-in ceremony of President
Zardari, the political dialogue is expanding, and it is
based on an understanding that a threat from the
insurgency is a shared threat. In addition to this
political dialogue, I hope that the jirga process of last
year will soon get under way again. It is a useful
instrument for helping to address challenges that the
two countries have in common. The international
community must strengthen this improved relationship
in a wise, thoughtful and generous way.
The second development is the changes made by
President Karzai in his Government last Saturday. I
know from numerous conversations with the President
that those changes reflect a desire to better address
some of the key areas that have been identified in the
ANDS and the Paris Declaration as our common
priorities. I am first and foremost thinking of the
strengthening of the Ministry of Interior and of the
Afghan police, the latter of which lags seriously behind
the army. This could affect security on the ground, the
respect for rule of law, the fight against corruption and
our counter-narcotics and border control efforts. The
implications could thus be very significant. I know that
the new Minister, who has previously successfully built
two ministries, is dedicated to doing his utmost and
will approach this task also with great determination.
The changes in the Ministry of Agriculture must
also be used to inject new energy into boosting
agricultural production and to help us to avoid serious
and frequent shortages of food and stimulate economic
growth. It is an area that we, the international

08-54872

community, have neglected for too long; and the price
of such neglect is too high. Over the last few days, the
United Nations has already been working with the
Afghan Government and key partners on the ground to
determine how we can use this opportunity to address
our common priorities.
The third positive development is that the latest
statistics for drug production show a mixed picture, but
with some important positive trends. The overall
production area has been reduced by 19 per cent, and
the number of poppy-free provinces has gone from 11
two years ago to 13 last year and to 18 this year. And
further can progress can be made here. Today, poppy
cultivation is not an Afghanistan-wide phenomenon,
but rather a phenomenon limited to a number of
provinces, primarily in the south, and particularly, of
course, Helmand, which accounts for the vast majority
of the production. At this stage, we must do our utmost
to consolidate this progress and make sure that, next
year, more — and not fewer — provinces are poppyfree. As I have said previously, that is achievable.
If we make good use of these positive trends in
critical areas, then the overall impact could also be
very significant. I am cautiously — I repeat,
cautiously — optimistic that we can start replacing the
current negative atmosphere with an atmosphere of
greater confidence in what we are all doing. That is
important for the Afghan people, and it is important for
the public in donor and troop-contributing countries as
well as for the international community as such.
There is one other priority that has to be urgently
addressed. The humanitarian challenges are serious and
increasing. First and foremost, we may soon be facing
a serious food shortage. Again, I would urge donors to
ensure that the requirements of the joint appeal
launched by the Afghan Government and the United
Nations in July are covered, so that food and other
assistance can be available to those who are the most
vulnerable.
Let me draw the Council’s attention to another
important priority for the United Nations, for the
Afghan Government in particular, for the Afghan
authorities and for us all. A week ago, the election
process started with the first phase of voter
registration. Despite delays in the opening of some
voter registration centres, due to logistics,
communication and security issues, 90 per cent of the
registration centres were open this week. Together with

3

S/PV.5994

the Afghan authorities, we are monitoring the situation
closely to overcome operational challenges and to do
our utmost to ensure a safe and credible registration
process.
A part of our mandate is to ensure better civilmilitary cooperation. I believe that, today, we have a
better relationship with the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) than we had half a year ago. It
is a relationship based on respect for each other’s
distinctive mandates. We have worked together closely
on the election process, which is now under way. We
work better on humanitarian issues, where a set of
guidelines have been agreed upon to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is delivered in an impartial
way, respecting humanitarian principles. We work
together on human rights issues, not least to avoid
civilian casualties as a result of the use of force. It is
my hope and belief that the current work in this area
will have a positive impact on the ground, and I am
convinced that a clear and independent United Nations
voice in this area is of benefit to all, and that a good
and constant dialogue with the military forces is
essential. My recent and very constructive
conversations with key military leaders confirm that
impression.
However, when we talk about civilian casualties,
I should add something fundamental here. When we
speak about this topic, we must all remember that the
clear majority of such casualties are caused by the
insurgency. The increased use of asymmetric attacks
has also led to a significant increase in civilian victims,
and such attacks must be firmly condemned.
As part of our civilian-military cooperation, we
have also elaborated an integrated approach under
civilian leadership. The challenge will be to translate
this strategy into practical policies. And in this respect
I would like to make one comment that I consider to be
of great importance. To me, a comprehensive approach
is not first and foremost a question of how to organize
our efforts in a post-operational landscape; it is about
how we allocate our overall civilian and military
resources to produce optimal effects on the ground.
Today, a growing amount of civilian resources is
allocated to conflict provinces to support military
operations. I understand that, and I understand the
logic that countries need to demonstrate that where
they fight they must also build. But the result could
easily be that more and more of us adopt a provincebased perspective. We must avoid a donor-generated

4

fragmentation of Afghanistan. There must be a balance.
That is my appeal.
Civilian resources will inevitably have a limited
impact where and when the conflict is most intense. At
the same time, a number of provinces and districts are
in the balance. A number of provinces have seen
progress that must be urgently consolidated. But they
receive very modest resources. And these are provinces
that could be stabilized and where progress could be
consolidated with limited means and limited civilian
economic resources. But the effect would be
tremendous. That view is shared by the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, Antonio Costa. And let me add that, without a
balanced and equitable distribution of resources, the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, to which
we have all committed ourselves, cannot be
implemented.
There is today much talk about reconciliation. I
have always believed that a solution to the conflict in
Afghanistan will depend on the continued and robust
presence of military forces but that the solution in itself
will ultimately be a political solution. However, we
must avoid speaking of reconciliation in a way that
does not reflect the complexity of such a process and
does not fully respect the lead and the ownership of the
Afghan Government. A policy of engagement will be
required. It must be led with strength and confidence
by the Afghan Government, based on the constitution
and the other achievements we have made so far, and it
must be supported by a strong and confident
international community. The United Nations stands
ready to assist in such a process, in accordance with
the mandate given to us in Security Council resolution
1806 (2008).
Finally, I have a few words about the work of the
United Nations Mission. It is still a small mission in
need of qualified staff to fulfil its mandate. We have
asked for a significant increase in staff and in budget,
and I appeal to all Council members for their support.
However, I am more concerned about the quality than
the quantity of the staff. At the present stage, we need a
number of people with very specialized qualifications
within aid effectiveness, agriculture, et cetera. I am
grateful for the many offers that made been made, but I
also ask for understanding for the fact that the
regulations we have to respect in this building make it
difficult to respond as positively and as quickly as we
would have liked. There is a need for all of us to find

08-54872

S/PV.5994

creative solutions within existing regulations that
enable us to meet specific requirements quickly.
With regard to the substance of our work after
Paris, we have set up a new and more results-oriented
consultation machinery, and it is starting to work. We
have worked with the Afghan Government to establish
an implementation structure for the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy. We have worked with
international donors to obtain the clarity we have
sought in the important social outreach programme of
the Independent Directorate for Local Governance,
where discussion has gone on for many months and
delayed important efforts. We have worked with the
Afghan Government to strengthen institution-building
and to move toward a more professional civil service.
Over the past few days, as I mentioned, our
efforts have been concentrated on the need to build
support around the new ministers who are about to take
up their functions. We are addressing critical issues of
data collection in order to monitor and improve aid
effectiveness.
Some have asked where I would like the United
Nations Mission to be six months from now. So let me
mention some achievable targets: to agree with donors
on specific criteria to measure aid effectiveness, such
as the amount of money spent through the core budget;
appropriate mechanisms to provide orchestrated
support to the Afghan National Development Strategy;
the equitable nationwide distribution of resources; the
percentage of resources spent in Afghanistan in
opposition to resources being spent in donor countries;
and the level of resources spent to build Afghan
capacity. None of these are new; they are all Paris
commitments that we have all undertaken.
Second, we must establish one databank instead
of many, allowing the Afghan Government and the
United Nations to track resources spent through
provincial reconstruction teams, development agencies
and non-governmental agencies. That is critical for
transparency and aid effectiveness. Today, the United
Nations and, even more important, the Afghan
Government do not know how many resources are
going into the country or what they are being spent on.
That must be corrected.
Third, we must set up a mechanism for joint
audits, enhancing accountability on each side.

08-54872

Fourth, we must strengthen the recently
established Government mechanism for combating
corruption.
Fifth, we must agree on a plan as to the kind of
police we want — because we are not even there yet —
how we should train them and how we should equip
them, and then we must start implementing that plan.
Sixth, as I have stated, we must put discussion
behind us with regard to the Afghan social outreach
programme and start implementing it.
Seventh, we must develop a design for
agricultural reform that enables all of us to follow the
same priorities and to maximize the impact of the
resources available to us.
Eighth, we must solidify the Pakistani-Afghan
relationship within a wider regional confidencebuilding framework.
I have often talked about a political surge. By
that, I do not mean to minimize the importance of
military forces, but it is important to focus on how to
give the political dimension of our work greater
prominence. The issues that I have mentioned belong
to the political agenda, where we have to seek a surge.
I hope that we can all work together on that
agenda. We will do our best to coordinate, but
coordination does not depend on mechanisms; it
depends on commitments and the implementation of
commitments. That is the main challenge: to take
commitments seriously. We will do our work, and I
trust that we will have the Council’s full cooperation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Eide for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We wish you every success. I would also like
to express our appreciation for the convening of
today’s important debate and to welcome the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2008/617). In addition, we are grateful
to Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his insightful briefing.

5

S/PV.5994

Seven years ago this month, an unprecedented
war was launched — a war that was not against a
country or a State, but against the amorphous scourge
of terrorism that was threatening to undermine security
in all parts of the world. That war was unavoidable,
inevitable and absolutely necessary. Now, in 2008,
despite hard work on the part of international coalition
forces and Afghans alike, terrorism appears to be on
the rise again. The Taliban burn down schools, stamp
out reconstruction and butcher civilians. They attack
roads and regions around Kabul, hampering
international humanitarian relief efforts. Ordinary
people are increasingly their targets. Their belligerence
against true progress and security in Afghanistan is
continuous, boundless and cruel.
To push back against that scourge, we must first
understand the changes that have occurred with regard
to its sources and the strategy of the threat since 2001.
First, the Government of Afghanistan recognizes
that the Taliban is a heterogeneous group and that some
of its members may be willing to participate in the
peace process. Our Government will keep the door
open to such members.
Secondly, the Government of Afghanistan
acknowledges the evolving strategy of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida. While the world’s attention was focused
within the borders of Afghanistan, the Taliban and
Al-Qaida intensified their operations in the Federally
Administered Tribal Area border regions of Pakistan.
They now hope to use the timing of the elections in the
United States and Afghanistan to force a change in the
international commitment in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, the Taliban are fighting a war of
perception. They seek to instil uncertainty about
prospects for peace in Afghanistan by launching
attacks of a spectacular nature — attacks that the news
media can easily capture and broadcast.
We must also recognize that security is not
confined to military security. Real security is
established through improvement in the day-to-day
lives of Afghans, measured by improvement in
humanitarian efforts, governance and the rule of law,
counter-narcotics efforts, the upcoming elections,
strong army and police forces, and a strong and
sustainable economy.
First, the humanitarian situation regarding the
food shortage in Afghanistan needs immediate

6

attention on the part of the international community,
especially as winter approaches. The crisis has been the
first topic discussed and pursued in every Afghanistan
Cabinet meeting this year. Our Government hopes that
the world will heed the call of the United Nations for
increased international relief efforts.
Secondly, three days ago, our Government took a
crucial step towards improving governance and
eliminating corruption. President Karzai announced a
reshuffling of the Cabinet, including the appointment
of a new Interior Minister. That key move accompanied
the creation of a High Office of Oversight to combat
corruption and of special anti-corruption police and
prosecutors. We are also strengthening local
governance through new appointments, the training of
local administrators and new incentives for
accountability.
Thirdly, counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan
are seeing the beginning of a breakthrough. More than
half of the provinces are poppy-free. The few
remaining centres of poppy cultivation are in the
insecure areas of Afghanistan, where international and
Government efforts have been unable to put down real
roots. The Government of Afghanistan applauds the
recent decision of forces led by NATO and the
International Security Assistance Force to target opium
factories for the first time.
Fourthly, our Government understands the
tremendous importance of secure, transparent, timely
and credible presidential elections in the summer of
2009. There is no alternative to elections in ensuring
the legitimacy of the process in Afghanistan. To that
end, we have drafted legislation on the Independent
Election Commission, and we held our first day of
registration last week. However, our Government also
cautions that the elections require a process of
sustained long-term efforts and hopes to ensure that the
political process acts as a unifying, rather than as a
divisive force for Afghanistan.
Fifthly, the Afghan National Army has made
significant improvements in command and control, and
plans are in place to increase its numbers from 75,000
to 134,000 by 2010. The Afghan National Police has
also increased its activity and is the focus of rank and
pay reform.
Sixthly, the Government of Afghanistan is
strongly dedicated to improving the economic
livelihood of every Afghan. We are building roads,

08-54872

S/PV.5994

schools and clinics in more than two thirds of our
villages through the National Solidarity Programme.
As a testament to our efforts, gross domestic product
has tripled since 2001. In short, the Government of
Afghanistan is making progress on many fronts.
However, our goals are so ambitious as to need strong
and sustained international support to be fully realized.
The way forward in Afghanistan is to recognize
that abandonment and failure are not options. We must
stop engaging in the wrong debate of whether or not
we will fail. We must instead focus on the right debate,
on how we can succeed. That debate acknowledges the
absolute necessity of the following four items: a
regional solution; sustained international commitment;
appropriate strategies in this war of perceptions; and,
lastly, a consideration of all components important to a
successful political solution to Afghanistan’s
challenges.
First, it is now clear that the Taliban is a regional
threat. Its base of operations is no longer in
Afghanistan, but in the border regions of the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas. We have found in the new
President of Pakistan, Mr. Asif Ali Zardari, a friend and
trusted leader with whom to address terrorism. Our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Rangin Dâdfar Spantâ, will visit
Pakistan on 22 October to further that collaboration
and discuss long-term strategic relations between the
two countries. However, the international community
also has the responsibility to maintain the momentum
between the elected Government of Pakistan and
Afghanistan by boosting joint efforts to eradicate the
threat of the Taliban and Al-Qaida.
Regarding the second aspect of the way forward,
the Government of Afghanistan applauds the
international community for its reinvigorated attention
to Afghanistan. We commend Kai Eide’s leadership in
coordinating the efforts of the international community.
Only six months into his term, we are seeing very
positive results from the stronger collaboration
between our Government and the United Nations. In
addition, the Bucharest summit and the Paris
Conference produced a strong consensus that the
international community will stay engaged in
Afghanistan as long as necessary, verifying
international aid pledges that totalled more than
$20 billion. In the seven years since international
forces first entered Afghanistan, international attention
has often flagged, but the new relationship with the
United Nations, the Bucharest consensus and the Paris

08-54872

momentum are all indications that international
attention is refocused. Let us sustain that attention and
not lose focus again.
The third important aspect of the way forward is
a full consideration of how to wage a smarter war of
perception. Three things need to be done.
First, we should be careful with what we say
about Afghanistan. Media outlets move with
astonishing speed in Afghanistan and word of mouth
carries any pessimistic news quickly to the Afghan
people. The Taliban have used some recent statements
and reports as a powerful weapon to convince the
Afghan people that the international community’s
resolve is wavering. That is undeniably harmful to our
operations and efforts in Afghanistan.
Secondly, we must not underestimate our
successes. The gross domestic product of Afghanistan
has tripled since 2001. In two thirds of Afghanistan,
there is no conflict and millions of Afghans work and
live their lives peacefully. The international community
must not underreport the many success stories in
Afghanistan.
Thirdly, our assessments and reports must be
stronger in reflecting the destructiveness and brutality
of the Taliban. We build a school in six months; they
burn it down in six minutes. The Taliban are, in fact,
responsible for the majority of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan this year.
The fourth and final aspect of the way forward is
in regards to the Secretary-General’s political surge in
Afghanistan. Such a political surge must consider the
following components to be successful.
First, reconciliation efforts must be better framed
both inside and outside of Afghanistan. Currently,
those reconciliation efforts are portrayed as an
alternative to the efforts of the past seven years. In
fact, reconciliation is but another tool in our arsenal to
ensure continued progress towards a stable
Afghanistan. From the members of the Ulema to tribal
leaders, strong forces desire peace and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Thus, important steps have been taken in
recent months to begin the reconciliation process.
Secondly, a political surge includes not only
reconciliation with interested parties, but also a
strengthening
of
relationships
with
Afghan
communities themselves. Such outreach by the
Government of Afghanistan will be extended to

7

S/PV.5994

communities under Taliban influence and in secure,
peaceful regions.
Thirdly, a political surge cannot afford to neglect
the importance of military action. Afghanistan must be
able to negotiate from a position of strength, which
depends on the strong backing of international troops
and the Afghan National Army. An increase in
international troops is an essential and necessary first
step to counter terrorist activities. However, those
troops must also be willing to face enemies and
conduct operations thoroughly. They should address
responsibly the issue of civilian casualties that is a
challenge to our goal of winning the Afghan people’s
hearts and minds.
We face at this time a critical opportunity to turn
the tide against the forces of insecurity and instability
in Afghanistan. The Government of Afghanistan will
devote itself fully and completely to the quest for
security and peace. In turn, we hope that this Council
will continue to generate the right debate — a debate
that acknowledges the importance of a regional
solution and of sustained international commitment; a
debate that assembles, with urgency, appropriate
strategies to fight effectively in this war of perceptions;
and a debate that considers all of the components
important to a successful political surge.
Mr. Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy): I wish to
warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kai Eide, for his frank,
complete and thoughtful briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan and his appeal, especially, to keep a
realistic optimism and determination in our efforts. I
agree with the points made to that effect by the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin.
I would like to reaffirm once again our full
support for the leading role of the United Nations in
coordinating international civilian activities in
Afghanistan. The Security Council has already
endorsed the preliminary recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the empowerment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
It is now up to the General Assembly to allocate the
additional financial, human and security resources that
are urgently required in order to enable UNAMA to
play the enhanced role assigned by this Council in
resolution 1806 (2008) and reaffirmed by the Paris
Conference. That role is all the more relevant as we are

8

facing challenges that require political and
humanitarian responses — the worrisome food crisis,
the precarious situation of civilians and the difficulties
in promoting the protection of human rights.
Against the difficult background evident in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/617), we fully
support his call to accelerate the implementation of the
Paris agenda by restoring a strong sense of urgency.
The increasing asymmetric terrorist attacks by the
insurgents and the high level of civilian casualties
compound the complexity of the situation,
overshadowing the progress made in economic
development, social services and, recently, counternarcotics activities. We cannot afford to lose political
focus and momentum. We face undeniable disturbing
trends that need to be reversed urgently.
For that reason, we agree on the compelling need
to honour the commitments made at the Paris
Conference. One of those commitments relates to the
allocation of the available resources in an efficient
manner, in accordance with the fundamental principles
of coordination and aid effectiveness. That concerns, as
mentioned by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all the relevant actors, with no
exceptions. The coordinating role of the United
Nations in international civilian efforts should be
consistently kept in mind, along with the principle of
Afghan ownership and leadership in all sectors.
Civil-military cooperation is part of that equation.
Military efforts cannot succeed in a political vacuum.
In that context, we join the Special Representative in
welcoming recent ministerial appointments by
President Karzai.
For its part, Italy is once again playing its role.
Despite budgetary constraints, we are making an
additional effort on the military side by ensuring
enhanced flexibility and operational capacity for our
contingents. Furthermore, we have answered the calls
for increased support for the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy by supporting the national
budget with an additional contribution of €15 million
to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. Bearing
in mind the vital importance of an orderly and fair
electoral process, we are providing a contribution of
€5 million to the voter registration project.
We are striving to bring all our efforts in line with
the principles of aid effectiveness and Afghan
ownership. Those principles have also characterized

08-54872

S/PV.5994

our endeavours to support justice sector reform. We are
pleased to note the incremental steps illustrated in the
report of the Secretary-General. Yet, we are aware that
more is needed in that area, beginning with a
substantive improvement of the status and
qualifications of judicial personnel. In that connection,
what Ambassador Eide said about the quality factor
among UNAMA personnel is also important. We also
agree with him that the Council and the United Nations
should undertake efforts to support that aspect of
enhancing UNAMA.
Italy has constantly emphasized the importance of
the regional dimension to the stabilization of
Afghanistan and the wider area. We welcome the recent
concrete signals of enhanced dialogue and cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours. I would like
to recall that, during his meetings in New York last
month, Minister for Foreign Affairs Frattini discussed
an initiative to convene an outreach ministerial event
on the stabilization of the region next year during the
Italian presidency of the Group of Eight.
Finally, I would like to note the demonstration of
unity among members of the Security Council in the
consensus adoption of resolution 1833 (2008), on the
extension of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force. That vote showed the cohesion of the
international community in supporting stabilization
efforts in Afghanistan — a cohesion that should
become a constant objective of the international
community and that should be reflected as well, as
Special Representative Eide repeatedly noted today, in
the communication strategy of all international actors
keen on stabilizing the region.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like first to express my gratitude to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
detailed report (S/2008/617). I should also like to thank
Mr. Kai Eide for the comprehensive briefing he has
just given us. I welcome the efforts being made by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General despite the difficult conditions in
which they are working.
I also wish to welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and to thank him for
his statement. In keeping with his advice, I shall be
cautious when speaking about Afghanistan.

08-54872

This meeting is taking place at a time when, as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
pointed out, the situation in Afghanistan is
characterized by a serious deterioration. According to
the report of the Secretary-General, this may be the
most difficult time since the fall of the Taliban,
especially as regards the great number of civilian
victims, resulting from acts of war in the first eight
months of this year — an increase of 39 per cent over
the same period last year. That is a cause of concern to
us; but of greater concern yet is the fact that 40 per
cent, or about half, of the deaths have been due to
attacks by pro-Government and international forces.
We appreciate all the steps and arrangements
being taken by the forces to avoid civilian casualties
and damage to property. However, the figures are
nevertheless quite significant, and we believe that there
is room for improvement. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has indicated that the
international forces are trying to reduce the number of
civilian victims. We hope that those efforts will lead to
the desired results. In that regard, we also condemn the
acts of insurgent forces that result in civilian casualties.
This meeting is taking place two years after the
London Conference and four months after the Paris
Conference,
where
the Afghanistan
National
Development Strategy was adopted. Pledges of
assistance have exceeded $21 billion. It may be worth
assessing the progress made in the implementation of
the Strategy, especially as regards the commitments
made and the performance of the Afghan Government
in the area of development. We believe that, as
Mr. Tanin has said, development is a very important
element of security and stability.
There can be do doubt that there has been much
progress in a number of areas, including in demining
and combating narcotics, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing; in
the vaccination of children; and in improving regional
relations and launching a dialogue between
Afghanistan and its neighbours. However, we must
accept that many shortcomings remain despite all the
efforts and commitments. I believe that all of that must
be properly assessed and that we must look into the
causes that have led to the current situation.
As I said the last time I addressed the Council on
this issue, I believe we all agree that the solution will
require a general rapprochement, and not just recourse

9

S/PV.5994

to force, if we are to restore stability. We believe that
inclusive national reconciliation among the various
sectors of the population, as called for by President
Karzai and, previously, by the Constitutional Council,
is very important to establishing stability. There must
also be parallel efforts in the area of development, so
as to ensure dignified socio-economic conditions for all
Afghan citizens, so that they do not have to turn to
illegal means of earning a living. That should also
contribute to the fight against corruption and
extremism. The Afghan Government should thus regain
the people’s confidence in its ability to meet their
essential needs. We hope that the latest Government
reshuffle will promote development and concentrate on
the various priorities.
The report of the Secretary-General of last March
(S/2008/159) indicated that there had been violations
of prisoners’ rights and cases of abuse and torture.
There were accusations with regard to lengthy arbitrary
detention in detention centres. The United Nations
Mission was not able to verify those accusations, and
the latest report (S/2008/617) does not indicate any
progress in that respect. The report indicates that the
situation has remained the same and that the jails and
detention centres in Afghanistan are being seriously
neglected. We reiterate the importance of respect for
human rights by all and the need for respect for
international law.
My delegation is extremely concerned about the
food crisis that the Afghan people are facing given the
surge in food prices, the drought and the global
financial crisis, which affects Afghanistan in the same
way as it does other developing countries. We join with
the Secretary-General in his call, echoed by the Afghan
Vice-President, for more than $400 million to deal with
the crisis. I am sure that members are aware of the
misery and suffering in Afghanistan and the large
number of children who live in isolated areas in
mountainous regions and valleys, carrying flour on
their backs from Pakistan to Afghanistan.
Finally, my delegation stresses the important role
of UNAMA in providing assistance. We stress the need
for an enlargement of the Mission, taking into account
the comments of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and for providing the Mission with
the resources it needs to do its work in the different
areas of the country, in line with the priorities
highlighted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, so that the Mission can accomplish

10

its tasks. In all of this, as the representative of Italy just
said, we must take account of Afghan ownership of the
process and its effectiveness.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to thank Mr. Eide for his briefing to the
Council today. Concurrent with Mr. Eide’s
appointment, the Security Council took the crucial
decision to refine and expand the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). To implement the revised mandate, and
given the huge challenges that UNAMA faces
regarding civil-military coordination, the effectiveness
of humanitarian relief and election preparations, we
support an immediate increase, indeed a surge, in
UNAMA’s capabilities, based on the proposals made
by Mr. Eide.
The United States is gravely concerned about the
humanitarian conditions in Afghanistan. The situation
is worsening and many lives are in jeopardy, both from
possible food shortages and from extreme cold
weather. The United States is the largest donor to
Afghanistan, both financially and in kind. We are
prepared to do more. We urge United Nations Member
States to respond to the appeals of the Afghan
Government, as well as of the United Nations, to avoid
a worsening humanitarian situation this winter.
Planning and preparations for winter should aim at
assisting needy Afghans in dealing with food
shortages, as well as with cold weather.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s
conclusion that the security situation has become more
challenging as the number of anti-Government
incidents has increased and the extremist Taliban and
their terrorist allies have continued to wage deadly
attacks on Afghan security forces, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the civilian
population. But success in Afghanistan is critical not
only for the Afghans, but also for the region and the
broader struggle against terror and extremism. Success
can be achieved despite the recent talk of doom and
gloom, as referred to by Mr. Eide. Success requires that
the Government in Afghanistan implement its national
development strategy, making tough decisions and
implementing the agreed policies, specifically in the
areas of local governance, combating corruption,
enforcing the rule of law, achieving economic
development, the pursuit of robust counter-narcotics
efforts and reform of the police forces.

08-54872

S/PV.5994

We hope that the recent changes in the Cabinet
proposed by President Karzai can assist with making
progress with regard to those goals. We welcome the
Afghan security forces taking increasing responsibility
for protecting the Afghan people as their capabilities
grow and as conditions warrant; indeed we believe that
this is crucial.
President Karzai has committed his Government
to holding election in 2009. That is very important. We
welcome UNAMA’s effort to support the Afghan
Government in preparing for those elections. It is
imperative that the international community redouble
efforts to ensure credible elections. We call on the
Afghan Government to maintain its commitment to
carry out those elections as scheduled to further instill
the culture of democratic and representative
Government in the country and to sustain international
support.
For Afghanistan’s success, I would like to
underscore the importance of the role of the country’s
neighbours. The recent election of a new Government
in Pakistan provides an opportunity for increased
cooperation between the two countries against
terrorists and extremists, who threaten Afghanistan,
Pakistan and, indeed, the world. The agenda for
regional cooperation is clear: no sanctuary for hostile
forces; no use of extremists and terrorists to advance
national interests; intelligence-sharing; precluding
regional
geopolitical
rivalry;
encouraging
reconciliation; and integrating Afghanistan into
regional institutions and the regional economy.
Progress on those fronts is crucial to Afghanistan’s
stability and development. Both Afghans and
Pakistanis need and deserve international support to
resist extremists and terrorists. The United States is
committed to doing its part.
The United Nations Secretariat has its own
critical role to play in facilitating and supporting
UNAMA’s practical needs. As a top priority, we must
find ways to allow Mr. Eide to hire the people he needs
and get them on board immediately, not months from
now. We urge the Secretariat to do everything in its
power to make sure that Mr. Eide is given the support
and resources he needs to carry out his mission.
Mr. Eide, in turn, needs to use those capabilities and
the promising relationships he has built with the
Afghans and with the international community to
develop targets and plans with timelines for achieving
each of the major tasks in his mandate. The United

08-54872

States and its partners are committed to success in
Afghanistan and will adjust our approach as necessary
to achieve our common goals. The United States
deeply regrets the accidental loss of civilian life and
we do not take this lightly. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s grave concern over the issue of civilian
casualties. I want to assure the Council members that
we will do everything in our power to ensure that ISAF
and Operation Enduring Freedom take every precaution
to prevent civilian casualties. We have intensified our
efforts with the Government of Afghanistan to improve
coordination and communication in operations to
prevent future incidents. Our military central command
has issued guidance to United States forces to continue
to take steps to prevent civilian casualties and to
acknowledge them when they occur.
At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fundamental cause of the increasing casualties, clearly
spelled out in the Secretary-General’s report. The
Taliban and other anti-Government elements are
waging a systematic campaign of violence and
intimidation against civilians. They deliberately target
civilians and use them as shields. As the report points
out, and as Mr. Eide mentioned in his remarks, the
Taliban are increasingly resorting to asymmetric
attacks on population centres, aid-related targets and
non-governmental organizations.
The challenging security situation highlights the
need for more forces and better civil-military
coordination. On the military side, the United States, in
consultation with our ISAF partners, has streamlined
its chain of command to make its forces better able to
carry out their mission. General McKiernan is now the
commander of both ISAF and United States forces in
Afghanistan and is working very closely with the
Afghan security forces. The United States and its
partners will send more forces to Afghanistan.
Civil-military coordination is important for
success and is a crucial part of UNAMA’s mandate. We
expect Mr. Eide to partner with General McKiernan to
carry out that task as soon as possible. Furthermore,
UNAMA is at the centre of coordinating international
relief efforts.
Last June, the international community endorsed
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, and
there was an unprecedented level of pledges. Those are
clear signs of our determination to help Afghans

11

S/PV.5994

succeed. As Afghans do their part, donors must also
follow through on their commitments.

Nations to continue to cooperate fully to shed full light
on such incidents.

In closing, the Secretary-General’s report
accurately highlights the increasing difficulties and
challenges that the Government of Afghanistan and its
international partners are facing. Rather than cause
mutual recrimination, those challenges should serve to
reaffirm and renew mutual commitment to
Afghanistan’s success. By making the necessary
changes and adjustments, the United States is
committed to doing so and remains firmly committed
to Afghanistan’s success.

While we welcome the 19 per cent drop in poppy
production this year, efforts must continue, in
particular given the links to corruption and, more
specifically, to the financing of terrorism, a subject to
which the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee over which I
preside is very sensitive.

Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
for his frank, comprehensive and convincing briefing
and for his personal commitment at the head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). His determined actions of recent months
have already allowed us to see these concrete results
from the strengthened mandate of UNAMA, as
authorized by the Council last March.
As Chairman of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, I would like to thank UNAMA
for its invaluable cooperation with the Committee and
with the Monitoring Team, as encouraged by the
Council in resolution 1806 (2008) of 20 March.
I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.
Belgium shares the concerns set out in the last
report of the Secretary-General. Allow me here to
make the following remarks.
First, there is a need to recognize the fact that,
despite collective efforts, the security situation has
deteriorated over the past few months. In that regard,
Belgium shares the concerns voiced regarding the
increase in the number of civilian victims, the majority
of whom, we must recall, have been caused by the
actions of insurgents making use of suicide attacks,
attacking humanitarian personnel and using civilians as
human shields.
The Afghan and international forces, for their
part, must make every possible effort to minimize the
risk of claiming civilian victims. Belgium therefore
welcomes the additional guidelines given to the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
September. My delegation also encourages the United

12

The solution is not a purely military one, and we
are all well aware of that. Security is only one aspect
that must go hand in hand with governance and
development. It is not fortuitous that those elements
make up the three pillars of the Afghanistan Compact
adopted in London in 2006. Belgium acts in the context
of such a comprehensive approach. The recent joint
visit in Afghanistan of our ministers for defence and
development cooperation proved that yet once again.
Aside from Belgium’s participation in ISAF, my
country is contributing to numerous reconstruction
projects. During the aforementioned visit moreover, the
minister for cooperation announced a 20 per cent
increase in our contributions for the period 2007-2011,
which today totals €36 million over the past five years.
As the Secretary-General quite rightly requests, if
we are to reverse the recent negative trend, there is an
urgent need to honour the commitments made during
the Paris Conference, where consensus was achieved
on taking decisive action, on the one hand, to address
the serious shortcomings in governance and, on the
other, to align international assistance to the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.
It is indeed critical that Afghan citizens rapidly
see the benefits of the work of their Government and of
the international community. That is all the more
urgent as the humanitarian situation has also
deteriorated and that major elections are planned for
2009 and 2010.
Belgium fully supports the appeal of the
Secretary-General for a change of pace and direction
and for further efforts at the political level. The three
elements mentioned by Mr. Eide in his introductory
statement — the notable improvement in relations
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, the recent
ministerial reshuffle and the reorganization of the
Ministry of the Interior and the police — are strong
signals of hope for the Afghan people and the
international community.

08-54872

S/PV.5994

Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to begin by
joining previous speakers in thanking Mr. Kai Eide,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and the Secretary-General
for his report.
In the past few months, the international
community has recognized the increase in challenges
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. Military
measures remain critical to responding to the security
challenges. However, other steps will be needed in
addition to a military approach.
The situation in Afghanistan must be managed
with a strategy that incorporates not only security
actions, but also the promotion of governance and the
rule of law, as well as socio-economic development.
Indonesia therefore attaches primary importance to the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, which
serves as a road map for comprehensive action over the
next five years. We also attach great importance to
making real progress in the implementation of the
Action Plan on Peace, Reconciliation and Justice.
As the drug economy has helped sustain the
activities of insurgents, continued efforts to circumvent
that challenge are also crucial. In that regard, we
welcome the recent decrease in opium cultivation and
the decline in its production.
Also critical to achieving sustainable peace in the
country is an Afghan-led reconciliation process. That
effort must be inclusive and all parties involved must
renounce violence, respect justice, equality, freedom
and tolerance, and promote consultation. We recognize,
in that regard, the various recent initiatives undertaken
by neighbouring countries to assist the commencement
of inter-Afghan dialogue and reconciliation. We are
hopeful that those initiatives will achieve tangible
results.
The protection of civilians remains a critical issue
in Afghanistan. As indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report, a total of 1,445 civilians were casualties in the
first eight months of 2008. My delegation therefore
continues to underline the importance of compliance
by all parties with international humanitarian and
human rights law and the appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of civilians. We also call on
international forces in Afghanistan to take additional
robust efforts to mitigate the risk of civilian casualties,
in accordance with the Security Council resolution
1833 (2008).

08-54872

My delegation is concerned over the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. As pointed out
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/617), the
intensifying conflict, exacerbated by natural disasters,
has worsened the situation. In that regard, we attach
particular importance to expeditious resource
mobilization in response to the impending crisis.
Attacks on humanitarian workers and aid convoys are
exceptionally deplorable. Such attacks will increase the
suffering of the population in need. My delegation
therefore urges that every step be taken to end such
attacks immediately and permanently.
With regard to Afghan refugees, Indonesia
welcomes the forthcoming international conference on
return and reintegration of Afghan refugees. We are
hopeful that the conference will mobilize support for
the current return and reintegration of Afghan refugees
and internally displaced persons.
Partnerships with regional States as well as the
international community will remain key to sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan. President
Karzai’s participation in the recent summits of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization is a welcome
step. Most urgent at the international level is the swift
honouring of pledges made at the Paris Conference. We
welcome, in that regard, efforts to enhance the
coordination of donor efforts and to strengthen aid
effectiveness.
With regard to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), my delegation
believes that the Mission will remain pertinent in
assisting the country to tackle various challenges to its
security and development. We, however, feel
concerned over the obstacles arising from the
deteriorating security situation in the country that
continue to hinder the implementation of its mandate.
We welcome the ongoing preparation by UNAMA to
open its new provincial offices. We are hopeful that the
expansion will help bring about a political surge in the
country, as envisioned by the Secretary-General in his
report.
Finally, Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its full
support for UNAMA and its work and contribution to a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Afghanistan.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First, I join
others in thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his

13

S/PV.5994

briefing and for his introduction of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Afghanistan since
March 2008. I thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin of
Afghanistan for his presence and for his statement
before the Council.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2008/617), despite many efforts of the Government
and people of Afghanistan and the international
community, the situation in Afghanistan has become
more challenging over the past six months. We are
deeply concerned over the spread of violent and
insurgent activities throughout the country, especially
in the provinces adjacent to Kabul, which have
contributed to increased civilian casualties. The extent
and reach of violence is hampering reconstruction
efforts and threatens to undermine initial achievements
recorded by the Government and people of Afghanistan
so far.
We are concerned that, because of that situation,
as reported by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), 190,000 children, most of
them in the volatile southern districts of Helmand and
Kandahar, had no access to a recent immunization
programme and that food shortages due to drought and
high prices are affecting one sixth of the country’s
population, making their lives — which were already
very hard due to the severity of conflict and violence —
even harder.
The trend of increasing attacks against aid
workers, convoys and facilities, as well as those
launched for whatever reason against civilians, is a
cause of special concern. In that connection, we urge
all parties concerned, in respect for international law,
including international humanitarian law, to take all
necessary measures to ensure safety for all those doing
their noble humanitarian work in support of the people
of Afghanistan and the innocent civilians of the
country.
The aforementioned situation in Afghanistan
requires that further priority be given to strengthening
security, which is needed to ensure the safety of the
Afghan people, to carry out humanitarian activities and
socio-economic development programmes, and to
create an environment conducive to a lasting political
settlement. At the same time, more efforts should be
made to address the root causes of conflict. Measures
should be taken to create more jobs, and thus more
income, for rural inhabitants so that they will be less

14

dependent on opium cultivation, and to improve health
care, education and other social services so that
Afghans on opposing sides will realize that they will be
better off as beneficiaries of the peacebuilding and
reconstruction process rather than of violence and
hostilities.
To that end, we welcome the enhanced efforts by
the Afghan Government to implement the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy and achieve the
Millennium Development Goals, as well as to improve
their institutional capabilities, including at the
provincial level, to promote their ownership in all
fields of governance and to use international aid more
effectively. Afghan leadership and responsibility will
be of key importance in the reconstruction process.
However, given the formidable challenges they are
facing, the Afghan Government and people deserve
continued international assistance and support. The
international community should speed up the
implementation of the commitments made at the Paris
Conference in June.
As an important factor of its development and
stability, Afghanistan’s closer cooperation with
neighbouring countries and regional partners should be
further encouraged. The United Nations, through
UNAMA, should continue to play a key role in
coordinating and monitoring international assistance to
the country. We would like to stress that, apart from the
need for its effective management, it is essential to
ensure that international assistance target the most
vulnerable among the Afghan people, especially
women and children, and aim to encourage the full,
equal and effective participation of local people in the
decision-making process.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Viet Nam’s
consistent support for the Government and people of
Afghanistan in their post-conflict reconstruction
process. Viet Nam will continue to work with the
United Nations and the international community to
contribute to the success of the process in the hope that
Afghanistan will soon emerge from its current
difficulties to embark on a new era of lasting peace,
stability, prosperity and development.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Eide for his briefing and our colleague, the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. I would like to assure the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of our full

08-54872

S/PV.5994

support for the approach he has developed. Like him,
we wish to express our confidence in the commitment
of the international community. We should not be
discouraged and we should not blame ourselves. We
need to engage in passionate, determined action. There
is no alternative, in any event.
UNAMA has been given a key role by the
Security Council, including in the coordination of
civilian aid and it is essential that all international
actors actively support that coordinating role. It is also
necessary to give UNAMA the resources necessary to
enable it to fully carry out its mandate.
As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/617) indicates, developments in the situation
over the past few months show varying results. Real
progress must be acknowledged, in particular the
efforts to strengthen the Afghan National Army and the
launching of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, as well as some progress in the area of
economic and social development. We must also
acknowledge the progress made in the fight against
drug trafficking, reflected in the reduction in opium
production and the enhanced international cooperation
in preventing access to chemical precursors for heroin
production. As Mr. Eide pointed out, the recent
ministerial reshuffle shows that President Karzai truly
wants to make his Government more effective.
We also see, however, the persistence of
disturbing elements regarding, for example, the
security situation, the risk of humanitarian crisis this
winter and the human rights situation. The problem of
good governance, in particular the fight against
corruption, remains a challenge that will require
increased efforts on the part of the Afghan Government
in addition to the measures taken over recent months.
We too are concerned with regard to the issue of
civilian victims. As Mr. Kai Eide emphasized, civilian
casualties result mainly from anti-Government
activities. France has very strict rules of engagement,
but we are aware of the need to continue the efforts
undertaken by the international forces to avoid any
civilian victims. We are determined to work resolutely
towards that end with our allies and partners.
The difficulties and challenges faced by
Afghanistan should not obscure the progress made
during the past seven years. I wish to stress in
particular the 25 per cent drop in the infant mortality
rate, the 6 million children — one third of whom are

08-54872

girls — who are now attending school and the
establishment and continued strengthening of Afghan
democratic institutions.
The Afghan people clearly expressed their choice
for democracy and stability in 2004 and 2005, and we
must help them to prepare for the upcoming elections
in 2009 and 2010, which will be crucial to completing
the democratic process.
We share the sense of urgency expressed by the
Special Representative. The international community
and Afghanistan have a strategy defined in the
Afghanistan Compact, which was adopted in 2006 in
London, which has now been extended by the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy and the
road map that was drawn up during the international
Paris Conference. The road map is based on a renewed
partnership around mutual commitments aimed at
better taking into account the specific needs of the
population. That is a fundamental point, because the
involvement of the international community will be
judged in part by the improvement of the situation of
the population, which will also enable us to determine
whether we have attained our objective. In addition to
the initial individual institutional steps that have
already been announced, such as the reorganization of
the Afghan Government and reform of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board (JCMB), decisive
measures must be taken quickly by the international
community and by the Afghan authorities to implement
their commitments. The latter will be called upon to
share a greater degree of responsibility in the
reconstruction and development process.
Speaking for the presidency of the European
Union, I wish to reiterate here that Afghanistan and the
United Nations can count on the unswerving support of
France and the European Union. In conformity with the
framework established by the Council of the European
Union in May 2008, we will continue to play a major
role in the mobilization of the international community
in support of Afghanistan.
The European Union is the second-largest
financial contributor to the reconstruction of
Afghanistan. It contributes, in particular, to building
the capacity of the Afghan police, which is a priority
for the international community, especially through the
European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan, whose
numbers there will be significantly increased. On the
military front, I wish to recall that 25 of the European

15

S/PV.5994

Union member States are participating in the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
together account for nearly half of the total personnel.

are very challenging circumstances. We also welcome
the contribution to today’s debate made by Ambassador
Tanin of Afghanistan.

A lasting solution to the crisis in Afghanistan
cannot be only military; it must also be political, first
and foremost. Our objective is to help the Government
to establish the structures of a democratic State which
will ensure the security of its citizens, respect human
rights and promote economic and social development.
That will require a comprehensive approach based on
better integration of the civilian and military
components. We encourage development by the Afghan
authorities of a national political dialogue that is as
broad as possible and at all levels. That dialogue
should lead to respect for the constitution and
obviously cannot include the proponents of jihad,
whom we must continue to fight until their defeat.

Strong United Nations leadership must continue
to be at the heart of the international approach in
Afghanistan. We welcome Mr. Eide’s work to
restructure and strengthen the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) so that it
can better deliver in terms of our agreed priorities. We
shall take very seriously the eight steps that he has
proposed should be completed in the coming six
months.

As stressed in particular by Mr. Eide and the
Permanent Representative of Italy, stability in
Afghanistan is intrinsically linked to the stability of the
region. It is therefore essential to develop a
coordinated approach at the regional level. France is
prepared to contribute to that actively, as Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, our Minister for Foreign Affairs, has
announced, through the proposed organization of a
regional conference bringing together Afghanistan and
its neighbours, as an extension of the work done during
the international Conference in Support of Afghanistan.
We welcome the strengthening of cooperation
between Afghanistan and its partners to fight threats
such as those of terrorism and drug trafficking, and the
improved relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan,
whose new democratic Government has shown its
determination to fight terrorism.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm emphatically the
resolute commitment of France, both within ISAF and
alongside the Special Representative, to support their
efforts to ensure that the Afghan people, as soon
possible and as they well deserve, will find the path to
peace, security and development.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Sir, for presiding over this very important debate. Let
me begin by welcoming the Secretary-General’s latest
report on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/617) and
by thanking Special Representative Eide for his
briefing and for the leadership and commitment he has
shown since his appointment in March. We commend
him and his team for all their efforts in what we know

16

We look forward to agreement later this year on
an increase in resources for the UNAMA mission to
allow it to increase its crucial work on governance, on
implementing the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, on aid effectiveness, on the humanitarian
challenge and on improving United Nations and
broader international coordination. That work is central
to long-term success in Afghanistan, and UNAMA’s
work in support of the Government of Afghanistan to
help prepare for elections next year is particularly
important. Broad participation is crucial, and the
United Kingdom welcomes the work now under way
on voter registration.
The focus of the international debate is often on
security. That is for very good reasons, but it is a
mistake to focus on security alone, or indeed in
isolation from issues of governance and development.
As many of those involved in Afghanistan have been
saying for some time, the insurgency cannot be
defeated by military means alone. We have heard that
several times around this table today. The military
effort will of course remain a crucial element of our
approach for some time to come, as the Special
Representative has said. But equally important are
efforts by the Afghan Government, supported by
UNAMA and others in the international community, to
deliver effective governance, encourage economic
growth and build an inclusive democratic process that
provides a voice for all those prepared to pursue their
goals through political means.
The challenge for all of us is to enable the
Afghans to deliver that vision for themselves. Progress
has been made. The Afghan National Army is 65,000
strong and continues to grow, both in number and in
professionalism. It already plays a central role
alongside international forces in containing the

08-54872

S/PV.5994

insurgency. The significant progress it has made shows
that Afghanistan has the capacity to deliver once it has
the infrastructure in place.
Elsewhere, we have seen less progress,
particularly on governance and on tackling corruption.
Building a professional police force is essential if we
are to deliver the benefits of central Government to
ordinary Afghans, and we need more progress in that
area. The appointment of a new Minister of the Interior
is a welcome step, as are the other ministerial changes
announced last weekend.
All the challenges facing Afghanistan are
rendered more difficult by the pernicious influence of
narcotics. We have seen some progress this year, as the
Special Representative pointed out — a 19 per cent
decrease in overall opium production and an increase
in the number of poppy-free provinces from 13 last
year to 18 this year. We cannot be complacent,
however. The growth in production in areas of poor
security, such as Helmand, remains a real concern. The
United Kingdom volunteered to be the lead partner
country on counter-narcotics to help the Afghan
Government, and it was no coincidence that we agreed
that our forces should be deployed to Helmand, one of
the most demanding provinces in terms of restoring
security, which is an essential step to ridding the
province of narcotics production.
Concern has rightly been expressed about civilian
casualties, including in the Secretary-General’s report.
As I have said before in this Chamber, any civilian
death is a death too many. That is why the international
forces in Afghanistan go to great lengths to minimize
the risk of civilian casualties, including by warning
local populations of impending operations whenever
possible. It is right, however, that we constantly
re-evaluate and, where necessary, improve our
procedures on the basis of experience. We should also
constantly bear in mind the Special Representative’s
remarks about where the primary responsibility for
civilian casualties lies. It lies with the insurgency and
with those responsible for what he calls “asymmetric”
attacks — that is, attacks aimed at civilians or heedless
of civilian casualties.
The Secretary-General’s report rightly highlights
the range of challenges we face in Afghanistan. We
will succeed in tackling those challenges only if we
maintain a comprehensive approach. Security cannot
come without sustained work on governance,

08-54872

development and capacity-building, and vice versa.
Mr. Eide has also spoken recently of the need for the
international community to demonstrate renewed
energy and commitment to a lasting solution for
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom supports that call
and will continue to play its part in securing a stable
and prosperous future for its Afghan friends.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
I, too, would like to thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for the valuable
information he has provided.
It is concerning to note that the situation in
Afghanistan remains one of the most complex issues
on the Security Council’s agenda. We have welcomed
the convening and outcome of the Paris Conference,
which laid the groundwork for a political and financial
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community to rebuild the country. If such a partnership
is to produce the desired results, political and security
conditions must be established to provide for a calmer
climate.
Unfortunately, we must note that fighting has
increased recently between the insurgents, on the one
hand, and the Afghan forces and the international
security forces, on the other, claiming numerous
victims among the civilian population and
humanitarian personnel, while a high level of
insecurity continues to reign. The resolve of the
insurgents, even in provinces that have been relatively
calm until recently, is complicating the task of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), which must expand its provincial offices
and, above all, be able to make full use of its means
and capacities to fulfil its mandate effectively.
Burkina Faso believes that it is highly urgent to
identify the best possible strategy for resolving the
crisis, in particular through negotiation and the
strengthening of political dialogue. That would allow
for the creation of conditions most conducive to
ensuring, in the short term, the organization of
presidential elections in 2009 and legislative elections
in 2010, and, in the longer term, the establishment of a
lasting and definitive peace throughout the country,
including the effective resolution of the thorny issue of
drug trafficking.

17

S/PV.5994

We remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. While we welcome the
measures undertaken to meet that challenge and the
United Nations appeals to that end, we urge the
international community to remain vigilant as it helps
the Afghan people to mitigate their own suffering. We
make the same appeal for an effective approach to
addressing the fate of refugees and displaced persons.
In that regard, we welcome the convening on
19 November, at the initiative of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Afghan Government, of an international conference
on the timetable for their return and reintegration.
Another major source of concern are the ongoing
human rights violations — in particular summary
executions and sexual or gender-based violence,
including against children — committed in conditions
of impunity. We call for vigorous and courageous
measures to be taken along the lines of the National
Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan of 19 May
2008.
My delegation welcomes the political progress
achieved despite everything, including the adoption of
important legislation. Although political differences do
not yet allow for the adoption of an electoral law, the
adoption of draft legislation on the Independent
Election Commission represents a significant milestone
in the framework of the electoral process under way.
Moreover, given the extreme sensitivity of the pending
deadlines, every effort must be made to strengthen
security, along the lines of measures already taken by
the United Nations forces currently on the ground and
the Organization as a whole in support of the National
Police. We also note the adoption of an anti-corruption
law, the establishment of the High Office of Oversight,
and
the
improved
performance
of
public
administration,
local
governance
and
the
administration of justice. We warmly encourage the
authorities to pursue and intensify such efforts.
A definitive solution to the Afghan problem will
also hinge on strengthened regional and international
cooperation. We are gratified by the numerous signs of
reviving relations between Afghanistan and other
countries of the region, which augurs well for
subregional and regional stability. As to international
cooperation, I note once again the current and future
importance of the contribution of the international
community, including the United Nations, to peace,

18

economic recovery and national reconstruction in
Afghanistan.
UNAMA should be able to rely on the support of
the Security Council in fulfilling its mandate, which we
have just renewed.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We, too, join in
welcoming Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and thank him for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2008/617). We also
welcome the Ambassador of Afghanistan, Mr. Zahir
Tanin, and thank him for his statement earlier.
The international community has a shared interest
in a stable, peaceful and democratic Afghanistan. It is
for that reason that my delegation believes that the
challenges facing Afghanistan, which are detailed in
the latest report of the Secretary-General, should not be
underestimated. Key among those challenges are the
deterioration of the security situation, the increase in
civilian casualties, the continued human rights
deficiencies and the worsening humanitarian situation.
The persistent threat to security posed by insurgent and
terrorist activities is the main challenge to
Afghanistan’s nation-building efforts and stability.
Paragraphs 16 to 22 of the Secretary-General’s
report clearly illustrate the deteriorating situation in
Afghanistan, especially in recent months. In that
context, we deplore all attempts to destabilize the
country, in particular terrorist attacks on innocent
civilians, including children. It is also worrying that, as
noted in the report, the deteriorating security situation
has hampered the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
Another area of concern is civilian casualties. As
noted in the report of the Secretary-General, the
country has experienced an increase in civilian
casualties. My delegation condemns all attacks
targeting innocent civilians. We also call upon the
international forces in Afghanistan to minimize the risk
of civilian casualties.
Despite the aforementioned challenges in
Afghanistan, the country is slowly making progress in
some areas. One notable area is that of counternarcotics efforts. South Africa is encouraged by the
reported decrease in opium cultivation and the decline
in opium production. We encourage the Government of

08-54872

S/PV.5994

Afghanistan and other stakeholders to continue their
efforts to address the narcotics problem. We further
encourage the Government to improve its institutional
capacity for service-delivery and development in
support of viable alternatives to poppy cultivation.
We also welcome the notable progress in the
fields of the rule of law, governance and regional
cooperation. We underscore the importance of regional
cooperation as an effective means of promoting
development and stability in Afghanistan. In that
context, my delegation commends the improved
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours, in
particular Pakistan. We appreciate the resolve already
expressed by both countries to combat extremism and
terrorism by further improving existing mechanisms
for the exchange of information.
In order to address the challenges facing
Afghanistan, a holistic and comprehensive approach is
essential. In that regard, improved coordination in the
military, political, humanitarian and development areas
is of vital importance. It is for that reason that South
Africa continues to support the central and impartial
role of UNAMA and its activities in leading the efforts
of the international community. We agree with the need
to strengthen UNAMA’s coordination capacity, in order
to enable the Mission to make a significant difference
on the ground.
South Africa reaffirms its support for the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy under the
ownership of the Afghan people. We also commend the
central role played by the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board in facilitating and monitoring the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact.
Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Eide, and
the personnel of UNAMA for their tireless efforts in
Afghanistan.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Kai Eide, for his full and informative
briefing and for his leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in these
difficult and challenging times. At the same time, we
are pleased to welcome the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and we thank him for
his statement.

08-54872

My country, Croatia, is encouraged by hard work
that UNAMA has carried out to date, helping to
coordinate the humanitarian efforts of the international
community in support of the Afghan Government. My
delegation would like to reiterate its full support for
UNAMA’s leading role in that regard. As was clearly
stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/617), only if an absolute readiness of all
stakeholders to be coordinated is present will UNAMA
be in a position to successfully execute its mandate.
Croatia is seriously concerned about the
worsening of the security situation in Afghanistan. The
insurgency is intensifying and is now negatively
affecting areas that previously were relatively calm. Of
particular concern is the situation in the border region
with Pakistan, where hostile activities have
significantly increased. The change of tactics employed
by insurgent — towards attacks of an asymmetric
nature, often carried out in highly inhabited areas —
has significantly contributed to the rise in civilian
casualties.
In that context, Croatia believes that strict
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law and the implementation of adequate
measures to ensure the protection of civilians should be
effected throughout Afghanistan. We especially
welcome the efforts undertaken to date by the
international forces to minimize the risk of civilian
casualties.
Croatia is concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation, brought on primarily as a result
of the ongoing insurgency and the negative impact of
the conflict on humanitarian access. The current
drought and the high global food prices have only
exacerbated the situation. We therefore welcome the
second joint emergency appeal for relief to address
high food prices and the drought crisis, launched to
help people affected by the current conditions. Highly
aware of the acuteness of the problem, Croatia has just
donated $50,000 through the World Food Programme
to alleviate food shortages in the province of
Badakhshan.
It is a well-known fact that the insurgency in
Afghanistan is fuelled predominantly by the drug trade.
With that in mind, Croatia is encouraged by the new
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), according to which there has been a
19 per cent decrease in opium cultivation and a 6 per

19

S/PV.5994

cent decline in the production of opium. We welcome
the renewed efforts aimed at curbing that scourge,
undertaken with the approval of the Afghan
Government and consistent with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
Croatia is pleased to see that international efforts
to counter the flow of chemical precursors for illicit
heroin manufacturing, recently strongly supported by
the Security Council through the adoption of resolution
1817 (2008), are already bearing fruit. We commend
the International Narcotics Control Board for its
leading role, and we welcome the greater regional
cooperation on this issue.
Inextricably linked to the problem of opium
cultivation is the problem of the rampant corruption
that plunders Afghanistan. We therefore welcome the
adoption of the law on corruption and the
establishment of the High Office of Oversight to
combat corruption. It is evident that such measures are
necessary not only to demonstrate the seriousness of
the Afghan Government with regard to its
commitments to the international community, but, even
more, to strengthen the trust and confidence of
ordinary Afghans in the present Administration.
Croatia is of the opinion that the upcoming
elections are a key priority and a real test of
Afghanistan’s democratic progress. While we regret
that continuing disagreement within the National
Assembly has prevented the adoption of a new
electoral law, we are confident that all necessary
legislation — including legislation on the Independent
Election Commission, the lead coordinating body for
the elections — will be swiftly adopted.
On security and military matters, we welcome the
continuing improvement of the Afghan National Army
and support the Afghan request to raise the Army’s
recruitment ceiling to 134,000 by 2010. We especially
welcome the Afghan Government’s assumption of
greater responsibility for security in the country, with
the Afghan National Army taking over lead
responsibility for security in Kabul. Croatia is
currently examining arrangements to send to
Afghanistan additional teams to be included in the
training and mentoring of the Afghan National Army,
within an operational framework and with a liaison
team.
We commend all regional efforts aimed at the
stabilization and the further development of

20

Afghanistan. The country’s neighbours have an
important role to play in supporting the Afghan
Government’s effort to secure its borders, but also in
acquiring joint opportunities afforded by trade, energy
market integration and infrastructure construction. We
welcome the recent international agreements entered
into by Afghanistan and its neighbours and express our
full support for the efforts already put in place by the
Special Representative aimed at underscoring the
potential of regional economic development and
cooperation.
We are also fully aware that there is no purely
military solution to the situation in Afghanistan. In
order for the Afghan Government and the international
community to succeed, they need to apply a
comprehensive approach, uniting military, political,
humanitarian and development activities. Supporting a
comprehensive approach also means supporting
Afghan efforts to bring disaffected Afghans into the
mainstream of society and cause them to renounce
violence and accept Afghanistan’s constitution and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We share the
view that UNAMA has an important role to play in
supporting Afghan-led reconciliation activities in
whatever ways the Government of Afghanistan
considers appropriate. Furthermore, the crisis in
Afghanistan is not only a national and regional, but
also a global problem. The fight against terrorism can
be won only through the concerted efforts of the
relevant international actors.
Croatia would like affirm its strong determination
expressed at the Conference held in June in Paris to
work closely under the Afghan leadership in support of
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, based
on the Afghanistan Compact of 2006. Similarly, let me
reiterate our support for the assessment of the Special
Representative that the priorities identified at the Paris
Conference are sufficiently covered by UNAMA’s
mandate, as laid out in resolution 1806 (2008). In that
context, we welcome the changes announced by
President Karzai to his cabinet, which we see as a clear
sign of the Afghan determination to rigorously
implement the Paris agenda.
We fully concur with the assessment of the
Secretary-General that greater human, administrative
and security resources need to be mobilized in order
for UNAMA to fulfil its mandate and achieve the
established priorities. In that regard, we commend
UNAMA’s decision to open new provincial offices,

08-54872

S/PV.5994

thus further strengthening its outreach capability,
which is crucial for the implementation of its mandate.
A sense of urgency is clearly present.
Finally, throughout this year Croatia has raised
the level of its military contribution to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by approximately
30 per cent. Additionally, we have initiated
development projects in the province of Badakhshan in
the sectors of health and education, in accordance with
the priorities of the Afghan Government. That is all to
confirm our forceful commitment to the efforts of the
entire international community to rebuild a free, safe
and stable Afghanistan, as well as our strong support
for the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Eide for the efforts
that he has been making in the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We also thank
him for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
for having introduced the periodic report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617).
We share the Secretary-General’s concern over
the continuing deterioration of the military and
political situation in Afghanistan. Here, we note in
particular the stepping up of terrorist activity by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups. The
attack on the President of Afghanistan, widespread
terrorist acts in Kabul and other regions of the country
and increasingly frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel and United Nations staff members,
responsibility for which has been claimed by the
Taliban, are clear evidence of uncompromising
aggression by extremists who are striving to obtain
power and who are ready to sacrifice the lives of
totally innocent people in order to achieve to their
goals.
Under such conditions, there is a need to
unswervingly follow the policy of isolating extremist
leaders, first and foremost those who are on the
sanctions list of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), while
maintaining for rank and file Taliban members who are
not tainted by military crimes the opportunity for a
return to peaceful life. It is precisely such a policy that
should be maintained by the United Nations Mission
within the framework of the implementation of its
mandate.

08-54872

We believe that the tactic of pacification of the
Taliban and other extremist groups is inherently
flawed. Any attempts to play up to them are fraught
with irreparable damage to the positions of the central
power and the leading anti-Taliban political forces.
Unfortunately, the idea of reconciliation with the
extremists continues to find supporters both among
representatives of international organizations and
within Afghanistan.
The actions of the terrorists and of insurgents
who have not laid down their arms are fuelled
primarily by drug dealing. More and more often,
terrorists and drug dealers are closely coordinating
their actions, while international efforts to combat the
Afghan drug threat, unfortunately, are not yielding
visible results. Moreover, we are observing an
unprecedented rise in the production of drugs in
Afghanistan, which is a direct threat to the entire
international community.
Under such conditions, we believe that it is
vitally necessary to step up anti-drug efforts both in the
territory of Afghanistan — including the destruction of
drug crops, the pursuit of drug dealers, the
implementation of alternative agricultural crops and
curbing unemployment — and in the territory around
Afghanistan, and to do so through the coordinating role
of the United Nations and with the participation of
neighbouring countries, and through the establishment
of a system of anti-drug and financial security belts.
There is also a need to make fuller use of the
potential of regional organizations that have
demonstrated the effectiveness of their work in this
area, in particular the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. At present, the most effective mechanism
for making use of international efforts to counter the
flow of Afghan drugs is the anti-drug Operation
Channel carried out since 2003 under the aegis of the
CSTO.
We also believe that the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) cannot remain on the
sidelines of international efforts to counter the drug
threat coming from Afghanistan. It is important to note
that resolution 1833 (2008), recently adopted by the
Security Council, is aimed at focusing ISAF efforts on
interaction with the Government of Afghanistan and
other interested parties, including regional players, in
this sphere. Without combating the drug threat, given

21

S/PV.5994

the close link between terrorist activity and drug
production, ISAF’s activities will not be fully effective.

greater independence
problems.

We are ready to further develop practical
interaction between the CTSO and NATO in counterterrorism and anti-drug work. On several occasions, we
have informed our NATO partners of this fact.
However, so far, NATO has not responded in any way
to our proposal, although objectively such interaction
would make it possible to obtain better results from the
efforts of ISAF and the forces now active in
Afghanistan and headed by NATO. A clear example is
the agreement reached in Bucharest on the
simplification of procedures for transit through Russian
territory of non-military cargoes in order to secure the
rear of ISAF in Afghanistan.

We support the initiative of the French
Government and others that organized the International
Conference in Support of Afghanistan, which was held
in Paris on 12 June and in which we were active
participants. We believe that its outcome should be
seen as a kind of road map for the attainment of the
objectives now facing Kabul, which are reflected in the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy for 2008
to 2013. We believe that the international community’s
efforts to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan and to
counter the terrorist and extremist threats emanating
from that country will not provide effective results
until conditions are created for the Afghan Government
to independently ensure security within the territory of
the country. Of particular importance here is the
formation of genuinely operational national armed
forces and law enforcement agencies, equipped with
modern arms.

Another important sphere for cooperation is the
NATO-Russian Council project for joint training of
personnel for anti-drug agencies of Afghanistan and the
transit countries of Central Asia at the Ministry of
Interior training centre in Domodedovo. That is a real
means of interaction in countering the Afghan drug
threat.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern
regarding the increasingly frequent deaths of peaceful
Afghan civilians as a result of the actions not only of
extremists but also of international military presences.
Such incidents are clearly undermining the trust of the
local population in international efforts in Afghanistan.
There is a need for ISAF to take measures to prevent
the deaths of peaceful civilians, first and foremost of
children, as a result of indiscriminate or excessive use
of force, including bombings.
Here, we should like once again to emphasize
that there is no alternative to the imperative need
enshrined in a recent decision of the Security Council,
namely the need for compliance with international
humanitarian law to prevent loss of life among the
civilian population. That is an extremely important
objective in the context of the long-term stabilization
of Afghanistan, which was reaffirmed as well by the
Afghan leadership and by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Russia is convinced that effectively settling the
situation in Afghanistan and resolving the serious
problems now facing the country’s leadership will be
impossible without an integrated approach on the part
of the international community, led by the United
Nations, and without delegating to Afghan leaders

22

in

resolving

inter-Afghan

The steps now being undertaken to rectify the
security situation must be backed by efforts towards
the socio-economic revival of the Afghan State. Our
country must continue to be an active participant in
those efforts. Russia is actively working in that area,
participating in the implementation of a number of
projects to restore energy and transport infrastructure
in Afghanistan.
Another contribution of ours to stabilizing the
economic situation of the country is the agreement
signed in Moscow on a settlement of the Afghan debt
to Russia, by which the Afghan debt to our country was
reduced from $11.112 billion to $730 million. In order
to promote the development of higher education in
Afghanistan, since 2007 the Russian Federation has
been awarding 80 scholarships per year to pay the
tuition fees of Afghan students in universities of our
country. Russia has also provided Afghanistan with
military technical assistance on a non-reimbursable
basis, totalling $220 million. We are ready to continue
making the appropriate efforts.
Mr. De Vengoechea (Panama) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
for the briefing he has just presented. We would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his presentation to the members of the
Council.

08-54872

S/PV.5994

The picture painted by the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2008/617) shows how difficult and
complicated the work of Mr. Eide and his team has
been. We therefore commend the work that he has done
to date and wish him every success in the coming
months, which we know will be of crucial importance.
“Afghanistan is at a crossroads” is a phrase we
have heard before, but it has never been more fitting
than at the present moment. The wave of setbacks
suffered by the international community in recent
months has presented us with two options: we can
continue with the same strategy, becoming bogged
down in an unending asymmetric war in which nobody
wins and everyone comes out a loser, particularly the
Afghan people. Or, on the other hand, we could change
course and accelerate our steps towards rebuilding the
country, not by exclusively using force but through a
dialogue that seeks national reconciliation, which can
sow the seeds of peace, human security and social
development.
Panama is of the opinion that, to change course in
Afghanistan, two actions must be taken as a matter of
urgency. First, we must recognize that, as history has
taught us, a military victory in Afghanistan is not
merely a vague notion; it cannot be achieved in
practice. If we think that victory in Afghanistan means
totally removing insurgent groups, then we are
mistaken. The Afghan insurgency is much more than a
group of terrorists; it arises from a complex social
movement with strong roots in local culture.
It is certain that greater commitments on the part
of the members of the international security forces are
necessary to bring peace to the country, particularly the
most violent parts. But beyond that, Panama believes
that the Government of Afghanistan, with the support
of its international partners, must redouble its efforts to
integrate moderate elements of the insurgency,
including those members of the Taliban who renounce
violence, in order to reestablish the Afghan State.
Without them, national reconciliation, which is the
basis of any stable, multicultural society, will be
impossible.
The second action to be taken is to increase the
political commitment to Afghanistan. That does not
just include increased political, diplomatic and
economic aid for reconstruction, but also redoubled
efforts so that ordinary Afghans feel that their country
is changing for the better and that it is improving

08-54872

because of the actions of its Government and the
international community.
As indicated in the most recent report of the
Secretary-General, such action requires great efforts to,
among other things, establish the rule of law
throughout the country, root out the corruption which
permeates certain parts of the bureaucracy and improve
the standard of living of each citizen, particularly those
who live in remotest parts of the country.
Ultimately, a reconstructed State is worth little if
its people live in poverty and insecurity and do not
enjoy the dividends of peace. Such a situation leads
only to desperation, violence and extremism.
Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation would like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2008/617) and
Mr. Kai Eide for his briefing this morning, updating the
written report. We are also grateful for the statement of
His Excellency Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan. Like the representative
of Panama, I would also like to thank the presidency
for having enabled us to hear from Afghanistan prior to
members of the Council taking the floor.
With regard to the situation on the ground and the
report of the Secretary-General, the Secretary-General
states clearly and repeatedly that the situation in
Afghanistan, despite some progress, has suffered a
marked deterioration, particularly in the area of
security. According to the report, there has been a
44 per cent increase in the number of incidents
between August 2007 and August 2008. That
deterioration in the security situation, however, as the
report clearly indicates, is the result of a combination
of diverse factors. Mr. Eide has given us an additional
explanation as to what that means. We would like to
draw on some aspects of what he said.
The subject of governance is at the heart of the
challenges posed by this situation and of the
combination of factors to which we have referred. On
that subject, the Secretary-General states, in his report:
“Despite those positive developments, the
key challenge for the central Government will be
to create capacity at the sub-national level, where
the lack of resources, as well as corruption,
continues to have a crippling effect.”
(S/2008/617, para. 45)

23

S/PV.5994

At this meeting, we would like to highlight and
emphasize our concern about the issue of corruption,
which is mentioned by the Secretary-General in the
paragraph just cited. In the same context, the report
points out that the atmosphere of impunity perpetuates
the notion that crime and the abuse of power are
acceptable. Clearly, for the Security Council, that is
unacceptable.
We cannot fail to express our concern at the
increase in the number of civilian victims. The
majority of those casualties have been caused by the
murderous hand of the insurgents. But, unfortunately,
some have also been caused by failed actions on the
part of the international forces. Unfortunately,
seriously and disturbingly, the extremists have even
attacked humanitarian convoys, including those of the
United Nations.
The threatened food crisis, which is not exclusive
to Afghanistan, is the result of internal and external
factors and must be addressed by the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community with the
required urgency and assiduity, for humanitarian and
strategic reasons alike. In that connection, all timely
cooperation that the international community can
provide to Afghanistan and its Government to reduce
and alleviate the threat of the food crisis will play a
role that is not only humanitarian, but also strategic.
The more hunger increases, the greater the risk that
other sectors will be absorbed into the extremist
insurgency.
We do not wish to ignore the positive aspects of
the report, in particular the reduced production of the
raw materials for opium and the monitoring of the
importation of the chemical precursors necessary for its
manufacture; the adoption of important laws by
Parliament; and, as Ambassador Tanin informed us, the
300 per cent increase in manufacturing in Afghanistan
since 2001.
Finally, we wish to ask Mr. Eide a few questions.
First, apart from his hope and his personal conviction,
what makes him believe that the recent political
changes, particularly in the interior and agriculture
ministries, are positive elements or developments, as
he said in his statement? Secondly, both in the
Secretary-General’s report and in Mr. Eide’s own
briefing this morning, we perceive — and if we are
mistaken, we ask him to correct us — that there is a
complaint regarding the issue of coordination, which is

24

so essential that it was central to the mandate given to
UNAMA under Security Council resolution 1806
(2008) in May. The question is: What can the Council
do to cooperate further with Mr. Eide and his team on
that particular aspect and others that he considers
important?
It is pointed out quite rightly in the report that
coordination can be provided so long as there is a will
to be coordinated, but I would like Mr. Eide to explain
to us further what the obstacles are, because in our
previous resolution, as I said, coordination was central
to the tasks added to the new mandate.
Finally, since this is a piece of information
provided by the Ambassador and the Special
Representative, I wonder whether they can explain
why, given the tripling of manufacturing in
Afghanistan over the past seven years, the
unemployment and poverty rates remain so high.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.
First of all, I thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing. We
welcome the international Conference on Afghanistan
held in Paris in June and the National Development
Strategy formulated by the Afghan Government. We
support the continued central role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in coordinating the international community’s
assistance to Afghanistan in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1806 (2008).
The Government of Afghanistan currently faces
many grave challenges. In particular, the continued
deterioration in the security situation, the increase in
violence and terrorist attacks and the heavy civilian
casualties caused by the conflict have aroused grave
concern on the part of the international community. In
that connection, I should like to emphasize the
following points.
First, the international community must make a
great effort to help Afghanistan resolve its security
problems. Essentially, the security issue requires the
Government and the people of Afghanistan to make
their own efforts. The international community should
allocate greater resources to helping the country
accelerate the build-up of its army and police force and

08-54872

S/PV.5994

to strengthening its capacity to independently maintain
national security and social stability. We urge all ethnic
groups and parties in Afghanistan to act in the longterm interests of the country and its people, to continue
to foster and practice the culture of reconciliation and
to preserve and enhance the authority of the central
Government. We urge the international forces to take
every possible preventive measure and to do their
utmost to avoid civilian casualties resulting from
military action.
Secondly, during the period ahead, the
international community should focus on ensuring the
smooth holding of presidential elections in
Afghanistan, for which voter registration recently
began. In the coming months, UNAMA and the
International Security Assistance Force should make it
a priority to focus on providing services for the general
elections and, in particular, on ensuring a secure
environment for those elections.
Thirdly, the achievement of long-term peace and
stability in Afghanistan will depend essentially on
economic development and improvements in the
standard of living. The recent drought and high food
prices have further aggravated the humanitarian crisis
in Afghanistan, which poses a huge threat to the
country’s social security and stability. The international
community must honour its commitment to providing
assistance and assisting the Government, step by step,
in implementing the National Development Strategy.
As a friendly neighbour, China attaches great
importance to stability and development in
Afghanistan. We are prepared to continue assisting the
country to the best of our ability.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of India.
Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by formally
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to express appreciation for the scheduling of
today’s debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the situation in
that country, which is a topic of immediate interest to
our delegation. We also welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617) and thank Ambassador
Eide for his comprehensive briefing.

08-54872

The latest report of the Secretary-General makes
it clear that we stand at a very difficult juncture in
Afghanistan. The escalation in asymmetric attacks to
include areas that were cleared of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida is a deeply worrying sign. The fact that
civilians, humanitarian workers, United Nations
convoys and diplomatic representations — including
our mission in Kabul — have been attacked clearly
underlines the barbarity of the foe that we face.
The escalating civilian death toll is truly
distressing, but the ultimate responsibility for those
casualties must be laid squarely at the door of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and those who support and empower
them. Such callous violence underlines the need to
ensure that care be taken in our collective actions and
messages. We must avoid giving them a sense of
comfort or a hint of desperation; most of all, we must
not dignify them by according terrorists parity with the
forces of order. It is in that context that we feel a sense
of some discomfort at the references in the report to
casualties caused by anti-Government forces and
pro-Government forces.
The course ahead may be difficult, but it is clear.
We have no other option but to collectively work on a
three-pronged strategy in Afghanistan. One element in
that must be security, for without security neither the
Afghan people nor those of our own countries will see
the long-awaited peace dividend after decades of
privation in Afghanistan. A second element must be to
raise governance capacities in Afghanistan, otherwise
we run the risk of placing responsibility upon our
Afghan partners without ensuring that they have the
wherewithal to live up to it. The third element is the
regional aspect, because unless Afghanistan is at peace
within its region and vice versa, we cannot hope to
stabilize Afghanistan solely from within. I should like
to briefly elaborate on those three interrelated aspects.
First, on security, now is not the moment for
doubts or hesitation in implementing robust measures
within Afghanistan, while expanding coordinated
politico-military efforts beyond Afghanistan’s borders.
We need to go much further in realizing the wellestablished objective of degrading the ability of the
Taliban to fight, while simultaneously denying them
safe havens, finances and armaments. There must be a
much closer alignment between the consistent
application of force wherever terrorist groups are
present and the political objectives of our efforts in

25

S/PV.5994

Afghanistan, in which UNAMA must play an important
role.
That brings me to my second point, which relates
to development and international assistance. With the
adoption of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy at the Paris Conference in June, we now have
a clear road map. In the new mandate of UNAMA, we
have a designated guide to help us align our assistance
in accordance with the Strategy. The onus is upon us to
take forward our efforts in a manner that coheres with
the objectives set out in the Strategy. In that, UNAMA
and the Afghan Government must play a leading role.
We share the sense reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of the need for the international
community to provide not just the resources but also
the political momentum to “reverse negative trends and
accelerate progress in those areas where we have
achieved successes” (S/2008/617, para. 6). In the
particular context of the United Nations, it is now
essential that we back our stated commitment to that
new role for UNAMA by ensuring that it actually has
the resources to do so.
We also echo the call made by several speakers
for greater efforts to address the worsening
humanitarian situation, in particular the food crisis.
In the specific context of resources, India also
supports the increasing streamlining of assistance
through the Afghan national budget. Sustainable
progress depends on our ability to mentor capacitybuilding in all sectors of governance, including the
budgetary process as much as other mechanisms of
Government. At the same time, we must also ensure
that adequate resources are made available for such
newly trained Government agencies. It is for that
reason that capacity-building is a priority element in
each of India’s assistance programmes in Afghanistan.
I should in that context like to add that India has
recently announced an increase in its commitment to
Afghanistan, which will now amount to $1.2 billion.
We are also pleased to have completed the ZaranjDelaram highway, which is one of the three major
infrastructure projects India is undertaking in
Afghanistan.
Regional cooperation is the third leg of the triad
of elements that must be implemented in parallel to
stabilize Afghanistan. That includes but is not limited
to regional economic cooperation. Afghanistan’s entry
into the South Asian Association for Regional

26

Cooperation and its membership in other regional
groups, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, are aimed at revitalizing Afghanistan’s
historic linkages with the countries of its region.
The central challenge that remains, however, is to
ensure that programmes evolved in such regional
processes are actually implemented. Those include
resolving impediments that hinder the expansion of
commercial and economic linkages, including barriers
to effective overland trade and transit and to the
operation of mechanisms to deal with the challenge
posed by trafficking in drugs, cross-border terrorism
and so on. Eventually, every challenge is an
opportunity, but we need to make greater efforts to
implement measures before we can benefit from the
opportunities.
In conclusion, I must reiterate the need to avoid
excessive expectations. While it is tempting to attempt
to replicate our own socio-economic models in a
country that needs every form of assistance after
decades of conflict, we cannot realistically resolve all
of Afghanistan’s problems at once. We must therefore
accept that progress will continue to take place sector
by sector, partially and sometimes even episodically.
Unless we display patience and perseverance, however,
we cannot ensure that we will truly follow a demanddriven approach on the ground, and, without such an
approach, our best efforts will not have the necessary
legitimacy. It is for that reason that we reiterate the
importance of an Afghan-led process of prioritization
of tasks.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Special Representative Kai Eide for his very
helpful briefing this morning. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617) is also appreciated.
We share the Secretary-General’s candid
assessment of the challenging situation in Afghanistan.
The security and humanitarian situation, in particular,
is of serious concern. At the same time, we should
acknowledge the significant achievement of Statebuilding efforts over the past seven years. With the
resolute efforts of the Government and people of
Afghanistan and the united support of the international
community, we strongly believe that the situation can
be reversed. Today’s meeting will be an important
opportunity
to
demonstrate
our
unwavering

08-54872

S/PV.5994

commitment to assisting Afghanistan to achieve its
aspirations.
The security situation is of paramount concern.
As the insurgents have come to rely more on
asymmetric attacks, the number of innocent civilian
victims has increased. We are deeply concerned that
even humanitarian workers and their convoys have
increasingly become targets. A Japanese aid worker
was killed recently. Such heinous attacks are not
acceptable. We condemn all attacks against those
innocents who are genuinely supporting Afghanistan.
Afghan security forces must be strengthened
urgently. Japan fully supports the Joint Coordinating
and Monitoring Board decision to expand the Afghan
National Army. The reform of the Afghan National
Police and the Ministry of the Interior should be also
accelerated. Japan has supported the efforts of the
Afghan Government by providing assistance for the
police payroll through the Law and Order Trust Fund
for Afghanistan. In order to improve the security
situation, the issue of governance of the central and
local Governments is essential and must be seriously
addressed. We expect commitments for anti-corruption
efforts to be followed through and effective measures
to be taken.
International forces are playing an indispensable
role in the security of the country. Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1833 (2008) as a
demonstration of the solidarity of the international
community in the fight against terrorism. Japan is
determined to continue to play its important role in
supporting the activities of the Operation Enduring
Freedom coalition in the Indian Ocean.
The disbanding of illegal armed groups
contributes to improving the security situation. In
Afghanistan, more than 370 illegally armed groups
have been disbanded. The implementation of
development projects in the districts committed to the
disbanding of illegal armed groups is becoming more
efficient than ever before. However, given the
importance and urgency of those efforts, the pace of
progress must be accelerated. The establishment of a
unit for the disbanding of illegal armed groups in the
Ministry of the Interior in the coming weeks will be a
step forward. Japan will continue to do its utmost to
support the Government of Afghanistan through policy
coordination and by providing necessary assistance in
that area.

08-54872

Counter-narcotics is another priority issue
requiring urgent action. Building on ongoing efforts,
including full implementation of the National Drug
Control Strategy, additional measures have to be
explored to cut the link between the insurgents and
drug production and trafficking.
In the area of reconstruction and development,
concrete steps have been taken to implement the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy on the
basis of the outcome of the Paris Conference. We
welcome the recent decision to make the decisionmaking process of the Joint Coordinating and
Monitoring Board streamlined and more effective.
However, much remains to be done on both the
Afghan and the international sides. The commitment
and pledges of the international community must be
followed through and implemented promptly. I am
pleased that Japan, for its part, has fulfilled almost all
of its previous financial commitments, and the
additional pledge we made in Paris will also be
implemented in a timely manner. I would join in the
call of the Secretary-General for pledges to be
translated into urgent action.
The elections in 2009 and 2010 are too crucial to
fail. Their success is essential to consolidate nationbuilding efforts and democracy in the country. It is
necessary to ensure that the will of the Afghan people
will be faithfully reflected. Voter registration has
started as a first step in the preparations, with other
steps to follow. The Afghan Government and the
international community together must make every
possible effort to complete the necessary preparations
in time so that the elections are organized in a free, fair
and secure manner. Japan will lend its full support to
the Afghan Government and the United Nations.
Regional cooperation is another essential element
in achieving stability and development in the country.
We welcome positive steps, such as the planning for
the next peace jirga and the Afghan economic
cooperation conference, which is now under way.
Japan places priority on assistance to the AfghanistanPakistan border region, including follow-up of the G8
initiative.
To reverse the current negative trend and achieve
social and economic stability is a major challenge for
the international community as a whole. In that
endeavour, the coordinating role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is more

27

S/PV.5994

important than ever. I applaud the leadership of
Mr. Kai Eide in carrying out that challenging task, as
well as the dedication of UNAMA staff, who are
working under very harsh conditions. Japan supports
strengthening the capacity and priority needs of
UNAMA so that the Mission can fully accomplish the
mandate given to it by the Council.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We extend our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Kai Eide, for their sincere efforts. I would also like
to thank all their colleagues in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
firm commitment and valuable dedication to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The central role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan is of paramount
importance, and we fully support it.
The latest report (S/2008/617) of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan, as well as the
reality on the ground, present us with a mixed picture.
On the one hand, we have witnessed remarkable
accomplishments by the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in various fields; on the other, despite all
those achievements, many daunting challenges — such
as insecurity, poppy cultivation, the production of
narcotic drugs, drug trafficking and humanitarian
crises, among others — have yet to be effectively
tackled and continue to endanger the stability and
development of Afghanistan, along with that of the
region and beyond.
It is of grave concern that, as indicated in the
report before the Council, the security situation in
Afghanistan has deteriorated. Increased terrorist
attacks and violence in certain parts of Afghanistan
caused by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other criminal and
terrorist groups, coupled with the pervasive drug trade,
have created grave challenges. The increase in civilian
casualties, which is a result of terrorism and is also in
part caused by the military operations of foreign
forces, is yet another concern preoccupying the people
of Afghanistan and international public opinion.

28

The hearts and minds of the Afghan people, who
have gone through various forms of hardship and
suffering in the past few decades, cannot be won by
relying solely on military operations; nor will it be
possible by trying to appease the extremists and
terrorists, who will not be satisfied with anything less
than returning the country to the extremism that it
experienced in the past. Rather, as was also mentioned
by the Ambassador of Afghanistan, it will be
achievable by making ordinary Afghans feel the results
of the help and support of the international community
in their day-to-day lives through the reconstruction of
infrastructure, capacity-building, training, education
and the development of important sectors such as the
agricultural sector.
The recent increase in insecurity in Afghanistan
clearly suggests that the attempts made by certain
countries to approach some extremist and terrorist
groups have been counterproductive and have only
emboldened them. That is a matter of great concern
that could create a new version of extremism in the
region.
Furthermore, we are of the view that the Afghan
National Army and Police should be more seriously
strengthened. The transfer to Afghans of full national
ownership over the security of their country should be
expedited if the insecurity in Afghanistan is to be
addressed effectively. An important step in that
direction was the hand-over, in August 2008, of leading
responsibility for security in Kabul to the national
security forces led by the Afghan National Army. That
important development should be built upon and
followed by more steps.
As indicated in the reports of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, crop yields have actually
increased in Afghanistan in 2008. The cultivation,
production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs, which
adversely affect the security of that country, have
continued unabated. Undoubtedly, combating that
menace requires a long-term strategy. The magnitude
of the threat requires more resolute and coordinated
efforts by Afghanistan and the international
community. On its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran
has spared no effort in combating that threat. I have
explained our endeavours in that regard in my previous
statements in the Council. While continuing that fight
with unwavering determination, we expect the
international community to join us and to become more
seriously involved in the fight in order to save peoples

08-54872

S/PV.5994

across the world from the destructive impacts of that
menace.
However, despite all the concerns and
uncertainties to which I have referred, one thing is
clear — the Government and people of Afghanistan
continue to demonstrate their steadfast resolve not to
bow to the difficulties they are facing but to surmount
them and to work for a stable, prosperous and
democratic Afghanistan. In that regard, they need the
support of every one of us in the international
community. The Paris Conference of June 2008, at
which the Afghanistan National Development Strategy
was launched, provided the world community with
another opportunity to reassure Afghans that, as they
continue on their journey towards stability, security
and development, the international community stands
with them, offering its help and support. We concur
with the report that the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and the Paris Declaration have
established a road map for future efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to bring stability and development to
Afghanistan.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, along with other
neighbouring countries and the world at large, has a
vital interest in a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, and in an Afghanistan that is at peace
with itself and with its neighbours. Over the past six
years, we have spent more than $300 million in helping
the Afghans rebuild and reconstruct their country by
mainly spending on building infrastructure and
capacity-building. As an example, and as mentioned in
the report, the Islamic Republic of Iran recently
concluded memorandums of understanding with
Afghanistan on bilateral trade and has agreed to
construct a teacher training centre in Kabul. In
addition, the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance has signed an agreement with Iran to
expand public service training.
My country has also extended its hospitality to
over 3 million Afghan nationals over the past three
decades. As present, there are about 960,000 Afghan
refugees registered in Iran, with another 1 million
Afghan nationals living illegally in our country. For all
these years, the Afghan nationals have enjoyed, and
continue to enjoy, the educational and welfare facilities
in Iran and have been and are benefiting from the same
subsidies as our own people.

08-54872

It is our earnest hope that the international
community will assist in the process of enabling
Afghan nationals to return to their homeland and in
helping create the conditions to facilitate their
voluntary repatriation in a more timely manner.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): On behalf of the delegation
of Pakistan, I would like to say how pleased we are to
see China, a great friend, presiding over the Security
Council. We wish you every success, Sir. I should also
like to congratulate Ambassador Michel Kafando of
Burkina Faso on his successful presidency of the
Council last month, and to thank Special
Representative Kai Eide for his briefing this morning.
We are grateful for the opportunity to participate
in this important discussion. The objective of durable
peace, stability and development in Afghanistan is
faced with daunting challenges. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617) portrays a mixed
picture and an overall deterioration of the situation in
Afghanistan. Four months after the Paris Conference,
that is a cause for concern, and this is a time for
reflection.
The challenge in Afghanistan is without doubt
difficult and complex. There is no quick fix. It requires
the sustained engagement and commitment of the
international community in support of Afghanistan.
With such support, considerable progress has been
made in recent years. That foundation needs to be
consolidated. A truly comprehensive strategy is
required to address the remaining intricate challenges
of reconciliation, security, drugs, governance and
development. To ensure effectiveness and success, such
a strategy must be built around and pursued with full
Afghan ownership. Capacity-building in all fields and
at all levels is an essential element of that strategy. In
that regard, the report of the Secretary-General points
out serious gaps and shortfalls, which must be
addressed.
Lack of security remains a major problem and
concern. However, the report does not seem to be very
clear on the reasons for the insecurity. While it
provides some statistics, it is devoid of information on
the multiple and complex factors that contribute to
insecurity in Afghanistan. Moreover, it provides a
myopic view of the cross-border issue, with an isolated
reference that is not only unsubstantiated, but on which

29

S/PV.5994

the United Nations Mission of Assistance in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has neither the capacity nor
expertise for independent verification. We expect due
caution to be exercised in that regard in the future.
Security has to be addressed in all its aspects,
including the threats posed by the Taliban insurgency,
Al-Qaida, lingering warlordism, factional rivalries and
criminal and other illegal armed groups, as well as the
increasingly strong nexus with the drug trade. It is
obvious that these problems are primarily rooted in
Afghanistan and have to be addressed accordingly.
Attempts to externalize the problems are obviously
self-defeating, and we disagree with some of the
remarks made by the representative of Afghanistan
today. Apart from being incorrect and misleading,
those remarks run counter to the constructive
engagement between our two countries at the highest
political level.
Besides, security cannot be detached from the
wider issues of reconciliation, improved governance,
development and reconstruction. That myriad of
challenges requires a collective effort based on
cooperation and shared responsibility by all.
Much more needs to be done on counternarcotics. Short-term measures need to be
complemented by comprehensive, durable and longterm solutions based on alternative livelihoods and
development. As the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime recently reported, there is no point in
reducing opium cultivation if farmers switch to
cannabis. That is happening in some of the provinces
that are opium-free, for example in the north. The issue
needs to be seriously researched and addressed.
The
worsening
humanitarian
situation,
particularly aggravated by rising food prices, has to be
addressed on an urgent basis. In the battle for hearts
and minds, that freedom from want is as essential as
the freedom from fear, which unfortunately is also
being negatively impacted by the rising toll of civilian
casualties in Afghanistan.
Genuine national reconciliation can significantly
boost Afghan and international efforts to bring about
peace and stability in the country. Winning the support
of the peaceful majority is essential to isolate and
break the insurgency. We support the Afghan efforts for
reconciliation as part of the comprehensive approach.

30

The United Nations has a central role in the
international efforts in Afghanistan. UNAMA is not
merely an outpost, reporting on the situation on the
ground. It has a well-defined mandate, and we
appreciate the work being undertaken for its fulfilment.
It would be useful in that regard if the report were also
to shed more light on the efforts and measures the
Mission has deployed, in terms of number and
sophistication, to carry out its overall coordinating role
to facilitate a more robust and delivery-oriented
support process.
We agree with the observation of the SecretaryGeneral that in the end success depends on the full
implementation of the commitments undertaken by the
international community. The recommendation to bring
about a political surge also hits the right chord. It
underlines the need to look beyond the military option,
which, though necessary, is not the sole solution. In our
view, that should be complemented by an economic
development and reconstruction surge. The promises
need to be translated into tangible benefits for the
Afghan people, which is the surest way to win their
hearts and minds. We believe that an objective ground
analysis of the development needs and full use of local
resources and capacities must be part of the efforts to
improve aid effectiveness for development in
Afghanistan.
A peaceful, stable and prosperous Afghanistan is
in the interests of regional and international peace and
security. It is, above all, in Pakistan’s vital interest.
Apart from our Afghan brothers and sisters, no country
or peoples has suffered more than Pakistan from the
direct consequences of the decades of conflict and
instability in Afghanistan. We have hosted millions of
refugees over the years. We have been afflicted with
drugs, arms and environmental degradation.
Along with Afghanistan, Pakistan will therefore
be the primary beneficiary of peace in Afghanistan. It
will enable us to restore calm in our frontier regions,
whose traditional peace has been inflamed by war and
instability in Afghanistan, especially after 2001, when
many Al-Qaida and Taliban elements crossed the
border into Pakistan. It will enable the dignified
repatriation of the remaining Afghan refugees, an
essential step for the security and stability of the
region. It will enable our two countries to serve as the
hub for interregional trade and an energy corridor, a
strategic objective with immense potential for our
economic development. Pakistan’s commitment and

08-54872

S/PV.5994

support for the success of the international efforts in
Afghanistan is, therefore, clear and resolute.
Afghanistan and Pakistan are together facing the
brunt of the terrorist threat. We are suffering from its
deadly impact on a daily basis. As President Zardari
said in his address to the General Assembly (see
A/63/PV.10), Pakistan is a great victim in the war on
terror. We live with it, we are the target of terrorism,
but we will never succumb to it.
As a result of our role in the counter-terrorism
campaign, the security environment on our side has
deteriorated sharply. Thousands of innocent civilians
have fallen victim to terrorism in Pakistan. The
horrendous attack last Friday on a jirga in Orakzai
Agency is the latest of those condemnable acts.
Sensitive to the sentiments of our people, the new
democratic Government is in process of reaching the
national consensus necessary to confront and defeat the
terrorists. We are following a new holistic strategy
against extremism and terrorism, employing political
dialogue and socio-economic measures, but retaining
the option to use force whenever required, as
demonstrated by our ongoing campaign against
terrorists and extremist militias in Bajaur.
Pakistan’s contribution in the fight against
terrorism is well known. Much of the success against
Al-Qaida and the Taliban has been achieved with our
support and cooperation. If the number of soldiers
deployed and sacrifices made is a measure, Pakistan
alone has done more than the combined effort of the
international partners in Afghanistan.
In his statement in this Council on 9 July (see
S/PV.5930), my Foreign Minister outlined several
steps, including matching military measures that can be
taken by all sides to promote cooperative efforts based
on shared responsibility and full respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity in order to more
effectively address the security challenge, including
border control.
We are determined to carry out our part. We
remain committed to working together with
Afghanistan and the international forces towards that
objective. Pakistan will continue active cooperation
within the Tripartite Commission, which has been
recently re-energized.
Naturally, we expect reciprocity in such support
and cooperation, based on goodwill and respect for

08-54872

each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and on
a mutual commitment not to allow our respective
territories to be used against each other. No foreign
troops will be allowed to operate inside Pakistan. As
my President said in the General Assembly, we cannot
allow our territory and our sovereignty to be violated.
Such actions are not helpful in eliminating the terrorist
menace and actually serve to empower the forces
against which we fight together.
Our relationship with Afghanistan is rooted in
history. It is a multifaceted engagement between our
two peoples, who are bound by age-old fraternal,
cultural and religious ties. The destinies of our two
countries are interlinked. In his statement to the
Council, Foreign Minister Qureshi outlined a vision of
diversifying and strengthening this relationship. He
called for overcoming suspicion and building trust and
goodwill, a sentiment also echoed and reciprocated by
Afghan Foreign Minister Spantâ.
I am pleased to note that we are firmly on that
track. We intend to press forward on all possible
avenues of cooperation. The recent meeting in New
York between President Zardari and President Karzai
and the meeting between the two Foreign Ministers
have built upon the positive momentum of the earlier
contacts at the highest political levels. The two sides
have agreed on a comprehensive and constructive
engagement on multiple tracks, including political,
military, intelligence and economic cooperation.
Foreign Minister Spantâ is expected to visit
Pakistan during this month. Pakistan will be hosting a
meeting of a mini-jirga in Islamabad on 27 and
28 October. We expect that people-to-people forum to
make a useful contribution towards bringing about
peace and stability in Afghanistan. The PakistanAfghanistan Joint Economic Commission is expected
to meet in Kabul in November. We are arranging to
convene the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan in Islamabad in January
2009.
We will continue to help the reconstruction
efforts in Afghanistan. Of our total commitment of
$320 million, $130 million has already been utilized on
various socio-economic and infrastructure projects.
Despite the shortage of wheat in Pakistan, we are
fulfilling our commitment to provide 50,000 tons of
wheat at concessional rates to Afghanistan.

31

S/PV.5994

Meanwhile, as we continue to host millions of
Afghan refugees, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the international
community need to do more for their early repatriation
and their rehabilitation inside Afghanistan.
Let me conclude by saying that, through mutual
cooperation and the support of the international
community, we can achieve our common objective of
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan and the
region. We have to succeed. We owe it to our present
and future generations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. de Klerk (Netherlands): Thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing the Netherlands to take the
floor. We would like to add a few remarks to this
debate in view of our commitment to peace, security
and development in Afghanistan. We are offering
support as a donor, in line with our commitment made
during the Paris Conference and in support of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, as well as
by providing around 2,000 Dutch soldiers as part of the
International Security Assistance Force mandated by
the Security Council.
Let me start by expressing our deep appreciation
for the tremendous efforts undertaken by the United
Nations family in Afghanistan under the able
leadership of Ambassador Eide. We are grateful to
Ambassador Eide for his clear and sober introduction
this morning and for his tireless efforts.
We continue to support the consolidation and
expansion of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan,
notwithstanding
the
difficult
circumstances. A stronger United Nations footprint in
Afghanistan will help enhance the unity of purpose of
the international community in Afghanistan.
In his recent report (S/2008/617), the SecretaryGeneral refers to the deteriorating security situation in
parts of the country. We share his observations and
concerns. Indeed, the Taliban is stepping up its attacks
on Government representatives and aid workers and
has intensified a campaign of violence and intimidation
against the local population.
This terror and violence should strengthen our
resolve to keep working towards our long-term
objectives. There are no easy shortcuts, and we should
not trade in our long-term objective of a stable

32

Afghanistan free of terrorism and at peace with the
outside world for short-term security gains.
The strongest weapon against the Taliban is not a
military one. It is a civilian one: it is a competent
Afghan Government which is viewed as legitimate and
which enjoys growing credibility among the Afghan
population. The administration needs to be embodied
by officials of personal integrity who are willing to
reach out to all tribes and communities under their
jurisdiction. We therefore respectfully encourage the
Afghan Government to redouble its efforts in fighting
corruption and involvement in illicit activities within
its ranks and to appoint officials on the basis of their
competence, integrity and ability to reach out to all
communities. We hope and trust that the recent
appointments by President Karzai will contribute to
strengthening this governance.
The elections next year are a vital test which we
cannot afford to fail. First and foremost, we have to
ensure that the elections are conducted in a safe
environment. Here, the international forces have an
important role to play, but the Afghan security forces
will be at the forefront. Increasingly, those forces are
taking responsibility for security in a growing number
of zones. By and large the Afghan army is doing a
professional job, thereby commanding respect and trust
from the population, and we would hope to see similar
developments in the Afghan police force. Training
efforts to bolster the strength of the Afghan National
Police have to be a priority for all those involved.
We are aware that much more progress in the area
of security is needed, not only with a view to the
upcoming elections, but also to allow the Afghan
Government, with our support, to increasingly provide
basic services such as health care, education and
improved infrastructure for the Afghan people. Those
are the features that will help to strengthen the belief
and trust of the Afghan population in their Government
and that thus will help rebuild and further stabilize the
country.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): I would like to align
myself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of France on behalf of the European
Union. I would also like to join my colleagues in
extending my thanks to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, for introducing the

08-54872

S/PV.5994

comprehensive report (S/2008/617) and for today’s
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. In addition, I
would like to thank our Afghan colleague for his
comments.

ownership in all aspects of governance, exemplified in
the launch of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, and recall that the Afghanistan Compact will
remain the agreed basis of our work.

The report provides a very substantial analysis
and, most important, conveys a sense of urgency. We
fully share the observation that it is imperative for the
Afghan people to see and experience, in a more
concrete manner, the results of the reconstruction
efforts undertaken both by the Afghan Government and
by the international community. In our view,
acceleration is required in the translation of the Paris
commitments into concrete political action. In that
vein, I would like to thank Special Representative Kai
Eide for his untiring efforts to enhance coordination
and to move all actors forward on our joint agenda.

Increased efforts on the part of the Afghan
Government are required to improve governance across
the board and in particular to intensify the fight against
corruption. We should encourage the Afghan
Government to take further decisive action in combating
terrorism, corruption and the trafficking and production
of drugs and their chemicals precursors; and to continue
the reform of the justice sector in order to be able to
continue to improve the human rights situation.

As one of the major international partners in
assistance to Afghanistan and a major contributor to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF),
Germany is strongly committed to continue its
comprehensive support for the international efforts
under the umbrella of the United Nations.
The report of the Secretary-General rightly draws
a mixed picture of the current situation in Afghanistan.
Despite the substantial challenges still facing us there,
we should not forget that only seven years ago
Afghanistan was a country where the population did
not generally have access to basic health services,
where human rights were violated and where women
were denied access to education and public office.
Against that background, we can clearly acknowledge
the positive achievements of the Afghan Government,
supported by the international community.
In the words of German Foreign Minister FrankWalter Steinmeier: “Every strip of land that is
cultivated by a farmer again, every child that can attend
school again, every new hospital and every kilometre of
new road is a small victory for humankind”.
In 2009 and 2010, the election process will, in
our view, be an important step towards a stable
democratic Afghanistan. Germany will assist
Afghanistan in preparing for those elections.
The Paris Declaration provides the strategy and
the road map for renewed and strengthened efforts of
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community in facing remaining challenges. We
strongly support the concept of increasing Afghan

08-54872

We view the recent Government reshuffle as an
encouraging sign of the political intention to strengthen
the reform agenda. We are ready to intensify our
cooperation with the Afghan authorities in order to put
into practice the priority identified in Paris:
strengthening institutions and economic growth, in
particular by focusing on agriculture and energy.
Germany welcomes the leading role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in the coordination of the international civilian effort,
and I would like to take this opportunity to underline
the need to ensure that UNAMA is adequately
resourced to fulfil its extended mandate.
We are prepared to live up to our international
responsibilities and we are firmly committed to
continuing our support to Afghanistan. In that regard,
Germany has recently increased its development aid
for Afghanistan by €30 million to a total of
approximately €170 million in 2008. The day after
tomorrow, the German Parliament will take a ballot on
the Federal Government’s proposal to prolong
Germany’s contribution to the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) while increasing the
personnel ceiling to 4,500 soldiers through an increase
of 1,000 servicemen and women. At the same time,
Germany is ready to double the number of German
police officers in the framework of the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan, in line with the Union’s
efforts to reinforce the Mission. In light of the
imminent food crisis, Germany has made available
additional funds at short notice in order to enhance the
humanitarian capacity of UNAMA.
Germany shares the concern expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General on the issue of civilian
casualties. We note with great concern the number of

33

S/PV.5994

civilian casualties, due mainly to the increased violent
and terrorist activity of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremists and their asymmetric tactics. ISAF has
taken efforts to minimize the risk of unintended
civilian casualties and has installed procedures for an
after-action review. We recognize the need for
continued efforts by the international forces to avoid
civilian casualties during military operations.
In line with the Secretary-General’s report,
Germany would like to encourage all regional partners
to continue efforts to improve regional cooperation in
all fields. Finally, I would like to express sincere
gratitude to all men and women helping to improve the
situation in Afghanistan. They all deserve our greatest
efforts.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Norway is fully
committed to the rebuilding of Afghanistan. At the
Paris Conference in June, Norway pledged €500
million for the period covered by the Afghanistan
National
Development
Strategy.
That
makes
Afghanistan the number one recipient of Norwegian
development and humanitarian assistance.
As friends of Afghanistan, we are concerned by
all the negative reporting on developments in the
country. We must not inflict fatigue on our people on
the ground or on our soldiers and aid-workers by
speaking the language of defeat and decline. Let us
instead focus on the improvements and important
nuances in the security situation. Not all of
Afghanistan is equally troubled. Three quarters of
security incidents this year have occurred in a part of
the country where only 6 per cent of the population
lives.
I would like to raise three issues today.
First, let me mention elections. The United
Nations and, in particular, the United Nations
Development Programme, are doing an important job
in assisting the Afghan authorities to prepare for
elections. Our main priority now must be to assist voter
registration, to provide information about the election
and to make it safe to vote — in particular, to make it
safe for women to vote. The elections, which we hope
will demonstrate that the Taliban is losing ground,
must take place according to plan.

34

Secondly, we — the donors who pledged our
support in Paris — must honour our pledges. We
should all be held accountable at regular intervals and
we must let ourselves be coordinated, as we agreed in
Paris. At the same time, the Afghan Government,
which pledged to fight corruption and narcotics, must
also be held accountable. The recent appointment of
Mr. Atmar as Minister of the Interior is encouraging
and promising in that respect.
Thirdly, we must not lose time by slowing down
the efforts of Special Representative Kai Eide to build
a lean and professional United Nations organization in
Afghanistan. Mr. Eide was welcomed as a United
Nations representative who brought hope to our efforts
in Afghanistan, so we should not — to borrow a phrase
from the financial crisis — push our bad loans onto
him and wish him good luck. We have a serious
obligation to support him every day.
If our joint endeavours in Afghanistan are to
succeed, it is crucial that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) have the necessary
resources and sufficient qualified personnel to do the
job. That is the only way that UNAMA can fulfil its
strengthened mandate and meet our expectations,
which are high. We urge Member States and the
Secretariat to support UNAMA and Kai Eide in their
efforts to rebuild Afghanistan and to fight bureaucracy
when it stands in the way.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Eide to respond to the comments made and
questions raised.
Mr. Eide: The Ambassador of Costa Rica had a
couple of questions that I am pleased to answer. To
comment, in a more detailed way, on changes in the
Government of a sovereign country is, perhaps, a bit
daring. I must say, however, that I do know the
gentlemen who have been appointed to their new
positions. I am convinced that the dedication is there,
the knowledge is there and the proven experience is
there. That is why I also believe that those changes
have been welcomed across the board. That is why I
also say that this is an opportunity. The topics that we
are dealing with are really critical to our overall
efforts. That is why I also compliment the President on
having chosen to change ministers in those particular
ministries and having brought new dynamism into the
Government.

08-54872

S/PV.5994

Then there is the difficult question of
coordination. Can I say a few words about that? First
there is the question of resources: the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan was and is a small
and, as I said, a vulnerable mission. It is a mission that
was shaped at a period when one did not need the kind
of specific qualifications and experience that we need
today, and so to shift the profile is difficult.
Secondly, we are in a building where, over the
years and decades, rules and regulations have been put
in place that are probably of great value in regulating
activities, but sometimes perhaps slow things down a
little bit. I cannot blame the Secretariat because the
Secretariat acts upon the instructions given by Member
States.
Let me cite one example. We were given a
mandate by the Security Council in March; we were
given additional input by the Paris Conference on
12 June. In order to fulfil that mandate, we have to
formulate a budget that can provide the resources
required. The budget will then be debated throughout
the year and adopted some time in December, and then
the recruitment process can really start. That means
that, by May or June 2009, I will have the resources in
place that I need in order to implement the mandate
given to us in March 2008. Some members are
impatient. I can assure them that I am more impatient
than they are because every day I feel the pressure of
the lack of proportion between mandate and resources.
With all due respect, the Council votes in favour of
generous mandates and rather quickly, but does it vote
for generous resources just as quickly? That is where
the problem lies and that is where the people on the
ground feel the pressure.
There is a third element. I will be brief. There is a
long way, as we know, from generous statements of
commitment to changing policies and coordinating
action and to visible results on the ground. The Deputy
Permanent Representative of Pakistan said that there is
no quick fix. He is absolutely right, but nevertheless I
feel that sometimes some countries, here and
elsewhere, which should know that there are no quick
fixes tend to believe that for our part there is a quick
fix. We all know it is not like that. Let us work
steadfastly and stubbornly together and then we will
see results.
That is my answer to the question of
coordination. I am glad to have had this opportunity to

08-54872

respond. I can only say that putting the coordinating
mechanisms in place, as I announced I would do in
April, took quite some months to have approved, not
least before countries here and elsewhere added details
and comments. Finally, what I suggested a few months
earlier was approved. So things take time and there are
no quick fixes, but we will do our best.
As to the question of poverty versus economic
growth, the Ambassador of Afghanistan will be in a
much better position to answer that question, but I think
some basic elements can be mentioned here. First, the
increase in food and fuel prices impacts the poverty
level of the population. With regard to the growth level
that we are seeing, there are two or three elements that
influence whether it will be 6 or 11 or 13 per cent. That
will depend on the relatively small agriculture sector
and the influx of foreign money. That clarifies a little
bit the phenomenon that was questioned.
I am pleased to see agreement on two or three
issues here. First, we must do away with the doom and
gloom that are too widely spread, almost as a hobby, by
some. We should put an end to that — not as part of a
smart strategic communication plan, but because there
are substantive reasons for having greater confidence
in what we are doing. I mentioned the changes; let us
believe that they will result in changes also on the
ground. I am pleased about that.
I am pleased about the support that was promised
by everybody around the table to the new team that the
President has put in place. I think that is tremendously
important. As I said, I am pleased about the support
that Council members give to us and I count on all of
them to see that support materialize on the ground. The
Ambassador of the United Kingdom mentioned the
eight points that I had drawn up as elements that I want
to address quickly, and he supported me strongly and
will follow and monitor that. All of those eight points
require the full support of some key donors, so we will
work together to see that they are actually carried out.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Eide for his clarifications.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

35
