Resolutions adopted withoat referenee to a Main Committee

Requests the Secretary-General to invite the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance to participate in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly in the
capacity of observer.
2266th plenary meeting
11 October 1974
3210 (XXIX). Im·italion to the Palestine
Liberation Organi7.alion

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Palestinian people is the principal party to the question of Palestine,
Invites the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
representative of the Palestinian people, to participate
in the deliberations of the General Assembly on the
question of Palestine in plenary meetings.
2268th plenary meeting
14 October 1974
3212 (XXIX).

Question of Cyprus

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Grave/y concerned about the continuation of the
Cyprus crisis, which constitutes a threat to international
peace and security,
Mindful of the need to solve this crisis without delay
by peaceful means, in accorda-nce with the purposes
and principies of the United Nations,
Having heard the statements in the debate and taking
note of the report of the Special Political Committee
on the question of Cyprus, 10
1. Calls upon all States to respect the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain from ali acts
and interventions directed against it;
2. Urges the speedy withdrawal of all foreign anned
forces and foreign mHitary presence and personnel
from the Republic of Cyprus, and the cessation of ali
foreign interference in its affairs;
3. Considers that the constitutional system of the
Republic of Cyprus concerns the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities;
4. Commends the contacts and negotiations taking
place on an equal footing, with the good offices of the
Secretary-General, between the representatives of the
two communities, and calls for their continuation with
a view to reaching freely a mutually acceptable political
settlement, based on their fundamental and legitimate
rights;
5. Considers that all the refugees should return to
their homes in safety and calls upon the parties concerned to undertake urgent measures to that end;
6. Expresses the hope that, if necessary, further
efforts including negotiations can take place, within
the framework of the United Nations, for the purpose
of implementing the provisions of the present resolution, thus ensuring to the Republic of Cyprus its
fundamental right to independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity;
10 lbid., Twenty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item I IO,
document A/9820.

3

1. Requests the Seoretary-General to continue to
provide United Nations humanitarian assistance to ali
parts of the population of Cyprus and caUs upon ali
States to contribute to that effort;
8. Calls upon ali parties to continue to co-operate
fully with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, which may be strengthened if necessary;
9. Requests the Secretacy-General to continue to
lend bis good offices to the parties concerned;
1O. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
the present resolution to the attention of the Security
Council.
2275th plenary meeting
1 November 1974
3213 (XXIX). Report of the lnternational
Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the international
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1973/1974 and the addendum thereto, 11
Aware that the statement of the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 5 November 197412 provides additional inforrnation on the
main developments in the Agency's activities,
l. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and of the addendum thereto;
2. Commends the Internationa.J Atomic Energy
Agency for its action in amending the rules of procedure of the General Conference in such a way as to
enhance and streamline its performance;
3. Welcomes the actions taken by the lnternationaJ
Atomic Energy Agency to increase the leve! of the
1975 target for voluntary contributions to the general
fund by 50 per cent for a total of $4.5 million;
4. Notes with appreciation the reorientation of the
programme of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in view of the energy situation, by the adoption of an
expanded programme for nuclea4" power and reactors,
nuclear safety standards and environmental protection,
and the Internatiooal Nuclear lnformation Systcm;
5. Further notes with appreciation the steps taken
by the International Atomic Energy Agency in ex•·
panding its training programme to meet the urgent
need of developing countries which plan to utilizc
nuclear power at an early date;
6. Realizes the importance of the initiative taken
by the International Atomic Energy Agency in arranging for an intemational conference on nuclear power
and the fuel cvcle, to be convened in l 977, to review
and appraise the role of nuclear energy and alternative
energy sources in satisfying energy demand in th.:
future;
1. Commends the Inttl;national Atomic Energ:·
Agency on the steps it has takcn, a,; reflccted in thc
addendum to its ieport, in implemcnting Ucn,:ral
Assembly resolution 2829 (XXVI) nf 16 Decembrr
1971 to establish, within its framewor ..:. ,1¡¡ in•.e:rn:t·
tional service for nuclear explosinn, for pea-:dl,! pttr11 International Atomic Energy Agency, A 1111uul Report,
1 July 1973-30 /une 1974 (Vienna. July 1974) nnJ addendmu;
transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by notes
of the Secretary-General ( A/9722 and Add. l ) .
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twe11ty-11i11th
Session, Plentiry Meetin,rs, 227fith rneetin~ p'.11:1~. 1-·u.
