UNITED NATIONS’

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
THIRTIETH

ls19’th
NEW YORK

YEAR

MEETING: 5 MARCH 1975
Uf$ lyJc,$d
._ ‘il-l\’

NW 1 6 1983
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l8 19) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionofthe agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1625) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1819

(_

.

.),
-t

:,

.i

.

.
:
.
_’

‘.
:.

:

:-.

’

..
.>

.

81’.

,./..

.:,:
4’
‘_’
>-

..-

:

:

..
.‘,,
.‘

.
. .

1.

:,

.‘1i

-:.

. .
.

.i

NOTE

.i

\.

:
I

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbmed with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
,
Documents-of the Security Council (symbol Sl . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supp+ents of the O&Gin! Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document ‘indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infor-.
mation about it,+.I given.
The resohisons of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1%4, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of thp Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1%5, became
operatjve
, . fully
.
on that date. ‘:-r

.
‘_
‘_.

r
.

-

,.

. :
.~
-,. .:
_, .-..
i ‘r
. : ,
:- .
.

_.

*
.’

_

1

I.
,.I

.
;.

,

..1 . .l . T,;
‘_
.:
.;.

.
._
;
I

1.

;.:,

1

‘,

‘;
,‘.

-_.

. .

: .,

,

._ .‘a

.

:

1819th

MEETING

.

’

.

*

’

Held in New York on Wednesday, 5 March 1975, at 3 p.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Grozev
(Bulguriu), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. Datcu
(Romania) took the places resewed for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

President: Mr. Gonzalo J. FACIO (Costa Rica).
Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania, Sweden,. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon, United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.

j. Mr. ZAHAWIE (Iraq): Mr. President, may I first,
on behalf of my delegation, welcome you back to the
United Nations to preside once more over the deliberations of the Security Council. We still remember the
excellent manner in which you presided over the
first ,mee$ng of the Council in 1974, when both our
delegations had justi’ben elected to the membership
of the Council aldng with the other new nonpermanent membeii: ‘We wish YOU success in your
present task and promise
you our full co-operation.
i

Provisional
agenda (S/Agenda/l819)
i..
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. .The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1623

4. we should like also to express our congratulations
and appreciation to Mr. Huang Hua of China for his
outstanding contribtiiion to the work of the Council
in his capacity as .eresident during the month of
February.

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoptiki

5. As this is the f&t occasion this year on which
my delegation has spoken, I should like to extend
a brief but warm welcome to the new non-permanent
members of the Council. The representatives of Italy,
Japan and Sweden return to the Countiil with the vast
experience and the tremendous achievements of their
countries. The representatives of Guyana and the
United Republic of Tanzania bring to the Council
the vigour and the vision of young nations which
have already accomplished much in shaping the nonaligned movement, and hence the outlines of a new
world order for future generations.

oithe agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 17 February 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Coupcil
(S/11625)
1 . The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance tith the decision taken at the 1813th
meeting, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and
Greece to participate in the debate without the right
to vote.

6 . Our best wishes accompany the outgoing members
of the Council, the representatives of Austria, Australia, Indonesia, Kenya and Peru, each of whom has,
in his own distinctive way, made valuable contributions
to the work of the Council, It was a pleasure and
a privilege to serve with them here.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clerides
(Cyprus), Mr. Olcay (Turkey) and Mr. Carayannis
(Greece) took places at the Council table.

7. It may well be said that it is a matter of regret
whenever the Security Council meets to examine a
particular crisis, inasmuch as the. occurrence of the
crisis itself is regrettable. My delegation specially
regrets the fact that the Council has had to convene
now tp consider yet again the situation in Cyprus,
since this made it necessary for the Secretary-General
to cut short his visit to our part of the world. He thus
spent only one night in Baghdad instead of the two

2 . The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1815th
to 1817th meetings, and with the consent of the Council, I invite the representatives of Bulgaria, Saudi
Arabia and Romania to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber in order to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
1

nights originally scheduled. Be that as it may, we hope
that we shall have another opportunity to welcome
Mr. Waldheim as an honoured guest in our capital
and without the pressures of crises looming on the
horizon.

of the island. My delegation welcomes the renewed
assurances given by Mr. Olcay of Turkey that the
Government of Turkey has no intention whatsoever
of resorting to the partition of Cyprus and, in fact,
as a guarantor of the independence of the Republic
of Cyprus, will strongly resist any efforts that may
be made by other parties to partition or annex the
island.

8. We would like here to commend the most valuable
efforts of the Secretary-GeneraI.in dealing with the
Cyprus problem, as well as the efforts of his Special
Representative, Mr. WeckmanntMufioz, whose outstanding qualities and dedication we came to appreciate
from direct experience through his involvement in one
of Iraq’s own problems.

13. The representative of the Turkish community
in Cyprus, Mr. Celik, on the other hand, stated that
nothing in their proposal should be interpreted as the
last word; and I believe that Mr. Denkta~ himself has
also stated that his declaration does not prejudge the
final political settlement of the problem of Cyprus.

9. The situation in Cyprus is, as it has already been
pointed out, chronic, complex and, I might well add,
plagued with confusion. As the debate now draws
to an end, and having listened very carefully to all
the statements already made, one wonders what is
loft to be said about the dilemma that is Cyprus
without provoking further recriminations or taking the
risk of plunging the Council into the endless speeches
and futile debates that are the bane of the United
Nations.

1 4 . It would appear that there are good reasons to
believe that both sides want Cyprus to remain an
independent, sovereign and non-aligned State. Both
sides appear to accept the necessity of establishing
separate communities in the island. Both appear willing
to discuss the structure of the State and the boundaries
of the communal regions.
1 5 . Now there have been many calls made upon the
parties concerned to create the right climate for the
resumption of the negotiations. The Security Council,
in trying to act constructively in the present situation,
can do no less than attempt, itself, to create the
appropriate atmosphere for the speedy resumption of
the negotiations by calling upon the parties to start
genuine moves towards the implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX), by placing the Secretary-General
at the disposal of the parties, by calling upon them
to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General and
with the Council in order to achieve a just and durable
settlement of the problem.

10. My delegation takes its lead from the wisdom
displayed by the representative of Cyprus, Mr Clerides, in his opening statement [1813th meeting], when
he said that he would not reopen old wounds nor
attempt to apportion blame, in a sincere desire to be
constructive and not obstructive. Nevertheless, and
perhaps unavoidably, the wounds have been reopened,
and it is not my intention to add to the pain; there
is enough suffering in Cyprus as it is.
1 1 . The one glimmer of hope in all the gloom into
which Cyprus has been thrust is the almost unanimous
agreement on the necessity for the resumption of
the negotiations between the representatives of the
Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus. In the
circumstances, it is imperative to look for the points
of agreement between the parties concerned rather
than to emphasize the differences between them. The
unilateral declaration of 13 February has undoubtedly
aroused deep concern about the future of the island.
I would like to state here again that Iraq firmly
supports the independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the non-aligned status of the Republic
of Cyprus.

1 6 . We sincerely hope that the Council will succeed
in its endeavours and will not appear to have indulged
in yet another profitless debate.
1 7 . The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
Since all the members of the Council have already
spoken in this debate, I should now like to make a
statement on behalf of COSTA RICA.
18. The Government of Costa Rica attaches the
utmost importance to the post of President of the
Security Council. As proof of this, it decided that
its Minister for External Relations should discharge
that function when it was the turn of our country
to assume the presidency of the Council. It is for this
reason that I had the honour to preside over the
Security Council during the month of January 1974,
and that is why I am here today in the President’s
chair.

1 2 . My delegation finds deep satisfaction in the fact
that all the parties concerned have reaffirmed their
adherence to these basic principles. We take note of
the fact that in the declaration he made on 13 February, Mr. De&as stated his determination: “to
oppose resolutely all attempts against the independence of Cyprus, and its partition or union with any
other State” [S/11624, annex II]. We also wish to
recall on this occasion that during the debate on
Cyprus at the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly, the Foreign Ministers of both Greece and
Turkey condemned any attempt at enosis or partition

19. I appreciate the welcome given me by the
members of the Council who participated in the
debate at yesterday’s meeting and today. I also
appreciate the attention paid me by all the members
2

whom I have consulted. Their advice has been most
valuable to me in my endeavour to fulfil adequately
my exalted task.

was the breaking off of negotiations owing to the
unilateral action taken by one of the parties, our
immediate and principal concern must be to ensure
that the parties return to the negotiating table as soon
as possible, in a place and with a procedure that
are more suitable than those of the previous talks.

20. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity
to congratulate and offer my co-operation to the new
members of the Council, the representatives of
Guyana, Italy, Japan, Sweden and the United Republic
of Tanzania.

25. We have no doubt that it is up to the Cypriots
themselves to find a definitive solution for their
political problems by means of negotiation. But the
task of the Council cannot end with the resumption
of talks. Bearing in mind the danger for the peace
of the island, the eastern Mediterranean region and
the entire world which would be created by the
failure or the breakdown of the negotiations, there is
a consensus that the Security Council has the duty to
superintend their progress and in so far as possible
ensure that the parties will find new ways to reach a
peaceful settlement.

21. We are meeting here at the request of the representative of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
We were convened to consider an urgent problem
which, if not quickly resolved, could endanger the
peace and security of the world. Accordingly, I
believe that the Council would be failing in its duty
if, after having listened to the statements of the parties
concerned, it were not promptly to decide on a viable
solution which would make it unmistakably clear that
it intended to assist in a satisfactory resolution of
the Cyprus conflict.

26. One of the best means of helping to bring about
the success of the new dialogue is the active participation of the Secretary-General. The prudence and the
skill which he has demonstrated in the exercise of
his duties in general, and in particular in his peace
negotiations on Cyprus, bring him to the forefront as
the most able official to act as a moderator and a
promoter of these negotiations, which we hope will
be successful.

22. This debate, which started on 20 February
1975, has been a lengthy but a useful one. It has
enabled us to hear lucid arguments from the parties
to the conflict. We have been informed of the historical
background and present causes‘ of the conflict. It
has allowed us to hear significant appeals for harmony
from all members of the Council. But we cannot
prolong this debate any longer because, while we are
meeting here, the two Cypriot communities are drawing
farther and farther apart; their positions are
hardening; their rancour is being exacerbated; the
sufferings of thousands of displaced persons are
increasing and Cyprus is more and more the victim
of a terrible economic depression.

27. One by one the members of the Council during
this debate have expressed their faith in the participation of the Secretary-General in the dialogue to be
held between the representatives of the parties
concerned, a faith which extends to his Special
Representative, Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz. I have no
doubt that there is this consensus-shared by the
parties concerned themselves-to the effect that the
Secretary-General should be invited to make himself
personally available to the negotiators in order to
secure a better result for their efforts.

23. We must now reach a conclusion. In accordance
with what has been stated here, that conclusion can
be none other than the achievement of the practical
implementation of the principles contained in General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), which the Council
endorsed, thus making it binding, in its resolution 365
(1974), which was unanimously adopted on 13 December 1974. The principles contained in those resolutions
can be summarized as follows: first, respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Cyprus; secondly, non-intervention
by any foreign Powers in the internal affairs of
Cyprus; thirdly, the withdrawal of all foreign armed
forces and foreign military personnel at present
stationed in the island; fourthly, the return of the
refugees to their homes; flfthly, a solution of the
problems existing between the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriot communities through negotiations
carried out on a basis of equality, so as to arrive
freely at an agreement that is mutually acceptable.

28. The debate has also shown, in my opinion, the
consensus of the members of the Council on other
important matters; this will be reflected in the resolution which,. I hope, we shall adopt before the end of
this week.
29. In the first place, it has been recognized that
the Government under the presidency of Archbishop
Makarios is the only legitimate Government of
Cyprus. Whatever arguments may be advanced for a
constitutional restructuring of the island, the fact
is that as long as there is no constitutional change,
and as long as there is no election, in accordance
with new rules, of another head of State and a
corresponding Cabinet, the present Government of
Cyprus, which has been recognized by the quasitotality of the Members of the United Nations, will
continue legally to represent its people, and the persons
designated by that Government will be the only
legitimate representatives of Cyprus to the Organization .

24. The order in which these principles have been
stated does not necessarily imply the chronological
priority for their impiementation. At any rate, since
the reason for the convening of the present meetings
3

30. Secondly, it has been made crystal clear that
there is a consensus among the members of the
Council on maintaining. the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence of Cyprus. It is therefore
obvious that all members -of the Council reject any
attempt at the partition of Cyprus, or en&s or what
has been called double mosis.

grateful, could be a single draft resolution which would
consolidate the two documents I have mentioned.
35.

Because of the unflagging labour of such active

members of the Security Council, .I think that we

shall soon be abie to end this debate by adopting
.-unanimously. I hope-a resolution intended to
promote the immediate start of new negotiations
between the experienced representatives of the Cypriot
communities, Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktag.

31. There is a consensus too as to the undesirability
of the unilateral declaration which proclaimed the
existence of an autonomous Turkish Federated, State
of Cyprus. This decision, which was taken when
negotiations were about to start on’the future constitutional status of Cyprus, had to be unacceptable to.
the Greek Cypriot side. The result was the immediate
suspension of the talks, which we are now endeavouring to have resumed.

36. I should like to express to these negotiators my
confidence that their proven skill, moderation,
experience and love for their people will lead them to
find terms of understanding which, in time, will be
the foundation for peaceful coexistence and active
co-operation between the two Cypriot communities.
It is true that at times the task seems impossible.
But history teaches us that differences between other
communities which appeared.irreconcilable have been
overcome in the course of time. A good point of
departure is all that is needed.

32. Although we continue to regret the declaration
of 13 February 1975 [ibid.], it is fair to point out
that both the ad hoc representative of the Turkish
Cypriot community, Mr. Celik, and his leader,
Mr. Denktag, have reiterated that this action is not
intended to jeopardize the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integiity’of Cyprus; or to prejudge the
final result of the negotiations to be heid with the
Greek Cypriot side on the future constitutional
organization of the Republic of Cyprus. We must also
note that such statements are in complete accord with
the actual text of that declaration, which reaffirms
the determined Turkish Cypriot objection to any act
which would jeopardize the independence of Cyprus
or lead to its partition or its union with any other
foreign State. The declaration also reaffirms that the
final objective of the Turkish Cypriots is to be united
with the Greek Cypriot community within the framework of a bi-regional
__ ._ - federation.

37. If we read carefully the proposals on the organization of the.Constitution which Mr. Clerides and
Mr. Denktas exchanged through the intermediary of
the Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Weckmann-Muiioz, before the interruption of the
negotiations that were being held in Nicosia, we shall
find that they reveal much common ground.
38. Of course there are differences in emphasis
which at times make them seem incompatible. But,
in fact; some progress had been made. It had been
agreed that the new State of Cyprus should be a
bicommunal federation. Although Mr. Denktas had
proposed a biregional federation and Mr. Clerides a
multiregional federation, the latter eame close to the
approach of the former when he agreed that there
should be a substantial area in the north under
Turkish Cypriot control. For his part Mr. Celik,
speaking in this Council as the representative of the
Turkish Cypriot community, clearly. stated that the
proposals of Mr. De&as were not final, since in a
process of negotiation there must logically be proposals. and counter-proposals until a mutually
acceptable compromise is reached.

It is to be hoped that, if these are the purposes
of the Turkish Cypriots, they will in future refrain
from adopting new unilateral decisions which, like
that of 13 February, would eonstitute an obstacle
to what they maintain is their final objective.
33.

34. On the basis of the points on which the .debate
showed that there was a consensus, two working
documents were prepared which contain valuable
elements for a possible draft resolution. One. was
prepared by the representatives of France, Italy and
the United Kingdom; the other was prepared by the
representatives of Guyana, Iraq;’ Mauritania, the
United Republic of Cameroon and the United Republic
of Tanzania. On the basis of their praiseworthy
efforts, I had the honour of holding intense consuhations from the very moment I took over the presidency
on 1 March. For their part, the members of the group
of .three Western European Powers, as well as the
members of the non-aligned nations, in turn held
consultations among their groups, with other members
of the Council and with the parties concerned. The
result of this &&t, for which we. must all be

39. I am pointing out the areas of agreement without
the least desire to give an opinion as to how the basic
problem is to be resolved, .because, I repeat, the
buiIding of a new Cypy$ and the solution of the
problems related to it are tasks incumbent on the
Cypriots alone. But I cannot refrain from expressing
the hope that if negotiations are undertaken in a
new spirit, looking to the future, without looking back
on the errors of the past, peace will once again reign
in Cypr& and I also hope that with the passing -of
time a Cypriot nation will emerge free from the rancour
and bloody battles which have been the century-old
tradition of the two communities inhabiting the island
today.
4

.

40. The next speaker is the representative d Saudi
Arabia, and speaking in my capacity as PRESIDENT
I now invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

We would all get burned. But the simile holds good
in some respects.
44. Why am I speaking again? At the last meeting
I signalled to my good brother and colleague from
India, a member of the Secretariat sitting behind
Mr. Shevchenko, the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Security Council Affairs, that I wanted
to speak. He took my signal to mean that I wanted
to.see him personallyj so I missed the occasion to
speak then after I -had heard. the speakers, who, with
all due respect to their honesty, perspicacity and
lucidity of thought, found themselves going in circles
with no working paper.. At least, if there is a working
paper -either they do not trust me enough to show
me its contents, or, it seems, they have not come to
an agreement.

41. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
before I embark on my statement, allow me to
express to-you my appreciation of the fact that you
have come from your country specially to preside
over the deliberations of the Security Council on a
problem that indeed is taking more time to solve than
many of us had expected. I say this because, as the
Minister for External Relations of Costa Rica, you
no doubt have many duties at home. However; the
sense of responsibility of a leader who feels that he
should do his bit in trying to find ways and means to
resolve this problem is laudable, and all the more
so because your country is a small one, and we are
heartened by the fact that the representatives of
small countries are involving themselves in -such
matters more than they did in. the past. I hope the
message will not be lost on the major Powers when
they see many of us small countries taking an interest
in the afTairs of the United Nations.
:

45. I felt saddened-not so much for the gentlemen
sitting here, around this table, but for ‘the Cypriot
people who are suffering, regardless of their so-tospeak religious or national origin. They are Cypriots;
we decided that a ,long time ago: no enosis, and no
partition. That was the raison d’etre for Cyprus being
declared an independent Member State of the United
Nations.

42. I am heartened by the fact that throughout
the debate I have, on the whole, seen a -genuine
rapport between our Greek and Turkish colleagues,
on the one hand, and between the representatives of
the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities,
on the other. In spite of the minor accusations and
recriminations to which we have listened, I believe
that all the parties concerned are well disposed to
one another. I would not say that if I did not feel it.
There is no deep bitterness, or even the shadow of
hatred, although blood has been spilled and the
common people of Cyprus-I do not use the word
“common” in a derogatory sense-the people of
Cyprus have indeed paid a heavy price, whether they
are from the Greek or the Turkish communities.-

46. What has happened? Well, I did some research
about this fellow called Sampson, and I was told
he was not an Anglo-Saxon. I said, “For heaven’s
sake”, because I always have some suspicion about
our English friends, and I thought that since the
Labour Party took power they were not doing so many
things as they did in colonial days, starting with
Ramsay MacDonald, when things took a turn for the
better in 1924. You remember that year?
47. I heard that Sampson was a madcap, an
adventurer. I am not asking Mr. Clerides if that is
true; because that ‘may..be embarrassing, nor am I
asking my good friend Mr. Olcay. You know what
Sampson did? He cut off the heads of British soldiers
-not Greek or Turkish soldiers- during the struggle
for the emancipation of Cyprus.

43. I have already spoken on this matter in the
Security Council Why is it that I have asked ‘to
speak again? I mentioned that Cyprus happens to be
in our region. I was glad that my brother and colleague from Iraq spoke today, because Cyprus is part
of the Middle East. We are concerned. All those
countries in the Middle East are concerned about
what is happening in Cyprus, because Cyprus is the
microcosm of invisible forces and, if I may use the
term, of a tug-of-war that may be taking place without
our knowledge. But we feel it. I do not w,ant to
adduce facts and embarrass some of my colleagues.
I can adduce facts, but if I do so I may elicit
rights of reply, and then I shall have to- reply and
accuse. What would be the result? That would- not
get us anywhere. It would lead to increased bitterness. I have learned that the hard way; I .have .been
here many years. So is Baroody trying, now that the
Arab States have a little extra oil, to pour ‘oil on
troubled waters? No, because somebody might put a
match to that oil and then we would get nowhere.

48. I really envy the stoicism and the reticence of
our English friends, who never complained even when
he decapitaed their own compatriots on the island.
They did not even complain very much when British
tommies were hanged from the branches of olive
trees in Palestine in the 1920s and .193Os. That is to
their credit. But nobody can be as unemotional as
the British Government. We happen to be Mediterranean people, and it is a wonder how my good
brother. to my right and my good -brother facing
me have. acted more or. less like the Anglo-Saxon&
with sang-fioid. That is heartening because I see
hope in the new attitudes. of Mediterranean people
in approaching a question unemotionally, although
emotions may run very high among the peoples of
Turkey and Greece and the people of the Cypriot
communities-because they are people. How do I
5

.

know? I am an Arab. Once, in Paris in the 193Os, I
was sucked into a crowd as I went to the Place
de la Concorde one day, not knowing what the
demonstration was about. I was shouting my head off,
not knowing what I was shouting about, until machineguns were fired. I do not want to go into that event
in detail, but it was the Stavisky case, which members
will remember. That was in the 1930s. I apostrophiied
myself in Arabic: “Jamil, what are you doing here!
Get out of here” -in order not to be sucked in by
the Nazis. I told a Frenchman at one time what had
happened to me. He said, “Ah, il faut lire ti Psycholo& des Foufes de Gustave L&on”. It became a
classic.

53. But after all, I am a Member of the United
Nations; I identify myself with the ‘Organization.
I have done so for 30 years; and I believe it the
right of everyone. That is why I applauded our
President for involving himself-a Costa Rican, from
perhaps 7,000 or 8,000 miles away from the focus of
the trouble-in this question, hoping that it could be
resolved.
54. Now, what is the solution? What approach or
approaches should we try-if they have not already
been tried? And, no doubt, some have been tried
without the knowledge of many of us, including myself.
Let me be frank; I do not mince my words. I am
not going to embarrass anybody, so please do not
get uncomfortable, some of you-although if you feel
that certain remarks apply to you it is not my fault.
There is an Arabic proverb which says: “If you put a
saddle needle in your inside pocket, it will prick you
in the armpit”. Well, we do not know who has the
needle in his inside pocket. Once, years ago, I
mentioned this to a Foreign Minister; he asked me
whom I meant by the “perverted democracies” and
whether his country was included. I mentioned this
proverb-‘% you put a saddle needle in your inside
pocket, it will prick you in armpit*‘-so he put his
hand inside his jacket and said: “I do not have any
saddle needle”. To which I replied: “Search in the
other pocket: maybe you will find it.” That was as
far back as 1947, at Lake Success.

49. So what should we expect of the Cypriots, be
they of Turkish or of Greek origin--and, please let
me add, “of other origins”, because not all Cypriots
are Greek or Turkish. Some are from the Arab
world. They got to be Cypriots. They identified their
interests with Cyprus. Some of them, as I mentioned
the other day, are Maronites from Lebanon. Others are
Christians or Moslems from Syria. Ask me about
Cyprus. It is in my region.
50. But people are people, and I do not like to
categorize them. A people is a people because of its
way of life and its common interest-we settled that
point the other day-not necessarily because of its
religion. For if it were a matter of religion we should
not have had the European Christians engaging in two
world wars-praying on Sunday in the name of
the Prince of Peace, and the next day cutting
_Jesus,
-each others’ throats; So religion is not involved. Some
may have religion at the back of their minds. Take
my family, the B&oodys. It is a very ancient family.
It is no honour to be ancient; you must always be
kept shining; you rust when you are too old. Half of
it is Christian and half is Moslem. We do not say
“You are a Moslem” and “You are a Chris&n”.

55. Many of us have such needles which we hide.
But we cannot take such an approach to a problem
like this. I will start with Greece and Turkey,
Mediterranean peoples. The Mediterranean is the
cradle of Western civilization and, by extension of
the civiiization of the New World, so I think we
should appeal to those peoples with glorious histories.
56. The other day I mentioned -how tolerant the
Turks were, having myself been born an Ottoman
subject. Who can deny the contribution of Greece
to world civilization? We were proud that the Arabs
were the transmitters of much Greek culture and
thought. Indeed, had it not been for the Arabs, no
one would have heard of Aristotle or Plato. We should
consider ourselves a Mediterranean community with
common interests. No religion or political faction
should split us asunder.

51. So this is my counsel, my advice to my colleagues
from Cyprus: please do not make religion the pivot
of your differences from which all trouble may
emanate and by which it could even be intensified.
Look across that little strip of Mediterranean to
Lebanon. Lebanon has Moslems and Christians of
all denominations; it has Jews that live in peace
regardless of all the propaganda you read here in this
country about the maltreatment of Jews. They are
full-fledged citizens, and the people are thriving
because each one worships the way he wants without
making an issue of religion. I am not saying that the
situation is the same as’it is in Lebanon, but it is a
parallel.

57. But I go further than that: we should be considered a world community. True, that is utopian:
we have not arrived at that stage in society. Therefore,
scratching my bald head, I was thinking of how to
deal with this question as someone who hails from
the region, and I thought of several options, some
of which perhaps merit more attention and scrutiny
than others.

52. Who am I to come here and preach? And where
would it get us if I were to tell you what should
be done? After all, who is Baroody; why should he?
Let him mind his own business. The Arabs have
enough trouble; let them solve their own problems
before they come and give advice to others.

58. I will start with the Greeks and the Turks.
Mind you, if I say “the Greeks and the Turks”,
and not “the Turks and the Greeks”, it is that I am
6

going by alphabetical order. Let us forget for a Hloment
the historical background I gave you last time, because
I would just be repeating myself. Many Greeks
distinguished themselves in the Ottoman Empire,
and while the Turks ruled the Greeks until the
independence of Greece in 1824 or thereabouts-the
British sent Lord Byron, you remember, to incite
the Greeks-the Greeks did not suffer on religious
grounds, because of the tolerance of the Turks.
Why? Because the Turks were devout; they were good
Moslems. Both the Christians and the Jews were the
people of the Book, and the people of Anatolia
today are perhaps, I would say, as Moslem as the
people of Saudi Arabia-most of them-and they do
not hate the Christians, unless they are incited for
political reasons. Likewise, many Greeks are true
Christians. I know: they practise their religion more
than do their Western co-religionists, who, as I said,
went at each other’s throats in two world wars in
the name of religion.

future. But the members *of NATO should quietly
and silently try to compose the differences between
the Greeks and the Turks. After all, there is the sagacity
of our English friends, the lucidity and logic of our
French friends and the Mediterranean sentiment of
our Italian friends. The Italians are exuberant people;
they are affectionate and sentimental. Someone once
said to me, “The Italians are not good soldiers.
Look at them”. I answered, “That is because they
are more civiiized than you are. They prefer song
and the opera”. After all, the Renaissance started in
Italy, and that is to their credit. People are still
barbarians. They think that brute force, killing one
another, is a virtue-in war or peace.

59. Now, the one who is having a good time is our
friend Mr. Malik, because they have no religious
complexes any more: they are atheists. We accept
your atheism, in the sense that in the Koran it says:
“There is no compulsion in religion.‘* We cannot
compel you to be a good Christian or a good
Moslem, so be what you are. They have no complexes
about religion-with the exception of some people
who are using religion for political motives. You
know who they are; there is no need to mention
them.

64. As I have said, the first option is for the members
of NATO quietly and silently to try to compose the
differences between the Greeks and the Turks.
Unfortunately, events are following the same old
pattern: our Greek friends support the Greek faction
and our Turkish friends support the Turkish faction
in Cyprus. That is wrong. That is why I stated the
first axiom-that is, that there is religious tolerance
on the part of the rulers of Greece and the rulers of
Turkey. We see proof of that in this chamber.

63. I have mentioned three members of NATO.
There are others. I do not want to rule out the
Germans-East and West. And is it not terrible that
they divided Germany into two parts? Of course,
that is not my business.

65. Of course, the members of NATO may fail in
that attempt. If they do, we have to provide another
option or choice or alternative-whatever one wants
to call it.

60. Therefore, the first axiom, if I may say so, is
not to fan the flames of religious animosity, in Cyprus
or elsewhere. We cannot afford it in our part of the
world. We have solved this problem in Lebanon,
in Syria and in Iraq, regardless of what they say
about our Iraqi friends in the mass media, which
are controlled by certain factions which I do not have
to mention. That is the first axiom. Try to calm down
the Greek and Turkish communities and tell them
that what has happened is very grievous and very
sad and that it should not happen again on the grounds
of religious intolerance.

66. It so happens that Cyprus is regarded as a member
of the so-called third world, or non-aligned world. I
=Y ‘*so-called” because I do not believe in these
nomenclatures that are without substance. These are
cliches. Saudi Arabia is also regarded as belonging to
the third world, the non-aligned world. What is the
first world or the second world? We are one world,
and the catalyst is the Organization, the United
Nations. With all due respect to the aims of the
members of the third world, including my country,
I would ask: Is there any homogeneity among the
countries of the third world? There are all kinds of
special interests served by the politicians of each
national State. And there are national interests within
NATO too. If there were not, NATO would be a
solid bloc. We have found that it is not, that it is very
weak. I do not know about the Warsaw Pact; I hope
it is not very solid because if it is there will always
be a NATO.

61. Now, having prepared the ground,.we come to
the first option. It may not be practical because of
the special interests of certain States-and I do not
need to name them. I address myself here to our
Greek and Turkish brothers. Their countries arc both
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), are they not? Has anybody pulled out of
NATO yet? Of course, someone might; I do not know.
What kind of alliance is this when any suggestion of
arbitration between two parties evokes the fear that
one party or the other might be antagonized? This
is a very week alliance, let me tell you; it will not
work.

67. The proper way to proceed is to discuss the
question, to go to the roots of the matter, to talk
man to man, and not merely read out statements.
All these-words we hear are spoken with good diction,
but if we really try to find out what they mean we

62. I do not believe in military alliances myself.
I hope that we Arabs will not be forced into one in the
7

-

see that these are platitudes-beautiful platitudes, but
still platitudes. I sometimes wish that there was a
tax on words and prizes for deeds, There is an Arab
proverb which says: “Let him talk; he is not paying
any tax on what he says”. Because of semantics
and double meanings and rationalizations, most of
us. sometimes say things we do- not mean and mean
things we do not say. I have said time and again
that I wish we communicated like birds, by chirping
and twittering, instead-of putting various meanings
on words. As an example of what I am saying I would
refer to the famous resolution 242 (1967). I -told the
Council at the time that this resolution would backfire.
The word ‘the” was not put in before the words
“territories occupied in the recent conflict”, and so
everyone puts a different interpretation on the phrase.
Words, words, words-as Hamlet said to Poionius.
If Polonius were alive today, he would still be
mystified. Why should -we live by the words or the
resolutions or the ?vorking papers?

preclude -non-members of the Council who are
involved in the United Nations and who think that
there is no alternative to this Organization expressing
their humble opinions about how to find a way out
of this impasse.

68. If the members of the third world and/or the
members of NATO would get together quietly and
have what the French call pourparlers, exchange
thoughts, perhaps the fears could be allayed and
something could be accomplished..I d-c..not_ know.
These are options. We are exploring the various
ways and means;

74. If the major Powers are becoming insolvent-and
I mean insolvent-having spent their substance in two
world wars and in subsequent wars, if their currencies
are dwindling to nothing,’ erasing the middle class
and, one day, the -technocrats too if the rouble
goes down, why should we expect that the peoples
of ‘Cyprus, Greece and Turkey will not suffer
economically if there is a drain on their economies
arid finances? You may now. be semi-bankrupt. I do
not want to name those who are bankrupt. They are
all becoming bankrupt now-Saudi Arabia, too, with
all its surplus, because when we sell our oil we
sell it for fiat money that is worth nothing, that is
dwindling.

72. Before I concliide;~.I wish to say- something
about my knowledge of economics and finance that
I learned when young in the Western world-not
from books in the East-in the City of London and
in Paris. I have no’crystal ball, unlike the economists
who -do not see anything in their respective crystal
bails but imagine that they see things.
73. ~Incidentally, we are going to have a new socioeconomic -order--not communist, not socialist, not
capitalist. It is ‘a hybrid, neither fish nor fowl. We
do not know whether in the future we shall be able
to identify the “animal”; we do not know into what
economicstraits we are heading.

69. ‘And we should not rule out the idea put forward
by our good friend Mr. Malik. He has a right to his
vieilvs. He said, “Why not have the five members of
the Council meet together?‘*. He was referring, of
course, to the major Powers, the permanent members
of the Council-I shall not use the -word “superPowers” because I do not want to hurt you, Mr. Malik;
I do not want to go into your squabbles with youknow-whom. Why not explore the possibility of
meeting together, perhaps also with a selected number
of other members-three or four-in ord.er to find a
-way to compose the differences, on the basis always
of “no err&s, no partition*‘. Do you hear that,
Mr. Rossides? You are -the. one who, in 1958,
started me on this theme of “no en&s, no partition”.

75. Of what benefit will it be to Cyprus, -Greece
or ‘Turkey to be made more impoverished by
maintaining this conflict? Who will benefit? Of
course your rulers will-rulers always find a way’ to
eat and get themselves jobs. But what about the
people? Do you want them to rebel against you;
against your rulers?.

70. I do not want that gentleman, the SecretaryGeneral, to shoulder the burden ti by himself, but
we must always keep in mind that if his services
are needed he can be a sort of catalytic agent
between the parties concerned-and not only the
parties directly concerned but also those who are
dealing with the situation.

76.. ‘Let ‘me tell you, there is an awareness ‘among
people all over the world, including those of the host
country.’ ,Only yesterday we read that there are
2 million weapons in the hands of the citizens of
New York. If there is a crisis here and the Govemment does not have a firm hand, do you think the
people are going to take their soup bowls to- Times
Square as they did in the 1930s and sell apples on
the streets? -They will rebel. So ifin this great country,
full of resources, people are restive because of the
economic. situation, who do you-Greece, Turkey
and Cyprus-think you are? You would be rendered
insolvent. The people will rise against you. They want
to eat. Spending your substance on what-on
dissension, war and conflict? The’ people will nat
let you do it. If 1 were one of the people-and if I see
an ant I do not tread on it-1 would rebel. They will

.71. Now do not think that I have not jotted down
other- choices. But the Council has been. meeting day
after day and no text has emerged, and you are
going in circles-with all due respect to you as very
capable representatives of your respective countries.
I am not a member of the Council and I thank you
for allowing me to express my views. I cast no vote;
thank God I do not have to cast any vote, not being
‘a member of the Council. But that does not
8

rebel against you all, regardless of your religious
affiliations,
national origins or respective
Governments.

82. In his statement yesterday [18182/r meeting],
Mr. Cleridcs started by blaming Turkey for not having
implemented General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX) by withdrawing its troops from the island,
and implied that that was why the Greek Cypriot
side had again brought the Cyprus question before
the Security Council. In this connection, Mr. Clerides,
yesterday and during his. previous --statements, has
addressed to me and to Mr. Olcay of Turkey many
specific questions regarding the implementation of
resolution 3212 (XXIX). Those questions sometimes
took the form. of challenges.

77. So this is my last word to you: the unsatisfactory
economic and financial situation that prevails in the
world,-do you think it will be to anyone’s profit?
I am sure that if our Russian and Chinese friends-I
am talking as .a Communist-saw misery they would
not have a feast, because they are humans. After all,
humanism transcends ideology. We .are all brothers
under the skin, and people in want should be objects
of sympathy for us all, regardless of our political
persuasions. Or, are we hypocrites here talking about
“human rights” year after year yet seeing people
suffer-1 am not talking about war; war is madnessowing to a lack of foodstuffs or a lack of the substance with which to buy those foodstuffs so essential
for the sustenance of every human ‘being? Do not
let your people rebel against you because of want.
.
.:
78. I shall therefore go back to the theme of my
Iast statement. I beseech you, both sides, not to be
rigid in searching for a solution. Do not go by terms
such as “federation*‘, “confederation”, “autonomy”
and “canton’*. Grapple with the question. Forget
any shadow of religious intolerance and think of
humanism. That is the persuasion that should take a
hold of each one of us, including us Arabs. Do not
think 3 am preaching this to you only; I preach it
to my own people as well.

83. I hope that the Greek Cypriot side appreciates
that the utilization of New York in general and this
chamber in particular as a sounding-box for propaganda effects is not the right way to obtain correct
answers to these questions. The answers to all of
these questions can and shall be given at the negotiating
table. Had the Greek side preferred the continuation
of..the. talks to coming to -New. York for political
reasons, some of the questions raised would probably
have been answered by now. I again -most sinceiely
urge Mr. Clerides to return to the negotiation table
and resume negotiations with Mr. Dcnktas as early
as possible.
84. I should like to repeat here what is already
on record: that the implementation of resolution 3212
(XXIX) does not only mean the withdrawal of the
Turkish troops from the island. It has to be taken up
and implemented in toto. The Turkish side has on
various occasions in the past, both in the General
Assembly and in the Security Council, made it clear,
and placed on record, in what conditions the Turkish
troops would be withdrawn from the island.. We
stated that in view of the security risk involved for
the Turkish- Cypriot community-which, being
numerically the smaller and militarily by far the
weaker, had always been the losing party in Cyprus
for the last 12 years-both the..question of the withdrawal of troops and the- question of refugees were
political problems which should and must be taken
up only within the framework of a final political
settlement.

79.: With the permission of the members of the
Council and while impatiently awaiting the emergence
of something from your deliberations which I will
take to heart and scrutinize in the hope that it will
yield results, I do ask you to be tolerant with me
and indulgent and, depending on what emerges from
any deliberations, overt or covert, allow me to address
the Council again.
80. The PRESIDENT (interpretufion from Spanish):
I should like to inform the Council that Mr. Celik
has asked to be allowed to make a further statement.
In conformity with the decision taken by the ‘Council
at the 1813th meeting to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Celik, I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

85.. There must first be an agreement on the constitutional problem, as a result of which the security
problem will be solved, all Greek Cypriot armies and
armed elements will be dissolved and disbanded, and
the way- paved. for full normal&&ion, including
the withdrawal of .forces. Only then will the full
implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX) be possible,
‘and the sooner all concerned realize this, and the
sooner we go back to the negotiating table and
resume talks with a view to solving the political
problem, the sooner the implementation of rcsolution 3212 (XXIX) will be possible.

81. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, may I thank you
and, through you, each and every member of the
Council for giving me .the floor. I have found it
necessary to ask to be allowed to speak for a third
time in order to comment on some of the points
raised by Mr. Clerides in his statement before the
Security Council yesterday. It is not my intention to
enter into an unproductive dialogue with Mr.Clerides,
but I thought it necessary to elaborate on some
issues of substance in order to clarify the Turkish
Cypriot position.

86. Mr. Clerides complains to the Security Council
that the Turkish army invaded “his country” and
occupied 40 per cent of “their land*‘-meaning, of
9

-

-

responsibility? But this is Mr. Clerides’ heelof Achilles.
This is his weak point; there are not many statements he can quote from. On the other hand, what
is the position of the Greek Cypriot side regarding
enosis? We have a Greek Cypriot community which,
with its President, leaders, institutions and people,
thought enosis, wanted enosis, spoke and wrote
enosis, and fought not only us, the Turkish Cypriots,
but also each other for enosis.

course, the Greek Cypriots* land, as he &n only speak,
as he actually does, for the Greek Cypriot side.
But Cyprus is our country; it is the country of the
Turkish Cypriots, who actually own more than
30 per cent of the land of the island, as much as it is
the country of the Greek Cypriots. It is this land that
has been invaded in order to prevent or to put an
end to a de facto enosis which had been completed
with the coup of lS.July, and save the islands independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and nonalignment. It was invaded in order to save the Turkish
Cypriot community from political, administrative,
social and economic discrimination, usurpation,
harassment, expulsion and/or annihilation in their
own land.

92. I do not believe in the usefulness of quoting
in exfenso statements made by Greek Cypriot leaders
on enosis, and it is definitely not my intention to
take much of the Council’s time over this matter.
I shall therefore let it suflice to give only one or two
quotations from Archbishop Makarios, from each
member of the Greek Cypriot delegation here, and
from other political leaders.

87. It is this anomaly that has to be corrected.
It is the recurrence of these actions and unfair
treatment that first has to be prevented. It is the
enosis movement and struggle that first has to be
forgotten. When that is done, Mr. Clerides may rest
assured that the Turkish troops for their part will
leave the island.

93. Fit, a statement issued by Makarios on 29 October 1971:
“I can now disclose that I have stated clearly
and categorically to Greek Governments from
time to time that I would unhesitatingly proclaim
enosis if I had the consent to this end, that is, if
Greece were prepared to accept enosis and share
the responsibilities for the repercussions from such
a
a venture.‘*

88. As regards bi-regionality, which is really the
de facto regrouping of the Turkish Cypriots for
obvious security reasons, as I have already said
in my previous statements before the Council, it has
been forced upon us by the Greek Cypriot administration, which has no one to blame but itself.

94. A second statement by Makarios, addressing
members of the Greek Army contingent in Cyprus
on 29 April 1973, on the occasion of the Easter
celebrations:

89. Mr. Clerides stated that the Turkish policy on
Cyprus was based on partition and not independence,
which is wrong. Partition was never considered by the
Turkish side as an alternative to independence. It
has always been considered as an antidote to enosis;
in fact partition is double enosis.

“We, the Greek Cypriots, see in your persons
the presence of Greece. We, the Greek Cypriots,
are still living the sorrow of the ‘Great Friday’ of
the Easter Week. But our unshakable convictions
is that national resurrection will follow our crucilixion., Our hard national path is lit by the light
issuing from the Holy Sepulchre. We shall march
on like Hellenes. The needle of our compass shall
always point towards immortal Greece-our
immortal motherland. At the end of our road is
Acropolis. Acropolis is the symbol of our aspirations and dreams.**

90. For years the Greek side tried to achieve enosis
through self-determination. There being no Cypriot
nation, as there are two national communities in
Cyprus, in our struggle for equal rights, which is
still continuing, we always demanded that if the right
of self-determination was to be applied it should be
applied equally to both communities-which would
mean in a way both communities opting for the
union of Cyprus with the two respective motherlands,
Turkey and Greece, and therefore double enosis.
It is only when enosis agitation was high, or it
looked imminent, that partition was thought of by
the Turkish side. It came up not as an alternative
to independence, but as an antidote to enosis.

95. Another statement by Makarios, made on
21 February 1974 in an interview on Netherlands
and Belgian television:
“Enosis is my as well as all Greek Cypriots*
national aspiration. This aspiration shall never die.
The fact that this aspiration cannot be realized
now because of certain difficulties beyond our
control is another matter.”

91. In an effort to accuse the Turkish side of having
pursued a policy of partition, Mr. Clerides, in his
statement before the Council yesterday, read an
extract from a recent edition of the Turkish Cypriot
daily newspaper H&in Sesi. If we were to quote the
Greek Cypriot press on enosis it would take us
whole months, if not years, to complete. But why
quote from the press? Why not quote official statements made by men in office, by persons of

%. A statement made on 16 July 1966 at Ayia
Phylaxis village by Mr. Kyprianou, former Foreign
Minister of the Greek Cypriot administration:
10

_

“The national leadership, which voices the wish
of all the people, is not prepared to accept any
compromise solution adulterating the people’s
national restoration. The Cypriot people want union
of the whole of Cyprus with Greece... The Greek
Cypriot people will continue to struggle, having as
their standard the Greek flag, the Greek virtue and
the Greek ideals.‘*

“EDEK believes that no solution to the Cyprus
problem can be everlasting if it is not based on
the inalienable right of the people of Cyprus to
self-determination. The use of the right to selfdetermination in Cyprus will result in the union of
Cyprus as a whole with Greece.”
101. A second statement by Dr; Lyssarides, made on
23 April 1973:

97. In an interview with the editor of the Daily
Star of Beirut on 19 April 1967, Mr. Kyprianou made
the following statements:

“The real cause of the crisis is that the people
of Cyprus have not been allowed to exercise their
right to self-determination. For this reason, various
groups have turned to different goals and thus a
crisis has arisen. Some people speak of ‘enotists’
and ‘anti-enotists’. This is not at all correct. All
the Greek Cypriots are ‘enotists’ and they are
prepared to make every sacrifice and to fight for
enosis , provided that suitable conditions are created
for its achievement.”

“Editor: There have been reports that your
Government is willing to accept a NATO base on
the island in return for enosis. Is this true?
“Kyprianou: Greece is a member of NATO. In
case of enosis, Cyprus would normally be part of
Greece in the same way, vis-bvis NATO, as any
other part of Greece. The question of a NATO base,
therefore, should be viewed in the light of this
reality.

102. The following is a statement made on 24 April
1973 by Mr. Ezekias Papaionnou, Secretary-General
of the AKEL Party:

“‘Editor: There are suggestions that your Govemment is not actively in support of enosis at this
present stage. Is this true? Is your Government
still committed to union with Greece?

“Allegations that AKEL opposes enosis are
contrary to realities. AKEL supports genuine
enosis without conditions, strings or exchanges as
the ultimate goal...“.

“Kyprianou: The Cyprus Government has always
been committed to a solution of the problem in
accordance with the wishes of the majority of’
the people of Cyprus in the exercise of their right
to selfdetermination. The vast majority of the
people of Cyprus desire union of Cyprus with
Greece, as is well known.”

103. A statement made on 4 February 1973 at Dhali
village by Mr. Clerides:
“The national duty makes it incumbent on us
to work positively to preserve the national character
of the island’s Hellenism, to strengthen the national
spirit of our people and to cultivate their faith in
the supreme values of Greek Christian civilization.
Our eyes must always be turned towards eternal
Greece, which is a symbol and a source of the
loftiest ideal of humanity.”

98. The statements I have just quoted were made
by the President and the Foreign Minister, respectively, of an administration which professed devotion
and still pretends to pay allegiance to the policy
of non-alignment.

104. A second statement by Mr. Clerides, made on
10 February 1974:

99. The following is a statement by Mr. Tassos
Papadopoulos, former Minister of Labour and at
present a member of the Greek Cypriot delegation,
at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly:

“The Cyprus.probiem is a national problem and,
consequently, the Government of our motherland
should have a decisive opinion on the ways of
handling it and to the point up to which we are
entitled to proceed at the present stage.”

“Our national tradition and ancestral endowment
have pre-charted the course of our evolution in
history, and no power, no pressure, no threat,
no intervention, no sacrifice, no time consideration
can .divert the course of history from its natural
evolution, which leads to freedom and to union
with Greece... It is high time Cypriots and others
made it their conviction that union of Cyprus with
Greece is a historical necessity... There can be no
freedom for. Cyprus outside the boundaries of
Greece.*’

105. But why quote individuals? The Greek Cypriots
House of Representatives, of which Mr. Clerides was
and still is President, on 26 June 1%7 adopted the
following resolution unanimously:
“Interpreting the age-long aspirations of the
Greeks of Cyprus, the House declares that despite
any adverse circumstances it would not suspend
the struggle being conducted with the support of
all Greeks until this struggle ends in success through
the union of the whole and undivided Cyprus with
the motherland, without any intermediary stage.”

100. A statement by Dr. Lyssarides, leader of the
Greek Cypriot EDEK Party, made on 27 March
1972 in Kypros:
11

106. This resolution of the Greek Cypriot House of
Representatives is still valid, and the events that have
taken place since 1967 confirm that the Greek
Cypriots-President, leadership and people-have not
abandoned their policy of uniting the island “whole
and undivided” to Greece.

side to conform to this, rather than take the Turkish
members with him, he preferred not to. participate
in the deliberations of that Council at all. Cyprus
today is still not represented in the Parliament of
the Council of Europe. This, I think, will suffice
to disprove what Mr. Clerides has said.

107. The Greek members of the House of Representatives who took an oath to implement this resolution
are the same members who paid allegiance to and
supported Sampson, who carried out the coup of
I5 July 1974 for the realization of the union of Cyprus
with Greece.

115.. .As regards the contention that shortly after
1964 the Turkish Cypriots enjoyed full freedom of
movement throughout the territory of the Republic
under the control of the so-called Government, I can
only say that the statement does not reflect the
truth. If the Turkish Cypriots enjoyed full freedom of
movement, why is it that thousands of Turkish
Cypriots, 6,000 of them, were not alIowed to return
to their own homes in Kiiciik Kaimakli (Omorphita),
on the outskirts Of Nicosia? Why is it that tens of
thousands of other Turkish Cypriot refugees were
not allowed to return to their villages, like Ayios
Theodoros, Mansura, Vroisha to name only three of
scores of others? Why was it. that those unfortunate
Turkish Cypriot refugees. were not allowed even to
visit their villages for agricultural purposes? What
kind of freedom of movement was it when hundreds
of Turkish Cypriots who ventured to leave the
Turkish enclaves disappeared, never to return?

108. Now these very gentlemen are here today,
pretending to be the ardent supporters of.independence and non-alignment. They accuse us of having
followed a partitionist policy -and of having dismembered Cyprus.
109. The Turkish policy. on Cyprus is very clear.
We are against enusis and we are against partition.
110. As regards bi-regionality, which the Greek
Cypriot side considers “dismemberment of the
island”, this is the only real physical guarantee both
for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and nonalignment of the istand and for the security
and survival of the Turkish Cypriot community.

.

116.. Greek Cypriots were allowed access to Turkish
controlled areas for legitimate business, and no one
can cite a single instance of any Greek Cypriot
being hurt or harmed while in a Turkish Cypriot
controlled area.

1 II. Ihe Greek side is against biregional federa.tion not because it will destroy the independence of
the island, but because, as can be seen from the
various quotations just cited, Cyprus &not any
longer be united to Greece “whole and undivided”.
In fact, not even a part of it can be annexed by
Greece. This must be the main source of uneasiness
for them.

117. -It is- true that’ we had to take some security
precautions against surprise attacks and Greek
military infiltrations. The Turkish enclaves, as the
name clearly indicates, were our last defence positions,
and we could not unconditionally open them to the
Greeks, who were all out to break up the enclaves
by armed force. We’even agreed to open the famous
Kyrenia road to Greek Cypriot traffic, on condition
that the users of the road acdepted Turkish Cypriot
authority, as we did when we entered Greek Cypriot
controlled areas, but they refused. Mr. Clerides, as
the Greek Cypriot negotiator, insisted that we should
both open the road to Greek Cypriot traffic and
accept Greek Cypriot authority at the same time,
which would have meant political surrender.

112. Mr. Clerides anain reDeated the allegation that
the Vice-President, &e T&kish ministers and the
Turkish members of the House of Representatives
had left the Government and the House respectively
of their own accord, and went as far ,as to say that
the Turkish seats in the House of Representatives
are still kept vacant for the Turkish members.
113. May I ask one question of Mr. Clerides: Why
has Cyprus not participated in the deliberations of
the Parliament of the Council of Europe since 1964?
Cyprus until December 1963 participated in the
deliberations of the Parliament of the Council of
Europe through a joint parliamentary committee
consisting of Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
representatives, as our Constitution demanded.

118. Mr. Clerides took .pains to accuse the Turkish
Cypriot side of creating fairs accomplis by declaring
the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus and of thus
having caused the suspension of the intercommunal
talks.
119. The probIem of Cyprus; .and therefore the -.
negotiations, started as a result of faits accomplis,
negotiations continued despite faits accomplis-&its
accomplis by the .Greek side, faits accomplis to violate
the Constitution, faits accomplis to establish secret
armies, faits accomplis to invite to Cyprus whole
armies from Greece with a view to destroying the

114. In 1964, Mr.- Clerides attempted to participate
in the deliberations of the said Council without
Turkish Cypriot members, and when he was told by
that Council that the Cypriot Parliamentary Committee
had to consist of representatives of both communites,
and despite the expressed readiness by the Turkish
1

.:

2

:

very independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-alignment of Cyprus and to uniting it to
Greece. There have been numerous other faits
accomplis that I do not intend to emrmerate here.
.
120. But despite all these faits accomplis we continued to negotiate and never ran to New York to call
for an urgent meeting of the Security Council. We
continued to negotiate despite statements by Makarios
that he would not accept federation, that he would
, not accept muhicantonal solutions, that he would not
grant us even locai autonomy. He offered us only a
degree of self-government. Here is what Archbishop
Makarios had to say in the Cyprus Mail on 3 June
1974:

equally to ah unilateral actions by all sides that
contributed to the present impasse.
125. Mr. Clerides persistently demands the appointment of a fact-finding mission to visit Cyprus and to
establish who is responsible for the Cyprus situation.
But the whole world knows by now who is
responsible for the-Cyprus crisis. The Cyprus problem
started with the inhuman onslaught on the Turkish
Cypriot community in 1963 aimed at uniting the island
with Greece. The so-called Government violated ah
Turkish rights in the Constitution. The Turkish
community was denied not only political rights but
also economic, administrative and even human rights.
We were denied drinking water; we were denied
electricity; we were denied birth certificates; we were
denied passports; we were denied the right to live,
to exist.

“We do not accept federation or cantons or
local self-government. If the Turks insist on their
imprudent demands, then the talks wih be a waste
of time, and their failure will be their end.

126. To cite only one example, men like Mr. Modinos
of Greece, who had no connection whatsoever- with
Cyprus, were granted Cypriot citizenship and Cypriot
passports and were employed by the so-called,
Government of Cyprus, but a few. young Turkish
.Cypriots born and raised in Cyprus, who during the
crisis of 1964-1967 were stranded in Turkey without
passports,’ were denied travel documents to -return
to the island for 10 years-solid years. -.

“If the talks fail, the Turks should know that we
wiIl withdraw ‘alall our offers so far made to them,
which constitute serious concessions. Greek
Hellenism is ready to.face all the consequences.”
121. We did not .run away from the negotiating
table, despite the fact that even Mr. Clerides, as
negotiator for the Greek Cypriot side, made provocative statements, such as this one:

127. I remember drafting letters to Mr. Clerides
on ‘behalf of Mr. Denktag at least six times on
this matter, with no positive results.

“Common sense ought to have led the General
[Grivas] to the conclusion that the carrying out of
talks for five years without arriving at a solution
meant that the Greek Cypriot side did not attend
them in order to arrive at ‘any solution’, or to
make inadmissible concessions for an ‘un-national’
solution and that their bargaining at the talks was
aimed at safeguarding the national interest in its true
sense.”

.l28. The so-called Government used its so-called
police not to protect but to subjugate and to exterminate the Turkish Cypriots. Tens of thousands of
Turkish Cypriot refugees’ who had been forced to
abandon their homes were not allowed to return to.
their villages until July 1974.
129. The COUP of 15 July 1974 was the last of the
chain of events that threw Cyprus into the lap ,of
Greece. Even Turkish military intervention did- not
prevent the massacre of whole Turkish Cypriot
village populations. At&r (Aloa), Murataga (Ma,ratha)
and Sandallar (Sandal&is), where scores of bodies
were unearthed in the presence of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
and
foreign correspondents, are only three examples; not
to mention Task&t (Tokhni), where the graves have
not yet been unearthed.

122. This quotation from Mr. Clerides is also an
answer to his question: “Why had there been no
progress in the talks?“. The reason is obvious.
Everyone wanted a nationaI solution-and we .know
what a national solution for .the- Greeks is-but
pretended to be negotiating independence with us:
Any solution which effectively closed the door to
enosis could not therefore be accepted by the
Greek side.
123. In the same way, it appears now that the Greek
side will not accept a solution which grants the
Turkish community an equal status and does not
reduce us to a simple minority on the island.

130. The whole world knows this. The United
Nations records cry aloud in support of our arguments.
Furthermore, UNFICYP and the Red Cross are
actively in operation in Cyprus. So why the need for
a fact-finding mission, which the Greek Cypriot side
wants for political reasons and is meant to be a first
step towards intemationahzing the Cyprus problem?

124. Mr. Cierides accuses the Turkish side of
objecting to expressions condemning, deploring or
even regretting the unilateral declaration of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. We are of the
opinion that any expression of regret should apply

131. That is why we are opposed to missions-not
because we have anything to hide from anyone, but
13

.

.-

;
-.

because the whole matter would be exploited by the
Greek Cypriot side for political purposes.

137. When I made my statement yesterday, I thought
I understood the Turkish position with regard to the
implementation of resolution 3212 (XXIX). I said that
Turkey alleged that the- implementation of that resolution, and particularly of the parts of its operative
paragraphs that call upon Turkey to proceed to a
speedy withdrawal of its forces from the Republic
of Cyprus and to permit the return of 200,000 Greek
Cypriot refugees to their homes, was something that
was to be carried out in parallel with the finding of
a solution or in the context of that solution. I
thought that that was the Turkish position.

i32. Having said all that-and 1 should like to assure
the members of the Council that I do not enjoy making
these statements-1 should like to put on record
once more that the Turkish Cypriot side is in favour
of negotiations. We believe that the intercommunal
talks are the best and only way to a peaceful
settlement of the Cyprus problem. May I therefore
once more extend my hand in friendship to Mr. Clerides and assure him of the willingness and readiness
of the Turkish side to co-operate with the Greek
Cypriot community to build a new, happy and
prosperous Cyprus.

138. I heard today with amazement Mr. Celik state
clearly that even that is not the correct Turkish
interpretation of the resolution. The Turkish side
contends not only that a solution of the Cyprus
problem must be found but that it must be signed
and sealed before the Turkish forces leave Cyprus
or the refugees return to their homes.

133. The PRESIDENT (inte&,retation from Spunish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.

134. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): Let it not be
imagined for a single moment that I enjoy exchanging
recriminations with Mr. Celik of the Turkish Cypriots.
What hurts me most is not recrimination but the
actual facts, and what hurts even more than the
facts is when they are distorted or slanted to produce
the picture his side wants. That is why I have asked.
for a commission of inquiry to visit Cyprus and to
establish the real facts.

134. But he went further, to the position which the
Turkish Foreign Minister had stated, clearly and
unambiguously at the second Geneva conference,
that the Turkish forces will leave Cyprus only if
and when Turkey is satisfied that, beyond finding a
solution, conditions have been created that make it
possible for the Turkish forces to leave.

135. I should like to say that had I known there
were Turkish Cypriots in Cyprus who considered
me their nemesis, I might have found great use for
them, because one of the problems I faced in the last
election was the accusation that I was for independence and against enosis. I have been repeatedly
criticized by the extreme right of the Cypriot press,
which represents only 5 per cent of the population,
and the only thing for which they can criticize
me is my commitment to the independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, and
its non-alignment.

140. And we have here this position: Turkey is the
sole arbiter of when it will withdraw its forces from
the Republic of Cyprus. 1 am amazed that such a
statement has been made before the Security Council.
I have always believed that ordinary words, in any
language-in EngIish, for example, as the resolution
is in the English language-have an ordinary meaning.
And I have always believed that the words “speedy
withdrawal” meant a withdrawal within a reasonable
time: perhaps weeks, perhaps a couple of months.
But I am told now that the resolution which spoke of
a “speedy withdrawal’* of Turkish forces from the
‘territory of the Republic-the resolution which spoke
about “urgent measures” for the return of the
200,000 Greek Cypriot refugees-is to be interpreted
to mean that none of these events will take place
until there is a solution of the Cyprus problem and,
even beyond that, until Turkey feels that the conditions are right for the evacuation of its forces from
Cyprus.

136. It is futile to repeat out of context statements
made from time to time by various Greek Cypriot
or ‘Turkish Cypriot leaders trying to establish that
either the Greek Cypriots or even the Turkish Cypriots
are opposed to independence. It is a fact that independence came to Cyprus and that both the Greek
Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots were very reluctant
to accept it. Cyprus has been called “the reluctant
Republic’*, because both communities tried to unite
the island with their respective motherlands. That
is the reality, and that reality cannot be changed by
quoting statements, by -bandying accusations and
counter-accusations. What is important in this debate
is to record the statement of Mr. Celik. I noted the
exact time he started his statement. It was precisely
5.40 p.m. And the statement is a real eye-opener for
the Security Council. It is the interpretation by
Mr. Celik of General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX)
which should be the disturbing fact and ihe fact
which the Security Council is bound to examine and
to answer.

141. I should like this important fact to be noted,
to be understood, by the members of the Council,
because it is very pertinent, in preparing a resolution, to bear it in mind.
142. Mr. Celik said that in the course of my addresses
to the Security Council I had asked certain pertinent
questions. It is a fact that I have, and the most
pertinent question I asked was: When will the Turkish
side begin w&hawing the Turkish forces of occupation from Cyprus? At least now I have -had an
answer to that. And there can be no covering up
14

of the fact any longer that Turkey does not-intend
to comply with General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX).

whereby the Greeks will have the right to remain
Greeks, and the Turks to remain Turks. But they
will live and coexist in the same island, administering
it for the benefit and in the interests of the people
of Cyprus.” And in defence of my position I added:
“This is the true national Greek interest in Cyprus.”

143. Mr. Celik invites me to go back to Cyprus and
resume talks. It is an attractive invitation; it is an
invitation which my heart and my spirit would want
me to accept. But for -what purpose? To return to
the negotiating table in order to accept the fait
accompli which the Turkish side has created during
the process of negotiation? What is the purpose of
this negotiation? Is the purpose to accept the Turkish
position so clearly and eloquently stated by both
Mr. Celik and the representative of Turkey-which
is that two things are not negotiable: any solution
which is not bi-zonal; and any solution which is not
multi-regional. These are not to be debated.

148. Yet Mr. Celik takes that statement, manhandles it a bit, and tries to accuse me of not having
performed my duty as a negotiator in the talks because
of my inhibitions as a Greek. It is an established
fact, a fact that can be proved by the records of
the negotiations which were conducted, that the
negotiations were proceeding very well, and that we
had almost reached the point of agreement, when,
for the first time, they were interrupted when the
Prime Minister of Turkey Mr. Ecevit-while the talks
were proceeding, and proceeding on the basis of an
independent State of Cyprus with a large degree of
autonomy for the two communities-made certain
public statements, first in the party memorandum for
his election campaign, and second before the Turkish
National Assembly as soon as he was elected and
assumed his duties. He said that he would not accept
any solution of the Cyprus problem other than a
federation-and this despite the fact that talks had
.been conducted in Cyprus since 1%8 and were
proceeding and developing towards a successful
culmination when he, Mr. Ecevit, decided to change
the course of action that was being followed at the
talks.

144. Is that the process of entering into negotiations-the dictation of terms by one of the two sides?
Mr. Celik says-and Mr. OIcay, the representative
of Turkey, has stated: “We will not accept any
other guarantee; we will not accept any other solution
but a bi-regional one. Welcome, Mr. Clerides, to the
negotiating table. Accept these conditions and the
negotiation is completed.”
145. Was that the spirit of resolution 3212 (XXIX)
when it called for free negotiations in order to arrive
at a mutually agreed solution? Supposing I were to
say to Mr. Celik: “Come and negotiate on a multiregional basis”; and supposing I, because I had
40,000 troops in Cyprus, imposed a multi-regional
federation in Cyprus, would he have accepted my
invitation? Would he have sent me flowers for inviting
him to such a conference?

149. Now, it is late; we have all heard long speeches;
and I say again that I will not follow the unproductive
path of regrettable, lamentable accusations and
counter-accusations. If Mr. Celik believes that we are
in the wrong, then let him accept a commission of
inquiry to establish beyond reasonable doubt who is
at fault. Such a commission will probably find that
both sides were at fault, and it might even go as far
as to apportion blame.

146. I am prepared to go back to the negotiations
this very moment; but let Mr. Celik, let the representative of Turkey, state that they will undo that which
they have done. Let them say openly that any
negotiation, any solution, is on the agenda-that any
negotiation could be for a solution of the Cyprus
problem based not on any preconditions which force
of arms made it possible for them to dictate, but
on free argument, negotiation, exchange of views
and reasonable attitudes. I would then gladly join
him in the intercommunal talks, and he would then
find me very constructive.

150. But we are not here today to apportion blame
for the past mistakes of the two communities. We
are here today to examine the question as to whether
a resolution adopted by the General Assembly and
endorsed by the Security Council--has been impiemented or not, whether there is any intention of
implementing it or not, and whether by a unilateral
fait accompli the Turkish side has destroyed the
process of negotiation. Those are the pertinent
questions, and to each one the answer given by the
representative of Turkey or by Mr. Celik has been
a negative one: resolution 3212 (XXIX) will not be
implemented, not even after a solution has been arrived
at and signed. And so far as the process of negotiation is concerned, there. is not even a word of
regret or remorse about unilateral action taken
arbitrarily by the Turkish side at the very moment when
proposals were being exchanged that would have
led to progress in the negotiations.

147. Now, Mr. Celik says that on one occasion I
stated, in answering General Grivas-the dear old
gentleman died some time ago-that in the Cyprus
talks I had made no concessions which were contrary
to the national interests of the Greek Cypriots. Yes,
indeed, I made such a statement. I had even been
publicly accused by the deceased old General, who
said that by my support and by my conduct in the
talks I was destroying the national interests of the
Greek Cypriots. To which I retorted: “No, I have not
done that. I am looking for a solution based on an
independent State of Cyprus; I am looking for a solution
15

lS1. Mr. Celik has suggested that I sought the
limelight of-the Security Council in order to air niy
views. Mr, Celik has forgotten that from 1964 until
this time I had never attended a meeting of the
Council and that since 1968 I have been patiently
negotiating with Mr. Denktas, seeking neither the
limelight of the Council nor any other limelight but
merely making a sincere attempt to find a solution
to the Cyprus problem, a solution not for the benefit
of the Greeks or for the benefit of the Turks but
for the benefit of the people of Cyprus as a whole.

and the Greek Cypriots. Any attempt to boost the
ego of one of the parties, which finds itself in a
difficult position because of certain internal political
situations, would only at this stage render more
difficult the smooth process of reactivating the
negotiations.
157. That is the appeal I make to the members of
the Security Council, through you, Mr. President.
158. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Greece.

152. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.

159. Mr. CARAYANNIS (Greece): I am amazed at
what the representative of Turkey said about General
Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX). He tried to make us
believe that that is a very fragile resolution, that
it had been arrived at during the last General Assembly
session only through painstaking efforts and that it
would be wise for the Security Council not to
touch it.

153. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I think that at this late
hour I owe a very brief explanation to the Security
Council, especially in view. of the statement which the
President has made that there ‘is”now a well-defined
movement towards the adoption of a resolution by the
end of this week.
154. I believe that the Security Council should
refrain from tampering with General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX), which was arrived at so
painstakingly. I know .&at the authors of that resolution-and I am referring especially to the five
mdedicated members of the non-aligned group of
countries, of which only one is represented in the
Council-are aware of the meaning of the resolution.
They are aware also of the motivations for Turkey’s
acceptance of it, as well as of the conditions on the
basis of which it was accepted by my Government.

160. Well, I personally worked on that resolution,
and Mr. Olcay worked on it too. At. that time I asked
him a question, and I shall ask him the same question
today: Why did Turkey insist on voting for this
resolution? I know that Mr. Olcay will not be able to
answer that question today, any more than he was
able to answer it then.
161. General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) is
drafted in good English. It is very clear. We all
.know that Mr. Olcay has a very good knowledge of
English.

155. The main issue the United Nations was facing
when the resolution was adopted was the necessity
of finding a solution to the Cyprus problem. The
situation has not changed since then. In its wisdom,
the General .AssembIy decided that negotiations
should take place to that end. The negotiators in
Cyprus and those familiar with the problem know
that all negotiations in Cyprus during its lamentable
history since independence have always taken place
in very special circumstances involving the presence
of forces outside the island. They know that statements were made indicating no possibility of compromise on certain basic positions. And yet negotiations were pursued. Now the negotiations are
regarded as imperilled because for the first time in
history the Turks in Cyprus have ceased to negotiate
from a position of physical weakness.

162. Now, Mr. Olcay said also that this resolution
was adopted only for the purpose of solving the
Cyprus problem. 1 very much agree with him.
It was adopted for the purpose of solving the Cyprus
.problem-but solving it on the lines of the resohrtion,
not on any other lines. And the lines of the resolution
are very clear. The resolution is drafted in very good
English, Mr. Olcay understands English. He understood English when he voted in favour of the
resolution.
163. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.
164. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): I listened very
carefully to the appeal of the representative of Turkey
and, if I understood it correctly, his theme was that
the Turkish Cypriot side is now in a position of
strength, by virtue of the fact that it has a substantial
military force in Cyprus and that it occupies 40 per cent
of the territory of the Republic. He alleges that in the
past the Greek side was in a stronger position than
the Turkish side and that as a result of this no solution
was possible. If I were to accept his logic, then
surely the same thing might happens again-*lnless
Turkey intends to force a solution. It is now in the
stronger position in Cyprus and, therefore, we shall

156. I appeal to the members of the Council, as
they deliberate on the kind of resolution they think
can emerge from the two long and arduous weeks of
negotiations and debate here, not to create conditions that would take us far from the only text on
which there is agreement-that is, General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX). That resolution indicates
what the issue is: finding a solution through negotiations, with the negotiations taking place between the
only two parties involved: that is, the Turkish Cypriots
16

have the &me problem again. Surely, the logical
conclusion from what he has- said would have been:
let all Greek forces and all Turkish forces stand down;
let the security of the island’s Greeks and Turks be
entrusted to a strengthened peace-keeping force; and
let free negotiations continue for the solution of the
Cyprus problem.
165. Why does the representative of Turkey want to
continue to have talks on the Cyprus problem from
an advantageous position of strength? Does he intend
to impose a solution in Cyprus? If he does, what
is the purpose of negotiating? Surely, the very words
he has uttered prove the absolute necessity for the
withdrawal of ail forces, as provided in resolution 3212
(XXIX), for a speedy and immediate withdrawal and
for the resumption of free negotiation for the purpose
of finding a solution to the Cyprus problem.
166. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretution from Spanish): I call on the representative of Turkey.
167. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): In reply to the representative of Greece, who has asked me now, as he
said he did during the General Assembly-and I am
sure he did-why we wanted to accept the terms of
the resolution, let me say it was because in all good
faith we believe iq all the contents of that resolution.
What we do not believe is that there is an order of
priority in the resolution-and those who have
negotiated the resolution with us know that too.
168. That particular resolution came after I5 years
of a very, very difficult situation in Cyprus. Those
15 years ended with a Turkish intervention in
Cyprus which followed a Greek intervention in Cyprus.
There was at that time and there still continues to be
a tense situation in Cyprus. The tenseness of that
situation is not due merely to the presence of armed
forces. It is due to the factors that brought the forces
to the island. The island has now reached a point
. where the ultimate settlement which may still save
its independence has naturally evolved towards a
certain position. We may not like it-the Greek side
may not like it-but this is the result of 15 years
of continuous bickering and warring. And, as a result
of this situation, we now find ourselves in a de fuer~
position where we cannot-d I say it very clearly
and very candidly-be expected to return to the
situation of 14 July 1974 for the greater glory of the
Archbishop. It is not possible to revert to that
situation. .We have to take .the situation from where
we are.
t69. I tian solemnly state, on behalf of my Govemment, that Tuikey has no intention at all of keeping
its forces there. Turkey has no intention at all of
partitioning the island. We do not intend to impose
a “Turkish” solution on the island. What we want
is for the Turks of the island to feel free from all the
threats under which they have lived for so long.
We want to rest assured that the island will become

what it has never been-a truly independent island,
a ‘truly non-aligned island. And I address myself
to the non-aligned world, to which so far only the
Greek side-which calls itself the “Greek Govemment’*-has been able to appeal, to tell it that we
intend that the island should be a non-aligned island
and not what it is at present. All this is a process
which is going to take place through negotiations;
there is no other way. But we cannot accept that,
for the negotiations to start, we should return to the
situation of 14 July 1974, when there was no possibility for negotiation anyway. We were under a threat
from the Archbishop either to accept something or
leave the table. That was the position always taken
by the Greek side.
170. I am being very candid. One has to realize
that there are irreversible situations in a political
world. We are not living in a laboratory. Things
have happened in Cyprus that I wish had not happened;
but, unfortunately, they have happened. It is not
through us that they have happened.
171. Sampson-to whose intervention Mr. Baroody
has given so much importance today, indicating even
its origin-was not a creation of the Turkish r&d.
The coup of the colonels was not a Turkish invention.
172. We always come back to the. position of
regretting that things have happened which should
not have happened. Those are mistakes, muximu
culpa; therefore, they have to be forgiven and we have
to start all over again. “All over again” is, I submit,
a situation in which Turkey always finds itself the
underdog. It is a situation which we will not tolerate;
we cannot tolerate that situation.
173. There is a oolitical nrobiem affecting all of us
around this table -which has to be solved. fwish that
it may be solved. My Government’s only hope is that
it will be solved, but that will be through negotiations
and not by a return to a situation in which the other
side need not negotiate, as it has not negotiated for
the past 10 years. If this was, unfortunately, the
only way we found to bring then to the negotiating
table, too bad.
174. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Greece.
175. Mr: CARAYANNIS (Greece): I shall not take
up the Council’s time in this exchange of views, but
the representative of Turkey, at the very beginning
of his statement, said something about “priorities in
resolution 3212 (XXIX)“. I would only like to recall
the facts to the members of the Council and to refer
them to the verbatim records of the General Assembly
according to which the representative of Algeria, one
of the sponsors of the draft resolution, indicated the
priorities of that resolution before the vote was taken.’

176. With regard to what Mr. Olcay told us-that
we cannot return to the situation of 14 July-nobody
is asking Mr. Olcay to return to the situation of 14 July.
The only thing we ask of him is to return to a decent
situation.

careless as to wound, even unwittingly, my brother
and good friend, except that I would like to draw his
attention to the fact that I deal with subjects in the
United Nations, not in cliches and rubrics, but in
an unorthodox, personal, individualistic manner.

177. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.

183. I know why he is smarting about certain remarks.
I said that I for one, and I repeat it, glory in the
fact that there is a Mediterranean country-I am
paraphrasing what I have said, not today but on many
occasions, before my good friend Mr. Plaja spokewhose people do not have the heart to fight and
kiil, and I respect them.

178. Mr. CLERIDES (Cyprus): I have listened again
to the representative of Turkey giving assurances that
it is not the intention of the Turkish Government
to keep its forces in Cyprus. The representative
was trying to be very convincing on that issue. But
I noted with regret that he never stated when it is
the intention of the Turkish Government to withdraw
its forces. Is it the intention of the Turkish Govemment to proceed in the next two months speedily to
withdraw them? Is it the intention of the Turkish
Government to maintain them there until a solution
is found; or, as Mr- Celik said, even after a solution
is found, until Turkey is satisfied that all is well with
Cyprus? An answer to that would have been much
more convincing. I regret that he has failed to be
convincing as far as I am concerned, because he has
not given a date when this auspicious event, the
withdrawal of Turkish forces from the Republic, will
occur.

184. Our actions are predicated on peace in the
United Nations. We have not reached utopia yet.
But perhaps I said that, because the Italians are
so civilized, I do. not think they made good soliders.
There is nothing wrong with that. We Arabs sometimes
are very bad soldiers in many respects. So he should
think that it is a wonderfui thing that they consider
the sanctity of life more important than going and
murdering somebody whom they do not know
because they have been indoctrinated by their Govemments, which say “go and kill the enemy”.
185. That is brutality. And I mentioned in this context
that you are more civilized than are people who
have lived in the north, because you civilized
Europe, you, Italy. The Renaissance started in
Europe. The British were barbarians before the
Nromans came and slew Harold in 1066. But then
the Normans had taken a lot from Rome. And where
was Rome? In Italy. See? And the Renaissance, where
did it start? In England or in Germany?.The Germans
were the Huns-Attila and all that. I am talking of
history. So why are you so sensitive? If you want to
be a soldier, go and get into the army. But you are
a diplomat and we are dedicated here to peace.

179. Mr. PLAJA (Italy) (interpretation from French):
I recognize that Mr. Baroody had no intention of
being discourteous to anyone whatsoever in his
remarks, and I have known him well and for a long
time. I think, however, that he would not be surprised
to hear me say that some of his remarks seemed
to me out of order, and I would prefer to disregard
them.
180. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I have a request to speak from the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

186. The country of this gentleman, the SecretaryGeneral, had an empire and it was a sort of
commonwealth. They did not become less civilized
when they lost their power. They became perhaps
more civilized. The Austrians were always civilized.
I have known them for 50 years. He does not take
exception to the fact that they are a small Power
and that they do not wield power. Power means war.
We abuse power, as individuals and as nations.
That is why we are in trouble.

181. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I have no
choice but to reply to my good friend, the representative of Italy, and I mean good friend because
we are friends, at least outside this chamber. But
how can he say that what I said was out of order?
I thought that the essence of the United Nations
was free speech and free thought, and for one thing
I must say that the approach to dealing with any
question should be individual and not, as I have said
time and again, platitudinous. My good friend should
have been briefed if he had not perhaps paid much
attention to my speeches since he was appointed
Ambassador of Italy, which is a country very dear
to our hearts. When I say dear to our hearts, it is
not to my heart only but to the hearts of the Arabs.

187. Who am I to say when we abuse power and
when we do not abuse power? I am a human being
entitled to my thoughts. And you want me to wear the
straitjacket of courtesy and the gioves. That is ali
right when you are accredited to a country as
Ambassador and there is decorum and there are the
cocktail parties, and you- have to know what to say
and what not to say. But here it is a- free forum,
for heaven’s sake, my good friend. If I hurt you, I did
not mean to. If you want an apology from me I say
it in public. There is no apology; there is no-difference

182. In that regard I want to mention something.
We are honoured that the President of Italy is, I think
today, visiting Saudi Arabia. How could I be so
18

between you and me. Therefore, I was not out of
order. I think you were a little over-sensitive, my
good friend.

to make their arguments public and they have done
so. Furthermore, all members of the Council- have
stated their points of view, and other Members of the
United Nations have participated in the debate.

188. Mr. PLAZA (Italy) (inrerprerationfrom French):
Not only did I not wish, but I would not have
dared, to say that Mr. Baroody was out of order.
I do not know whether hors de propos is the same
as “out of order”? But I should like to end this
exchange with the same expressions of friendship as
those of Mr. Baroody, particularly on the occasion
which he just mentioned, the visit of my President
to his country, to His Majesty the King.

191. I believe that it is our duty not unnecessarily
to postpone a decision which we hope might lead to
fruitful negotiations on the solution of the serious
problems confronting Cyprus, negotiations between
the representatives of the two Cypriot communities,
with the active personal participation of the SecretaryGeneral, if that were to be decided. In that way we
would promptly contribute to alleviating the tragedy
which the people of Cyprus are suffering.

189. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): This is
simply to announce that I am not going to exercise
my undoubted right of reply.

The meeting rose at 6.45 p-m.
Notes

190. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): During the weeks which have elapsed since this
debate began, the parties have had ample opportunity

I See official Recoids of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 2275th meeting.

19

HOW TO OBTAINUNITED

NATIONS PUBLICAIIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLlCATlONS

DES NATION8 UNIES

tcS publications des Nations Unies sent en vcnte dans les librairks et ies agences &positaircs du
monde entier. lnformez-vows auprks de votrc libraire ou adressez-vows i : Nations U&s. Section
des ventes, New York ou GC&VC.

Fhxarfsrn

Opram3aqm

3Hriax H arexM8ax

CWbenmtemibnc

KauxR x0x0x0

xynmb

60 BC~X patiosax rapa. Haaonale cnpamca
B~KU~Y xmimiox mara3mie nmi nmsmm no mpecy : OpraRH389m

fIaItH%

~eKIVf%

no ~YOABX~

COMO CONSEGUIR

B lcAaucabni Mara0 6 H3J.taRRRx B

WXaHnR. HMO-Fiop~ mm )fCeZTeBa.

PUBLICACIONES

06aens3Rexxmx

DE LAS NACXONES UNIDAS

Las pubkacionesde la.s Nations Unidas e&n en wnta en libre.rias y casas distriiuidoras en
tadas parts de1 mundo. ConsuIte a su librero &ir&jase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccicibn de Vsntas.
Nue~ York o Ginebra.

Iitho in United Nations, New York

004cKl

82-61202-October 1983-2,200
