United Nations

A/RES/62/147

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 March 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 70 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2007
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/62/439/Add.1)]

62/147. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/149 of 16 December 2005 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2004/69 of 21 April 2004, 1
0F

Mindful that the International Covenants on Human Rights 2 constitute the first
all-embracing and legally binding international treaties in the field of human rights
and, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 form the core of the
International Bill of Human Rights,
1F

2F

Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 and reaffirming that
all human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, that they should be treated in a fair and equal
manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis, and that the promotion
and protection of one category of rights should never exempt or excuse States from
the promotion and protection of the other rights,
0H

1H

Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in examining the progress
made by States parties in fulfilling the obligations undertaken in the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 4 and in providing recommendations to States
parties on their implementation,
3F

Considering that the effective functioning of the Human Rights Committee
and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is indispensable for the
full and effective implementation of the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Noting the ongoing deliberations on the proposal to rectify the legal status of
the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
4
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.

07-47259

A/RES/62/147

Recognizing the importance of regional human rights instruments and
monitoring mechanisms in complementing the universal system of promotion and
protection of human rights,
Reaffirms the importance of the International Covenants on Human
1.
Rights2 as major components of international efforts to promote universal respect
for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2H

2.
Strongly appeals to all States that have not yet done so to become parties
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2 and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 and to consider as a matter of
priority acceding to the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights4 and making the declaration provided for in article 41 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and, while acknowledging that
additional States have recently become parties to these instruments, requests the
Secretary-General to continue to support the annual treaty event to this end;
3H

4H

5H

Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
3.
intensify systematic efforts to encourage States to become parties to the
International Covenants on Human Rights and, through the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, to assist such States, at their request, in
ratifying or acceding to the Covenants and to the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to achieving
universal adherence;
Calls for the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations
4.
under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where applicable, the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
Emphasizes that States must ensure that any measure to combat terrorism
5.
complies with their obligations under relevant international law, including their
obligations under the International Covenants on Human Rights, and takes note with
appreciation of the reports submitted by the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism; 5
4F

6.
Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of human rights by
derogation, and recalls that certain rights are recognized as non-derogable in any
circumstances, underlines the exceptional and temporary nature of any such
derogations, and that they must be in accordance with the conditions and procedures
stipulated under article 4 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
bearing in mind the need for States parties to provide the fullest possible
information during states of emergency so that the justification for the
appropriateness of measures taken in those circumstances can be assessed, and in
this regard takes note of General Comment No. 29 adopted by the Human Rights
Committee; 6
5F

7.
Encourages States parties to consider limiting the extent of any
reservations that they lodge to the International Covenants on Human Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to
_______________
5

See A/60/370, A/61/267 and A/62/263; A/HRC/4/26 and Add.1–3; and E/CN.4/2006/98 and Add.1 and 2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40), vol. I,
annex VI.

6

2

A/RES/62/147

formulate any reservations as precisely and narrowly as possible and to regularly
review such reservations with a view to withdrawing them so as to ensure that no
reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant treaty;
Welcomes the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee submitted
8.
to the General Assembly at its sixty-first 7 and sixty-second 8 sessions, and takes note
of the General Comments adopted by the Committee, including the most recent,
General Comment No. 32 on the right to equality before courts and tribunals and to
a fair trial; 9
6F

7F

8F

9.
Also welcomes the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights on its thirty-fourth and thirty-fifth sessions 10 and on its thirty-sixth
and thirty-seventh sessions, 11 and takes note of the General Comments adopted by
the Committee, including the most recent, General Comment No. 17 on the right of
everyone to benefit from the protection of the moral and material interests resulting
from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he or she is the author, 12
and General Comment No. 18 on the right to work; 13
9F

10F

1F

12F

10. Expresses regret at the number of States parties that have failed to fulfil
their reporting obligations under the International Covenants on Human Rights,
urges States parties to fulfil their reporting obligations on time, invites them to make
use of the harmonized guidelines on reporting under the international human rights
treaties, including guidelines on a common core document and treaty-specific
documents, 14 when submitting reports, and urges States to attend and participate in
the consideration of the reports by the Human Rights Committee and the Committee
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights when so requested;
13F

11. Urges States parties to make use in their reports of sex-disaggregated
data, and stresses the importance of integrating a gender perspective in the
implementation of the International Covenants on Human Rights at the national
level, including in the national reports of States parties and in the work of the
Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights;
12. Strongly encourages States parties that have not yet submitted core
documents to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to do so, invites them to make use of the harmonized guidelines on reporting,
and also invites all States parties regularly to review and update their core
documents while bearing in mind the current discussion on the elaboration of an
expanded core document;
13. Urges States parties to take duly into account, in implementing the
provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights, the recommendations
and observations made during the consideration of their reports by the Human
_______________
7

Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 40 and corrigendum (A/61/40 (Vols. I and II) and
A/61/40 (Vol. I)/Corr.1).
8
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/62/40).
9
Ibid., vol. I, annex VI.
10
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2006, Supplement No. 2 (E/2006/22).
11
Ibid., 2007, Supplement No. 2 (E/2007/22).
12
Ibid., 2006, Supplement No. 2 (E/2006/22), annex IX.
13
Ibid., annex X.
14
HRI/GEN/2/Rev.4, chap. I.

3

A/RES/62/147

Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and
the views adopted by the Human Rights Committee under the first Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; 2
6H

14. Urges all States to publish the texts of the International Covenants on
Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights in as many local languages as possible and to distribute them and
make them known as widely as possible to all individuals within their territory and
subject to their jurisdiction;
15. Urges each State party to give particular attention to the dissemination at
the national level of their reports submitted to the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and, further, to translate,
publish and make available as widely as possible to all individuals within its
territory and subject to its jurisdiction by appropriate means the full text of the
recommendations and observations made by the Committees after the examination
of those reports;
16. Reiterates that States parties should take into account, in their
nomination of members to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, that the Committees shall be composed of
persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human
rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of the participation of some
persons having legal experience, and to equal representation of women and men,
and that members serve in their personal capacity, and also reiterates that, in the
elections of the Committees, consideration shall be given to equitable geographical
distribution of membership and to the representation of the different forms of
civilization and of the principal legal systems;
17. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, when considering the reports of States parties, to
continue to identify specific needs that might be addressed by United Nations
departments, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, including through
the programme of advisory services and technical cooperation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
18. Stresses the need for improved coordination among relevant United
Nations mechanisms and bodies in supporting States parties, upon their request, in
implementing the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and
encourages continued efforts in this direction;
19. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made so far by the Human
Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to
improve the efficiency of their working methods, encourages the Committees to
pursue their efforts, welcomes in this regard the meetings held by the Committees
and States parties to exchange ideas on how to render the working methods of the
Committees more efficient, and encourages all States parties to continue to
contribute to the dialogue with practical and concrete proposals and ideas on ways
to improve the effective functioning of the Committees;
20. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the
Harmonization of Working Methods of Treaty Bodies, 15 and looks forward to further
deliberations in this regard;
14F

_______________
15

4

HRI/MC/2007/2 and Add.1.

A/RES/62/147

21. Also takes note with appreciation of the report of the Open-ended
Working Group on an optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights on its fourth session, 16 and encourages all parties to
participate actively in the fifth session;
15F

22. Encourages the specialized agencies that have not yet done so to submit
their reports on the progress made in achieving the observance of the provisions of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in accordance
with article 18 of the Covenant, and expresses its appreciation to those that have
done so;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to assist States parties to
the International Covenants on Human Rights in the timely preparation of their
reports, including by convening seminars or workshops at the national level for the
training of government officials engaged in the preparation of such reports and by
exploring other possibilities at the request of States, such as the programme of
advisory services and technical cooperation in the field of human rights;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights effectively assists the Human Rights
Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the
implementation of their respective mandates by providing, inter alia, adequate
Secretariat staff resources and conference and other relevant support services;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly
informed of the status of the International Covenants on Human Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
including all reservations and declarations, through the United Nations websites.
76th plenary meeting
18 December 2007

_______________
16

A/HRC/6/8.

5
