United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7285th meeting

Thursday, 23 October 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval/Mr. Oyarzábal/Ms. Millicay. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. White
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Ms. Al-Hadid
Mr. Špokauskas
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Haidara
Mr. Park Yong Min
Mr. Sergeev
Mr. Nkerabigwi
Mr. Meek
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council working methods
Letter dated 8 October 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Argentina to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/725)

14-58624 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1458624*

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Hungary and
Nicaragua to participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes so that the Council can
carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me congratulate
Argentina on its assumption of the Security Council
presidency for October. We thank you, Mr. President, for
the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725, annex), which
has facilitated our preparations for the discussions
today.
My delegation also appreciates the insightful
briefings by Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
It is in the interest of all Member States to see
improvements in the working methods of the Security
Council. Such issues as efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency,
participation,
accountability
and
decision-making continue to be the centrepieces of our
discussions. My delegation will confine our discussion
to the issue of the enhancement of due process in the
sanctions regime, as clearly outlined in the concept
paper.
Under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council is given authority to apply
measures to prevent or respond to what is perceived as
threats to international peace and security. Sanctions
are one of the tools frequently used and have long been
at the centre of debate. Thailand’s views on this point
are the following.
First, we support the imposition of targeted
sanctions against individuals or entities rather than
sanctions against an entire State. Targeted sanctions
generate a more direct impact in terms of changing an
individual’s behaviour, and they minimize unintended

2/38

23/10/2014

consequences on a country’s overall social and
economic development.
Secondly, we attach the highest importance to
the issue of criteria and procedures for listing and
delisting with regard to sanctions. What is required is
an independent, accessible and transparent mechanism.
Such a mechanism must apply to all subsidiary bodies
of the Council with listing and delisting powers. The
inclusion of individuals and entities on the list needs
to be carried out with utmost care. Unclear evidence
and insufficient information may lead to an erroneous
placing of individuals and entities on the list. On the
other hand, the issue of delisting is no less important
and requires our equal attention. Thailand therefore
encourages the respective sanctions committees,
panels of experts and the Office of the Ombudsperson
to continue interacting with all relevant parties and
stakeholders to refine the process in order to ensure
fairness and transparency.
Thirdly, after targeted sanction are imposed,
it is necessary to put in place effective monitoring
mechanisms to ensure that the measures are fully and
effectively implemented.
Fourthly, sanctions need to be time-bound. They
cannot be indefinite. There must also be periodic
assessments and revisions. However, when sanctions
fail to serve their original purpose, the Council needs
to modify its approach and find alternative measures.
Once the objectives of the sanctions are achieved, such
sanctions regimes should be terminated. But that opens
the question of who will decide if the objectives have
been met and when would be the best time to lift the
sanctions. In our view, the answer requires a collective
assessment, one best undertaken by respective sanctions
committees, United Nations entities, key stakeholders,
the Council itself, relevant regional organizations and,
in some cases, the targeted States.
Fifthly, without full implementation by Member
States and relevant stakeholders, sanctions regimes
will not succeed. Therefore, the wider United Nations
membership should have an increased role in the
discussions prior to the imposition or renewal of
sanctions. The discussions of subsidiary Council
bodies should be made more accessible to non-Council
members. More information regarding their operations,
including various reporting, reviewing, monitoring and
evaluation mechanisms, should be made available in
order to increase transparency and accountability.

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

My delegation commends the work of the Council’s
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, chaired by Argentina,
particularly in terms of substance, but, equally
important, on the Council’s working methods. As the
President said this morning, that concerns the way, and
not the how or the why. For our part, Thailand is fully
committed to continuing our active participation in this
important issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): Let me join my Thai
colleague in commending Argentina on its distinguished
presidency, and on convening this important and timely
meeting.
Improving the Council’s working methods,
increasing its transparency and broadening partnerships
that can support the Council in fulfilling its essential
task of maintaining international peace and security
represent a work in progress that we are all committed
to. We therefore very much welcome this annual
exercise. In particular, we appreciate today’s debate, as
it allows us to put forward some modest considerations
on two topics that Romania pays great attention to,
both in its national capacity and as a member of the
European Union (EU).
As regards sanctions, we have acquired, at the EU
level, substantial experience in balancing security and
fundamental rights that could bring added value to the
broader debate at the international level. The obligation
to include safeguards when adopting restrictive
measures, whether autonomously or pursuant to Security
Council resolutions, is established by the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union. When examining
the legality of such measures, the Court of Justice of
the European Union explained that the right to effective
judicial review requires that any decision that affects
a person individually must be taken on a sufficiently
solid factual basis. Judicial review cannot be carried
out in the abstract, but must assess whether the reasons
are substantiated.
Considering those requirements, we warmly
welcome the role and the activity of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, a valuable rule-of-law component in
the sanctions regimes, and we express our full support
for Ms. Kimberly Prost’s endeavours.
To conclude on this point, we would like to mention
the ongoing EU legislative process meant to amend the

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

rules of procedure of the General Court. The aim is to
establish an adequate system of procedural safeguards
that addresses the need for confidentiality without
affecting the right to a fair trial.
Let me now turn to the second subject, the
International Criminal Court (ICC). I am very happy to
see the ICC Prosecutor here today. We take the view that
it would be a positive step to establish a mechanism on
the follow-up of referrals made by the Security Council
in accordance with the Rome Statute. We have in mind,
in this respect, the following considerations.
The broad membership of the Rome Statute,
which currently includes 122 signatory States, and the
Council’s competence to refer situations to the ICC
even from non-States parties create the possibility
of an overlap between the activities of the Security
Council and those of the ICC with respect to the same
situation or situations at certain moments in time.
With that possibility, strong coordination between
the two institutions is undoubtedly required. One
could mention the examples already given, such as
aligning sanctions lists with issued warrants. Improved
cooperation between the Council and the Court would
certainly consolidate international justice and ensure
coherence in the exercise of the mandate that each of
the two institutions has in the maintenance of peace and
stability in the world.
Another perspective is the activity of the Court
compared to that of the ad-hoc Tribunals, which benefit,
at present, from the attention of an informal working
group. A fortiori, a dedicated working group for the
ICC would be justified, notwithstanding the formal
argument of their different origin: in one case, Security
Council resolutions, in the other, an international
treaty. In our view, that formal argument should not
prevail over the substantial one — that of the scope of
judicial activity — as the consequences of interaction
between the two institutions are essential to achieving
the Court’s mandate.
The Security Council has already made a
substantial contribution to combating impunity by
creating the ad hoc Tribunals. The relationship with
the ICC, for which the founding act of the Court
provides a solid basis, is an opportunity to build upon
and to expand that contribution. There is a need for
a constant and meaningful exchange of views among
Council members in order to address situations that
are referred and the consequences for non-compliance
with cooperation obligations under the referrals. On

14-586243/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

the basis of the periodic reporting by the Office of
the Prosecutor, adequate follow-up measures, as well
as instances where a deferral of the investigation or
prosecution could be decided upon, could be examined.
Taking into account all those arguments, let me
conclude by saying that such a mechanism would be a
step in the right direction in developing a mature and
balanced relationship, enabling both institutions to
exercise their mandates in an even more efficient and
complementary manner. Romania appreciates your
synergies, Madam President.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
having organized this open debate and to thank you for the
concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) on such an important
topic. We would also like to thank Ms. Kimberly
Prost, Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for their comments.
My delegation commends the work done by
Argentina as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues. During
the past two years, thanks to the remarkable efforts of its
delegation, we have agreed on six notes by the President
of the Security Council that reflect the consensus on
various issues. While recognizing the importance of the
adoption of those notes and their complex negotiation,
we believe that the due implementation of all those
notes is even more important. We cannot allow for such
developments to become a dead letter.
On the other hand, there are several other
outstanding issues to improve, for example, the need
to achieve better interaction between the Council and
the Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission and of the
country configurations, in particular their participation
in Security Council meetings, including informal
consultations, and a more analytical annual report of
the Security Council on situations under consideration.
We also need to improve the transparency of the work
of the Security Council and its interaction with States
that are not members of the Council during wrapup sessions, as well as the pursuit of mechanisms to
increase the transparency, interaction and efficiency
of the work of the subsidiary organs and the sanctions

4/38

23/10/2014

committees. We reiterate the importance of continuing
to consider the issue of the selection criteria for experts
of the subsidiary organs of the Security Council, in
accordance with the note by the President S/2006/997,
in particular the criterion of broad geographical
representation. We also believe that it is essential
to further promote interaction between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries.
The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson has been one of the critical elements
in improving the procedural safeguards of the United
Nations sanctions regime. In the five years that the
Office has been functioning, we cannot forget the
reasons that led us to establish it. We welcome the
achievements to date, which, while significant, are not
definitive. Much remains to be done to achieve a system
that meets everyone’s expectations.
In that regard, we wish to reiterate something that
we have said before in this Chamber. The mandate of the
Office of the Ombudsperson should be extended in two
ways: first, to other sanctions regimes and, secondly,
in order to entrust it with responsibilities beyond the
removal of names from the sanctions list. That is to say,
we would prefer the Office to have a greater role in all
sanctions processes, including serving as a filter during
the drawing up of lists. We must be mindful of the fact
that due process applies not only to individuals but
also to the effective implementation of sanctions. We
believe that the notion of fair and transparent processes
must be equally present in all regimes. That is central to
the credibility and legitimacy of the Security Council’s
work.
In that regard, I would also like to mention the
importance of promoting and ensuring the independence
of the Office of the Ombudsperson. That requires
adequate arrangements with regard to the management
structure and conditions of service of the Office and its
members. We call on the Secretary-General to take the
necessary measures to address that issue.
With regard to the follow-up of situations referred
by the Security Council to the International Criminal
Court, we believe that that is a critical issue, since it
concerns the important relationship between the two
bodies. My country has devoted enormous efforts to
improving and strengthening that relationship. Such
experience results from our recent membership of the
Security Council, during which we discovered that the
relationship with the Court is holistic and dynamic and
requires ongoing dialogue.
14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

In that regard, we reiterate our belief that the best
way to fill that gap is to have an appropriate forum
to discuss all aspects of the relationship between the
two bodies. We believe that, first, because of the large
number of referrals to the Court in the Council’s work,
which shows a clear development in its approach towards
the Court, The second reason is because the ICC deals
with complex situations, in which the Security Council
seeks to achieve similar goals. Several arrest warrants
have been issued against individuals responsible for
atrocities committed during some of the worst conflicts
on the Council’s agenda. The third reason is because
the Council must exercise its powers of referral and
postponement in an effective and responsible way.
When the Council refers a situation to the Court,
it must therefore be ready for the Court to effectively
fulfil its mandate. When the rule of law is not respected
and the Council does not prevent such a breach, the
rule of law is violated. The reluctance of the Council to
take further action or to follow up on matters before the
Court, limiting itself to receiving periodic reports from
the Prosecutor on specific country situations, shows its
indifference not only to upholding the rule of law and
to guaranteeing accountability in general, but also, in
particular, to ensuring the effective implementation of
its own decisions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
I wish to congratulate Argentina on its leadership in
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. I also wish to thank
Ms. Kimberley Prost for her briefing and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and her presence.
The concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) that guides
our discussion today highlights some important issues
related to the Council’s work, in particular due process,
targeted sanctions and the referral of cases to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The Brazilian
Government is of the view that sanctions regimes must
always comply with the highest standards of human
rights and international law.
In that sense, we note with appreciation the work
carried out by the Ombudsperson of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

entities, which has proved to be a valuable asset to
increase fairness and transparency in the consideration
of delisting requests. We encourage the Security
Council to continue studying ways to strengthen due
process within sanctions regimes, including through
the extension of the Ombudsperson mechanism to other
sanctions committees.
The appointment of the Ombudsperson is certainly
a step in the right direction, but much more remains
to be done with regard to the promotion of human
rights, due process and international law in the context
of the sanctions regimes. In improving the work of
those committees, one must, however, bear in mind
that sanctions are simply a tool at the disposal of the
Security Council to give effect to its decisions.
This month marks the tenth anniversary of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court. The pursuit of
international justice and the achievement of lasting
peace and security are common objectives that mutually
reinforce each other. Both the Court and the Security
Council have pivotal, albeit different, roles in pursuing
those objectives and striking the right balance between
peace and justice, accountability and reconciliation.
That is valid both for referrals and non-referrals of
situations, where the same rules and principles should
apply equally to all, thus avoiding double standards and
selectivity.
Another issue of concern relates to the costs involved
in referrals. We reiterate our call for the implementation
of article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute in relation to the
financial burden of referrals. The expenses of the Court
relating to referrals by the Security Council must be
met by funds of the United Nations, not fall just upon
the parties to the Rome Statute. The Court will only
be strong based on the support it receives, not only
from States parties, but also from the United Nations.
We ensure that the cooperation between the Court and
the United Nations goes beyond rhetoric and finds its
concrete implementation in the funding of referrals.
The Security Council acts on behalf of the 193
States Members of the United Nations, and it is
therefore of utmost importance to ensure that that
body be more transparent and more accountable to
the broader membership. In a sense, Brazil has long
advocated that the Council should carry out its work,
as often as possible, in an open and public manner.
Brazil believes that this organ should also consider new
ways to improve the participation of troop-contributing

14-586245/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

countries, regional and subregional organizations,
countries hosting peacekeeping operations and other
relevant actors in its decision-making process.
It is almost imperative to improve communication
and dialogue between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies. Closer cooperation is needed,
not only with the General Assembly regarding, for
instance, the issue of Security Council’s encroachment
on the General Assembly’s prerogatives, but also with
the Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We must ensure that the process of
reviewing the peacebuilding architecture in 2015 will
allow the Council to have a better understanding of the
advisory, early warning and preventive roles that the
PBC can play, and is playing.
The President returned to the Chair.
We encourage the Council to dedicate more of
its time and efforts to preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter. I would like to commend
Argentina for its work as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on the Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. The adoption over the past 14 months of
six notes concerning the Security Council’s working
methods is evidence of that country’s engagement in
promoting a more effective, accessible Council. Brazil
fully shares that commitment.
It is necessary to recognize that there is a limit to
what working methods can do for the Council. Changes
in working methods alone will not provide the Security
Council with the tools needed to adequately address
contemporary challenges. Some of the shortcomings
in the working methods of the Security Council can
only be corrected in the framework of a comprehensive
reform of that body. Initiatives aimed at achieving a
more accountable and transparent Council are more
likely to prosper in an expanded and more inclusive
Council with new permanent and non-permanent
members, a Council reflective of the realities of the
twenty-first century and committed to fresh and more
participatory working methods.
In concluding, I invite us all to take the
opportunity provided by the seventieth anniversary
of the Organization next year to finally achieve a
concrete outcome to the long overdue reform process
of the Council. By September next year, let us fulfil the
mandate extended by our heads of State and Government

6/38

23/10/2014

at the 2005 Summit, when they unanimously called for
an early reform of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): Today I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic countries
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden. Let me first of all thank you, Madam
President, for organizing today’s debate. As Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, Argentina has made important
contributions to improving the working methods of the
Security Council. We hope that your successor as Chair
will be equally diligent.
Let me also thank the two briefers from this
morning, Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost, and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Mrs. Fatou Bensouda, for their presentations and
tireless efforts.
Let me start by addressing the two subject areas that
are the focus of the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725,
annex) on enhancing due process in sanctions regimes
and the follow-up to Security Council referrals to the
ICC.
The Nordic countries welcome this opportunity
to take stock of the situation concerning listing and
de-listing. A gradual approach by the Council has
made steady advances possible for the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, as most recently witnessed by some
further improvements made in resolution 2161 (2014)
and usefully discussed in the Ombudsperson’s eighth
report (S/2014/553). However, we urge the Council to
actively consider how similar due process guarantees
could be introduced into other sanctions regimes. The
informal group of like-minded countries has repeatedly
emphasized the importance of taking such a broader
perspective. Here as well, a gradual approach would
yield the best results.
The Nordic countries commend the important and
persistent work of the Office of the ICC Prosecutor
aimed at developing the cooperation between the
ICC and the Security Council on effective follow-up
to referred situations. As has also been noted in the
concept paper, the fulfilment of the mandate of the
Court is dependent upon full cooperation by States. The
ultimate aim of a referral by the Council is in jeopardy
if States fail to cooperate without the Council taking

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

appropriate action. An effective mechanism to follow
up on referrals would therefore not only strengthen
international justice, but also bolster the relevance and
integrity of Council decisions.
In the past year, the attention to the working methods
of the Council has been further strengthened. The
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, now in its second year, has made important
contributions in that regard, and we fully support its
statement, as presented by our Swiss colleague earlier
today. I would also like to mention the important report
of the Security Council, entitled “Security Council
Working Methods: A Tale of Two Councils”, not least
its publication earlier this year. It provides an extensive
history of the working methods of the Council. That
was followed by a joint ACT-Security Council seminar
on the report.
The presidential notes that have been adopted
since we last met on this topic in October 2013 cover a
number of important issues. In particular, we would like
to highlight the note on penholders, which was adopted
in April (S/2014/268). In our view, it is imperative
that all members of the Council, permanent members
and non-permanent members, have a real possibility
of drafting and presenting products. The later note
(S/2013/515) on enhancing the dialogue among Council
members is also very relevant in that regard. While
we welcome the new presidential notes, we continue,
however, to stress the importance of implementation.
There can be no real progress unless there is sufficient
follow-up, and there is still much to do in that regard.
The core of the discussion on working methods has
not changed since last year. For the Nordic countries it
is all about the effectiveness and transparency of the
Council, and the possibilities available to non-members
to interact with members of the Council in a substantive
way. With the challenges facing the international
community today, it is imperative that the Council draw
upon other relevant United Nations entities in order
to help resolve crises, but also as a means to prevent
crises at the outset. In particular, we believe that the
cooperation between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Council should be further developed. The
horrendous public health catastrophe in West Africa,
with its broad socioeconomic implications for the
whole region, has strengthened our conviction in that
regard. The upcoming 2015 review of the peacebuilding
architecture will be a good opportunity to explore that
further.

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Finally, in the past few years we have unfortunately
seen several examples of inaction on the part of the
Council in the face of unspeakable human suffering and
mass atrocities. That has led to warranted criticism and
a necessary debate about the Council’s role, and more
precisely the use of the veto. We would like to commend
France for taking up the proposal that the permanent
members voluntarily commit to refrain from the use of
the veto to block Council action aimed at preventing, or
ending, atrocities. We welcome the ministerial meeting
held in September on that important topic under the
co-chairmanship of France and Mexico. The Nordic
countries would like to emphasize the importance of
keeping that question high on the agenda with a view
to framing a code of conduct that is consistent with the
common commitment of United Nations members to
halt atrocities.
In the meantime, we commend the increased use of
briefings in the Council by the United Nations Office of
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Office of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect, as well as relevant Special Rapporteurs,
where populations are at risk of mass atrocities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Montaño (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, I should like to thank your delegation
for organizing this debate, for presenting the concept note
(S/2014/725, annex) as a guide to this discussion, and
for your work as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. In
that Group, the five presidential notes on the working
methods of the Security Council, which have been
presented when your country has held the presidency
of the Council over the past two years, are evidence
of Argentina’s commitment and efforts to strengthen
and broaden the Council, as stated in presidential note
S/2010/507.
We also wish to recognize and acknowledge the
statements presented by the Ombudsperson of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, Ms. Kimberly Prost, and by
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
The increasing participation of Member States in
these open debates clearly reflects improvements in the
working methods of the Council. Although that progress

14-586247/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

has not come as fast as we would like, we are seeing
very valuable improvements. The flow of information
towards States non-members of the Council, even
when exchanged outside the Chamber, has improved in
recent years. The holding of monthly wrap-up sessions
presents two sides of the same coin; those who convene
such meetings promote transparency and strengthen the
value of this work.
In 2009, Mexico actively supported the
establishment of the Office of the Ombudsperson of
the 1267 (1999) Committee and the appointment of
Judge Prost, in the strong conviction that her mandate
was essential in the face of systematic violations of
the human rights of individuals and entities subjec to
the sanctions of the Committee. My delegation joins
with those who insist that the inclusion, amendment
or delisting of the names of individuals or entities be
based on due process. We believe that without a review
mechanism, the cooperation and support of Member
States in this area could suffer irreversible erosion in
our work.
Regarding the second topic proposed for this
debate, my delegation strongly reiterates the importance
for the Council and our work that the purposes of the
International Criminal Court under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations be supported by
the establishment of an internal Security Council
mechanism to follow up the referral of cases. We also
clearly affirm that the Rome Statute confers on the
Security Council the ability to request the Court to
suspend an investigation or indictment, which should
be used in a responsible manner with due consideration
and a careful assessment of its implications for
the registration of evidence, the status of detained
individuals and the protection of victims. We believe
that this authority should be used exclusively when
considerations of peace and justice are in clear conflict.
The lack of cooperation on the part of States is
undoubtedly one of the most serious challenges to the
effective performance of the Court. It undermines the
system and perpetuates unacceptable impunity for
those most serious crimes of paramount international
concern. That is why, alongside France, Mexico has
clearly and actively supported limitations on the use
of the veto on the part of permanent members of the
Council in cases of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We note with satisfaction that
Council members have done their utmost to combat

8/38

23/10/2014

impunity. We are convinced that there can be no lasting
peace without justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you
very much, Madam President, for organizing this
open debate, for your valuable work as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and for your personal leadership
on the issues we are discussing today. We also express
our deep appreciation to Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost
and International Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda for their briefings and tireless efforts.
I make this statement on behalf of the Kingdom
of Belgium and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We
align ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Norway on behalf of the informal
group of like-minded States on targeted sanctions.
In view of the time constraints, my full statement is
available on paper and will later be available on Twitter
and on the websites of our two Missions. I will limit
myself today to addressing the two key points of our
statement.
As stated before, the Netherlands and Belgium are
in favour of Security Council reform. We want to make
the Council more representative of today’s geopolitical
realities and more equitable, legitimate, accountable,
effective and transparent. Even as discussions of reform
are ongoing, improvements in the working methods
of the Council should already be under way, and
therefore we welcome today’s debate. I will focus on
the issues raised in the excellent concept paper before
us (S/2014/725, annex).
My first point concerns the strengthening of
due process in sanctions regimes. We thank the
Ombudsperson, Ms. Prost, for the good work she has
done in fulfilling her mandate. We welcome the reports
of her Office. These reports indicate key areas that
require further strengthening in terms of due process.
Due process is crucial to the sanctions regimes, and we
therefore should welcome five specific improvements
in that area: first, a separate and permanent Office of
the Ombudsperson; secondly, more safeguards for the
independence of the Ombudsperson; thirdly, improved
sharing of information by Member States; fourthly,
more transparency in the process of listing individuals
and entities; and fifthly, extending the mandate of

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

the Office of the Ombudsperson to all other sanction
regimes.
My second point concerns the follow-up of
referrals to the ICC. Sustainable peace and security
can be achieved only if perpetrators of the most
serious crimes are brought to justice. The international
community must work better together to achieve that
aim. All States and the Council have a moral duty
to cooperate in the investigation and prosecution of
those horrendous crimes. We commend the Council
for assuming its responsibility by referring situations
to the Court, as it has done with the situations in the
Sudan and in Libya. We underline that the Council has
a particular responsibility to provide political support
for its referrals of situations to the Court and for their
implementation.
I note that we are waiting for a referral of the
situation in Syria to the ICC. We stress that all States
parties are obliged to cooperate with the Court under
the Rome Statute. As to the non-State parties, the
Council has the capacity to oblige them by adopting
resolutions to cooperate with the Court. We would like
to see the Council apply that option more frequently.
Belgium and the Netherlands welcome the
constructive cooperation between the Council and the
Court over the past decade, but we would also welcome
more frequent interaction with the Court, a good
example of which was the Council’s visit to the Court
in August. The active cooperation and follow-up of the
Council to enforce its own resolutions are essential.
That could be done by expanding the mandate of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
to include the Court as well. In that context, Belgium
and the Netherlands wish to recall General Assembly
resolution 68/305, in which the need for proper funding
of the International Criminal Court was underlined.
As we heard from Ms. Bensouda, the ICC is
currently coping with serious capacity constraints
and has difficulty conducting crucial investigations.
Therefore, it is worth remembering that the Relationship
Agreement between the ICC and the United Nations
envisages the Court to be reimbursed by the United
Nations for expenses incurred in connection with
Security Council referrals. We invite the United Nations
membership to reflect on that.
My third point concerns working methods.
Belgium and the Netherlands remain committed
to the improvement of the working methods of the

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Council. We are grateful for the various initiatives
taken in past years by members of the Council to
improve transparency, openness and accountability.
We encourage Council members to do even more.
Improving the Council’s working methods should be
an ongoing process. In that regard, let me highlight
our support for the French proposal for restraint in the
use of the veto in situations involving mass atrocities.
We commend France and Mexico for having organized
the excellent high-level meeting during the ministerial
week last month. We would like to reiterate our full
support for that important proposal.
In conclusion, let me again thank you, Madam,
for organizing this important debate. Proper followup would enhance the efficiency, transparency
and interactivity of the work of the Council. It
would strengthen the effectiveness, credibility and
accountability of that lofty institution. Both Belgium
and the Netherlands stand ready to be a partner in
pursuing that important purpose.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Madam President, and the Argentine presidency
for convening this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. It is a main pillar of
the overall reform of the United Nations that we consider
necessary. In the current system, too, transparency,
openness and efficiency are more necessary than ever
to promoting a sense of ownership of the Council on
behalf of the entire international community.
(spoke in English)
We commend the improvements that have been
made in rendering the Council’s working methods
more responsive to the growing demand for openness
and interaction among Council members and the
broader membership. I am referring, for instance, to
the increasing number of open debates and the informal
wrap-up sessions by the Security Council Presidents on
their monthly work.
As President of the Council of the European Union,
Italy praises the attention dedicated to cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations.
But more improvements in the Council’s working
methods are needed, such as greater interaction
between the Council and the wider membership
through regular consultations and detailed reports, the
deeper involvement of interested parties and regional

14-586249/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

organizations, and more contacts with other main
bodies of the United Nations.
We also wish to underline the importance of the
Council’s consultations with countries that contribute
troops and police officers to peacekeeping operations.
A perspective from the field can be fundamental,
especially when mission mandates are being defined
or renewed. Italy has welcomed past briefings to the
Security Council by the military leadership of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and looks forward
to seeing United Nations Force Commanders more
involved in the decision-making process.
At a time of serious crises in several areas of the
world, improved working methods are also crucial
to the Security Council’s ability to fulfil its main
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. That also holds true for ensuring effective
and responsible follow-up to cases referred to the
International Criminal Court by the Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We believe that the Council should have a forum where
such follow-ups can be regularly discussed.
We should redouble our efforts to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes of
international concern. The fight against impunity
will not be effective without greater cooperation,
both collectively and individually. One fundamental
challenge is how to respond to cases of non-cooperation
on the part of States. Non-respect of Court-ordered
arrest warrants constitutes a violation of international
law. In specific cases referred by the Security Council,
such violations also constitute a breach of obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations.
Concerning the role of the Ombudsperson,
from whom we have heard this morning, we should
acknowledge that ensuring respect for the rule of law
and human rights is an essential part of our task in
countering terrorism. Therefore, providing fair and
clear procedures for listed individuals has to be seen
as part of our collective action. Consequently, the work
of the Ombudsperson should receive full support and
cooperation to ensure adequate and timely consideration
of requests from individuals seeking removal from the
consolidated list.
Improving the working methods is part of the
Security Council reform process. Italy believes in a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council that
encompasses all five clusters, including working

10/38

23/10/2014

methods. The veto mechanism is one of the key issues
of Security Council reform. The Security Council plays
a crucial role in regulating international relations. My
country is opposed to any attempt to delegitimize the
authority of the Council. At the same time, we are all
aware that the current veto system does not reflect
today’s reality. Moreover, in some cases it has prevented
the Security Council from delivering appropriate
responses in cases of mass atrocities. While we are
working on a comprehensive solution, something can
be done under the current system.
We join those who call for a voluntary code of
conduct for permanent members of the Council on the
use of the veto when taking action to prevent or end mass
atrocities. Veto power presumes a clear responsibility
to prevent or end the perpetration of atrocity crimes.
In that respect, Italy is ready to engage with the rest of
the membership in a constructive dialogue leading to
an early outcome.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany is pleased to
contribute to this important debate, which is central
to our engagement within the United Nations. I thank
Argentina for providing a platform for our deliberations
on improving due process and targeted sanctions, as
well as a better follow-up of Security Council referrals
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). I am also
grateful to ICC Prosecutor Ms. Fatou Bensouda and
Ms. Kimberly Prost for their briefings and proposals.
Due process in the context of targeted sanctions has
been of concern to the United Nations for many years.
Among the many good reasons to ensure high standards
of rule of law and transparency in the implementation
of sanctions regimes, one of the most important is
credibility. Our sanctions regimes need to follow rules
and procedures based on the principles of the United
Nations. They must give everyone affected the means
to understand their rationale and they have to provide
possible remedies. Only then will the sanctions reach
the degree of worldwide acceptance and implementation
necessary to effectively target the challenges they were
designed for in the first place.
The Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime sets a positive precedent in that context. By
introducing an Ombudsperson, real progress in due
process was made, although there is still room for
improvement. With a view to suggesting further

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

concrete measures to be taken, Germany would like to
associate itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Norway, on behalf of the informal
group of like-minded States on targeted sanctions,
regarding the Ombudsperson and the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime.
At the same time, there is also a need to improve due
process in other United Nations sanctions regimes. We
therefore recommend building on the lessons learned
from the creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
and exploring the possibilities of applying procedural
safeguards to other appropriate sanctions regimes as
well. In that context, I would like to underscore the
important work that is ongoing in the high-level review
of United Nations sanctions sponsored by Australia,
Finland, Greece, Sweden and Germany. That initiative
addresses all United Nations sanctions regimes and
relevant actors. It aims to establish coherent and
transparent standards and to make United Nations
sanctions more effective, more credible and better
understood. We look forward to presenting our findings
to the wider United Nations community before the end
of this year.
Germany welcomes the referral of cases by the
Security Council to the ICC. Those mandates underscore
the central role that traditional accountability plays in
conflict resolution, but clearly it is not a one-way street.
The Security Council should assume its responsibility
by establishing a follow-up mechanism for the cases
it has referred to the ICC. What form the mechanism
may take is a topic that we should discuss in depth.
Indicative input may come from the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. At the same time, we
may not forget that both the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda are United Nations courts, so
the working methods of the Informal Working Group
cannot be duplicated by the independent ICC.
I would like to reiterate the great importance
Germany attaches to due process in targeted United
Nations sanctions, the role of the ICC and the
improvement of the working methods of the Security
Council. In that regard, like Italy has just done, we
commend the initiatives brought forward by France and
Mexico on the use of the veto and by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.
At the same time, we are convinced that reforming
the Security Council’s working methods is not enough
to achieve greater representativeness, transparency and

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

accountability. Many among the States Members of the
United Nations share that view and look to the year 2015
as the year to bring about reform both in the methods
and in the structure of the Security Council, which is
at the core of securing peace and stability worldwide.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): An open debate on
the working methods of the Security Council under
your presidency, Madam President, is doubly apt.
This is an area of interest for both Council members
and the general membership, and you as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions in 2013 and 2014, Madam
President, have given a new impetus to improving the
working methods of the Council.
As we talk about the working methods today, let
us keep the core objectives of the Council in mind.
The primary purpose of the Council is maintain
international peace and security and to take decisions
in that regard in an efficient and effective manner. In
addition, it is our collective aim to promote openness,
transparency and inclusion. The Council’s decisions are
high-stakes matters for States Members of the United
Nations that are not members of the Council.
Having served in the Council recently, we can
testify that it is an efficient body, perhaps the most
efficient in the United Nations system. But it needs to
work more on effectiveness. In that context, Madam
President, we welcome the decisions taken under
your stewardship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters
in 2013 and 2014 on interaction and dialogue with
non-members of the Council, consultations with troopand police-contributing countries, appointment of more
penholders from among the elected members, and early
appointment of chairpersons of the subsidiary bodies
by a deadline. That is substantial progress and gives an
indication of more openness and responsiveness on the
part of the permanent five.
We also thank you, Madam President, for having
Pakistan’s proposal on intra-Council communication
adopted, albeit in a watered-down form. Our motive
in presenting the proposal was to ensure the flow of
more authentic and timely information among Council
members by strengthening the presidency, especially
when held by an elected member, and facilitating
communication from the permanent five to the elected
ten. That would engender cohesiveness in the Council’s
work. The test of the value of those decisions will lie in
their faithful and consistent implementation. We look

14-5862411/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

forward to the Council’s assessment of the follow-up
and implementation of those decisions.
Wrap-up sessions, revived during Pakistan’s
presidency of the Council in January 2013, have proved
to be useful for both members and non-members of the
Council. Those sessions are not a substitute for horizon
scanning, but they do help us review and preview the
agenda of the Council. Combined with the periodic
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs, those
sessions should enhance the Council’s awareness for
preventive diplomacy purposes.
We should continue to find ways to forge more
robust partnership between the Council, the troopand police-contributing countries, the Secretariat and
the general membership. Pakistan, as Chair of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, tried
to enhance a shared space for discussing difficult
issues like robust peacekeeping, new technologies,
safety and security, drawdowns and transitions and
regionalization. But that was in an informal setting. We
believe that the Council should close consult the troopand police-contributing countries before writing down
and approving a peacekeeping mandate and it should
involve them throughout the formation of the mission.
That would help in addressing the issues relating to
force generation, command, control, communication
and coordination as well as inter-mission movements.
The aim should be to organize iterative discussions
with troop contributors so that a mandate is adapted to
the realities on the ground.
In that regard, Council members may revisit
the Brahimi recommendation on the adoption of
resolutions for a specific mandate in two phases. First,
a framework resolution should be adopted. Then, after
the troop contributors have been identified, a second
resolution should be adopted. We support two proposals
made by the United States in an intergovernmental
negotiations setting on working methods. First, there
should be an open meeting of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions with the participation of the
general membership, and secondly, an open informal
workshop on working methods. That should enhance the
space for dialogue between Council members and the
general membership. We call for making the process for
the selection and appointment of panels and groups of
experts more transparent, balanced and representative.
The Office of the Ombudsperson has worked
fairly effectively to advance due process with regard
12/38

23/10/2014

to the delisting requests under the Al-Qaida sanctions
committee. It has worked consistently to ensure that
fair and clear procedures are in place to list and delist
individuals and entities in the targeted categories
of finance, travel, arms and commodities. Further
improvements are necessary to remove the existing
lacunae in the Office, such as non-inclusion of
petitioners other than those on the sanctions list and
lack of full independence.
Due process is crucial in targeted sanctions regimes.
There should be in principle no objection to their
extension or to the extension of the Ombudsperson’s
jurisdiction to other sanctions committees, but this
would best be done after reforming the current office
and especially after giving it the requisite jurisdictional
autonomy.
Finally, with regard to the follow-up to the referrals
by the Council to the International Criminal Court,
we encourage Council members to hold internal
discussions on the need to designate a focal point or
create a subsidiary body or working group and work
out modalities in that regard. It is important that such a
linkage not infringe on the Council’s authority or on the
Court’s independence.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Madam President,
I thank you for having organized this open debate on
reform of the Security Council working methods.
In the light of the number of crises that the world
is facing, it is imperative that enhancing the Council’s
working methods be done with urgency and relevance,
taking the right approaches. Each of the areas included
in the working methods — transparency and access,
efficiency and implementation, the rule of law, the use
of the veto, peacekeeping operations, accountability
and the Council’s relationship with the General
Assembly, as well as with regional arrangements and
agencies — are interlinked or overlap with one another.
They are also closely intertwined with the revitalization
of the General Assembly. My delegation would like to
draw attention to some salient points in key areas of the
working methods.
First, we call for an increase in the number of
the Council’s open meetings. The degree of openness
will always be the central focus for non-Council
members. We also call not just for openness but also

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

for transparency and communication with the broader
United Nations membership.
Secondly, greater collaboration with troopcontributing countries (TCCs) is needed with regard to
decisions pertaining to their troops and to the mandates
of the peacekeeping missions in which they are
deployed. More regular open debates on peacekeeping
operations and improvements in the relationship
between TCCs and the Council are the best way to
increase coordination and understanding.
Thirdly, there is a great divergence of views
regarding the right to veto and its application. My
country supports the notion that the veto should not be
used in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity or
serious crimes against international humanitarian law.
But to make it practical, we have to bridge fundamental
differences in defining our perceptions of the
aforementioned concepts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious crimes against international
humanitarian law. My delegation hopes that this issue
can be resolved by the permanent members by taking
into account all their approaches on the basis of
goodwill and compromise.
Fourthly, incoming non-permanent members must,
during the interim period after their election and before
they assume membership, be allowed to attend all
meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and
the informal consultations of the whole, or at least for
a period of six weeks immediately preceding their term
of membership, and they should be given full support
for their new role.
Fifthly, regarding sanctions, there is evidence that
they are not always applied rigorously by the Security
Council or Member States. This must be done with
clear mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation. We
ask for consideration of the long-term establishment
of the office of the Ombudsperson with an extended
mandate and full support for her office. Likewise, we
propose that an independent advisory body be created to
provide inputs to the work of the sanctions committees.
Sixthly, there is a widespread preference and
desire that the annual report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly be more analytical, reflecting
complexities and intricacies in decision-making, rather
than being a long summary of the year, thus adding to
the process of transparency.
Finally, the United Nations Charter specifies that the
General Assembly and the Security Council are equal

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

bodies. Therefore, greater dialogue and collaboration
between the two will enhance both entities, especially
the Council, as it gains new perspectives from the
Assembly’s membership. At the same time, many of the
countries that have little or no power in the Council
see the General Assembly as their only avenue for
influencing the United Nations.
What is most needed is not just reforms but
changed attitudes. The national interests of Member
States must be balanced with greater objectivity and
global perspectives. We believe that the Council would
also benefit through greater dialogue with the United
Nations system, regional organizations and specialized
security entities, institutions and civil society, which
play a key role in maintaining peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): It is a pleasure to see you, Madam, presiding
over this very important meeting of the Security Council
on the working methods of this body. We welcome
this initiative. We acknowledge and are grateful for
your work and that of your team, which has injected
dynamism into the work of the Security Council. On
this specific topic, we thank you for all your efforts
and your initiatives in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Nicaragua associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia,
Ambassador Rambally, who spoke on behalf of the
L.69 group, of which we are a member.
We hope that this discussion will help us achieve
a deeper understanding of the central issue that is at
the very heart of our discussion, that is, to achieve an
in-depth reform of the Security Council, including of
its working methods, so that the work of the Council
can become more transparent, that there be true
accountability and, most importantly, that the Council’s
credibility can be restored.
In order to discuss the working methods of the
Security Council, it is essential to recognize not only on
an individual basis but also collectively that the Council
needs to be comprehensively reformed. We cannot
speak of working methods of the Security Council
in a piecemeal way. Everything is part and parcel of
a comprehensive reform that we have committed
ourselves to carrying out. It is vital urgently to expand
the Security Council in both categories of membership

14-5862413/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

to enhance its representation, give greater legitimacy
and credibility to its decisions, and to give effect, inter
alia, a substantial improvement in its working methods.
We are aware that significant improvement in
the methods of work of the Council is an imperative
in order to improve its efficiency and effectiveness
and to achieve accountability in line with the needs
of the members of the Organization as a whole. Such
improvements should not simply remain cosmetic; they
must be real. Changes in both procedure and approach
are necessary.
First and foremost, we need to reform the
composition of the Council. Article 24(1) of the Charter
clearly sets out that in discharging its duties under its
responsibility, the Security Council acts on behalf of the
other Members of the United Nations, that its primary
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
and security. What the Security Council does and how it
does it to fulfil this task is of great interest to the entire
international community, not only to the members of
the Council.
In the past few years, there has been a growing
recognition of the fact that the current composition
of the Council, which has existed since 1945, and
its methods of work must be brought into line with
contemporary reality.
The Council has demonstrated often that it has
little interest, when taking its decisions, in consulting
with the countries most affected by such decisions.
A more transparent and democratic Council will
need to establish a permanent mechanism for broad
and inclusive consultations that takes into account
the interests of the affected countries and the troopcontributing countries before any decisions are taken.
Also, broader consultations with regional organizations
and the General Assembly should be held.
Access to documentation and information is a
topic of particular concern and the trend of holding
closed meetings, for which there is no record, should
be reversed. By the same token, often the rest of
the Organization’s membership — non-Council
members — are not allowed to participate in debates.
Even when the discussion is on topics of interest to the
international community that affect all of us and, above
all, topics on which we all have the right to have an
opinion.
With regard to concrete ideas on reforming the
Security Council, including its working methods,
14/38

23/10/2014

we note with interest some of the very important
recommendations that have been expressed today.
We hope to see those recommendations and the
recommendations made during the sixty-eighth session
of the General Assembly, circulated in the concept
paper (S/2014/725, annex) by the President, included in
the text of a proposal that should be circulated among us
as soon as possible in order to fulfil a mandate given to
us by our Heads of State. The mandate is to implement
those reforms on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations in 2015, so that this
important body of our Organization genuinely is and
acts in accordance with the realities of the twenty-first
century.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Ceriani (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, and your team
for holding this timely and important debate, as well as for
the issuance of the substantive concept paper (S/2014/725,
annex). As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, Uruguay aligns itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland. We are grateful for the reports given
this morning by the Ombudsperson of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.
In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, Member States of the Organization
have conferred on the Security Council the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, recognizing that the Council acts on behalf of
all Members in that task. In the following Article of the
Charter, the Member States agree to accept and carry
out the Council’s decisions. In that sense, its decisions
will be imposed on the international community both
by that Article and Chapter VII. But that prerogative,
granted to the members of the Council by each State that
adheres to the Charter, brings with it the commitment
and responsibility to act on behalf of everyone and in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter. At the same time, Article 24 establishes the
Council’s duty to inform the General Assembly of its
actions through the submission of annual reports.
With regard to the report, we would like to mention
that it is usually purely factual and does not have
relevant information about the analysis of the situations
14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

addressed and the vetoes of draft resolutions that were
presented in the Council. The membership has the right
to know why certain situations move forward and the
Member States who used the veto should explain why.
Although all Member States, by adopting the
Charter, have decided to accept that the veto is part of the
system, despite our positions of principle on the matter,
in order to achieve the transparency, accountability
and commitment of permanent members with regard to
the international community, those vetoes should not
only be well founded, but also explained. International
peace and security — one of the three pillars of the
Organization — should not be subject to only five
member States, particularly in cases of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. That is why we
welcome the French proposal to restrict the use of the
veto in such cases, and we advocate its quick adoption
and implementation, without ever losing sight of our
greatest hope, which is the elimination of the veto as
an institution.
When it comes to the other elements that are part
of the Council’s working methods, we want to indicate
that there have been ups and downs in their use, with
no consistency in the Council’s action in that regard.
We refer, inter alia, to the horizon-scanning briefings,
provided by the Secretariat — either by the Department
of Political Affairs or another agency — in the exercise
of preventive diplomacy, which is extremely useful in
order to be better informed of the situations that may
endanger international peace and stability. We hope to
see that mechanism in place again, considering the value
that it has as an early warning and conflict prevention
tool. In the same vein, we highlight the adoption this
year of resolution 2171 (2014), by which the Council
undertakes to use all the tools of the United Nations
system to prevent conflicts.
We also wish to emphasize the wrap-up sessions,
held at the end of each monthly presidency, in various
formats, which provide valuable information about the
Council’s actions to the rest of the membership, making
its work more transparent. Fortunately, 10 out of the
12 countries that held the presidency since last year’s
debate have made use of that working method. We hope
that all countries that assume the presidency of the
Council in the future will act accordingly.
Our delegation supports the holding of open
debates, such as today’s. We note with satisfaction that
they happen on a monthly basis and are usually held
more than once a month, allowing non-member States

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

of the Council to participate and offer their viewpoints
on issues of interest to the international community.
We suggest that the holding of Arria Formula meetings
and interactive informal dialogues continue. They both
give more openness to the Council and make it possible
to hold Council meetings with great informative and
interactive value, but according to their participants
require a different format.
The sanctions system, created by resolution 1267
(1999) of October 1999 and subsequent resolutions, has
been the target of varied criticism. Among the criticism
is that there are no guarantees for the people included
on the list of individuals, who, due to their connection
to Al-Qaida, are prevented from moving freely and
their assets are frozen through a nonjudicial process,
which casts doubt on the legitimacy of the sanctions
imposed by the Council. There have been improvements
when it comes to due process. The developments have
been positive because there have been substantive
improvements from the original system to that of
today. Clearly, there must be a strengthening of due
process and the study of the possibility of extending
the Ombudsperson to all sanctions committees. Our
country calls for a transparent, consistent and fair
system, in accordance with legal due process.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to refer to
the cases referred by the Security Council to the
International Criminal Court. Since considerable
time has passed since the first referral, no follow-up
mechanism has been established in either case — the
situation in Darfur or the situation in Libya — nor have
measures been taken in cases of failure to cooperate
with the Court concerning the arrest warrants issued
by it. It is time for the Council to be consistent with
those referrals, and it should act under Chapter VII, so
that they are not simply virtual referrals, and thereby
making it possible for the International Criminal Court
to carry out its work.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mrs. Hrdá (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
would like to express its gratitude to the Argentinian
presidency of the Security Council for conducting this
very important open debate, and to both briefers, not
only for today’s briefings, but also for their tremendous
work. As suggested in the concept paper (S/2014/725,
annex), we wish to focus on one of the possible ways
of improving Security Council’s work, which is the

14-5862415/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

relationship between that main organ of the United
Nations and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The Czech Republic is strongly committed to the
idea of international criminal justice, in particular the
ICC. Due to our country’s historical experience with
the perpetration of serious crimes under international
law and serious human rights abuses during the
Second World War and the post-war era, we very
much appreciate the Court’s existence. The ICC’s role
in the fight against impunity is really irreplaceable,
and we stand ready to support it wherever possible.
Nevertheless, we believe that the issue of cooperation
with the Court goes far beyond its relations with the
States parties to the Rome Statute, and that it must be
addressed within a much broader spectrum of relevant
actors, involving the United Nations and in particular
the Security Council. In our view, the Security Council
has in that regard a special responsibility to close the
impunity gap by making referrals to the ICC.
In that context, we should emphasize that some
situations, chiefly internal armed conflicts where the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community have been or continue to be committed
today, should be referred by the Security Council to
the ICC. Applying a double standard can adversely
affect the promotion of the rule of law and international
justice. However, the Court has so far not received the
support it needs from the Council to enable it to fulfil
the missions referred to it under resolutions 1593 (2005)
and 1970 (2011). We regret the absence of any effective
follow-up from the Council on its referrals and hope
that members will hear this open debate as a call to act
on the matter.
We urge the Security Council to establish a
mechanism to follow up on situations it refers to the
ICC. Specifically, such a mechanism should benefit
from the Council’s power to enforce its resolutions and
ensure that States cooperate with the Court. Moreover,
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
should be given the job of dealing with issues pertaining
to ICC referrals. We would also like to recommend that
the cost of future referrals be covered by the United
Nations, as has been done for the Ad Hoc Tribunals.
It is essential that the Security Council work with a
consistency that would then produce a preventive effect
as well.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.

16/38

23/10/2014

Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for your initiative
in convening this timely open debate on the Security
Council’s working methods and for the comprehensive
concept note (S/2014/725, annex). I would also like to
thank Ms. Prost and Ms. Bensouda for their statements
today.
The very fact that this discussion is being
conducted as an open debate reflects credit on the
Argentinian presidency for enhancing transparency
and including the wider United Nations membership
in the Council’s discussion of issues, and I recommend
that every presidency follow suit. Estonia, as a member
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Switzerland earlier today.
Estonia firmly believes that enhancing transparency
in the actions of the Security Council, as well as in
the Council’s interaction with non-Council members
and bodies, is crucial to building greater trust in the
institution that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Protecting human life is the greatest responsibility
and priority that we, as the international community,
have been entrusted with, and the Security Council’s
execution of that mandate should be clear and
understandable to us all. To meet that goal, we urge
that the Council should ordinarily meet in public and
that detailed records be published even for private
meetings. Furthermore, the wider membership’s
involvement should be a continuous process from the
very beginning of the discussion of a decision until its
implementation, giving the stakeholders greater input
into decision-making.
Concerning one of the sub-topics of the concept
note, the Security Council’s follow-up to its referrals
to the International Criminal Court (ICC), I would
like to say that the Council and the ICC are first and
foremost linked by their common concern of crimes
that threaten the peace, security and well-being of
the world. The Court is available to its States parties
and to the Council, which has the power to refer cases
to the Court that otherwise would not fall under its
jurisdiction. Whenever there is evidence that atrocity
crimes are being committed with impunity, the Council
should refer the situation to the Court. It should,
however, do so in a way that fully empowers the Court
to fulfil its mandate, as well as supporting the Court

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

in its investigations and prosecutions so as to ensure
accountability.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.

The Council should take measures to ensure that
there can be no room for doubt as to the support that
it and the United Nations give the Court in delivering
on its mandate. The reports from the Office of the
Prosecutor on the basis of resolutions 1593 (2005) and
1970 (2011) should result in the Council’s reaffirmation
of its responsibility to support the Court and its
recognition of the Court’s work. Follow-up measures
should be implemented with resolve and determination
to ensure that the Court’s decisions, including the
arrest warrants it issues, are executed. It should also
be recalled that, given the Court’s limited jurisdiction
in the absence of ratification, referrals by the Council
are necessary.

Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): I would like to
thank Argentina for putting the working methods of the
Council at the centre of the agenda during its presidency
this month, and for your leadership, Madam President,
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, which since 2013 has
produced six important President’s notes on working
methods. What we are debating today is no longer
only about the implementation of the note contained in
document S/2010/507 but also the implementation of
subsequent notes that complement it and even innovate.
That might suggest changing the title of the agenda
item to “Security Council working methods”, reflecting
that the debate is not about the implementation of note
507 alone but now goes well beyond it.

Several attempts to adopt resolutions on an
effective international response aimed at ensuring
accountability for perpetrators of atrocity crimes have
been blocked by permanent members of the Council.
Far too often, history has shown us how the privilege
of the veto, or even the mere threat of using it, has been
abused, leaving the Security Council paralysed and
passive on the sidelines, in situations where it is most
needed. Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Council’s permanent members are given great power,
but also great responsibility to use it in a responsible
manner. Today we know that inaction is the biggest
challenge to maintaining and restoring peace and that it
can ensure that the Council’s legitimacy and credibility
quickly fade. We therefore gladly welcome the French
proposal on establishing a code of conduct for voluntary
restraint in the use of the veto, and firmly believe that
such a step would help the Security Council live up to
its mandate. Horizon-scanning briefings and Arriaformula meetings would also increase the preventive
impact of the Council’s work.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that in
our view efforts to achieve transparency should be
made more consistent, and more attention should be
paid to providing feedback from the Council both to
non-Council Member States and the ICC, whether in
the form of holding open meetings or by answering
letters addressed to the Council. It is only through such
feedback that we, the international community, can
better assess how best to contribute to the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the Council.

I wish to now briefly address the issues you
highlighted, Madam President, in your very
comprehensive concept paper (S/2014/725, annex).
First, the work of sanctions committees represents,
no doubt, a heavy portion of the Council’s activity,
but a significant part of it remains invisible. Sanctions
committees require efficiency in their working
methods, but also transparency. Transparency is
key to facilitating an understanding of the sanctions
regimes by States, which are the ones committees rely
upon for the effective implementation of sanctions.
The past decade has brought about new developments
in this area. One of them is the establishment of the
post of Ombudsperson for the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, which
we warmly welcome. Bearing in mind the substantive
results of its work, the Office of the Ombudsperson
offers today a remedy for those requesting delistings
that has proved to be real and effective. It would be
useful to replicate that experience in other sanctions
committees. For our part, we reiterate our support
to extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson to
other relevant sanctions committees. Those will lead
to strengthening the targeted nature of sanctions and
will help States in their domestic implementation, thus
improving the overall effectiveness of the sanctions
regimes.
Secondly, referrals are a prerogative of the Council
and an instrument to counter impunity made available
to the Council by the Rome Statute. Once the Council

14-5862417/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

uses that instrument, it should remain engaged with the
International Criminal Court (ICC), in particular in the
cooperation aspects necessary for the Court to perform
a judicial function. From the perspective of working
methods, it makes sense that the Council establish an
efficient way to address those aspects of its relationship
with the ICC without necessarily having to overburden
its already charged plan of work. In that regard, it should
be worth considering having issues relating specifically
to the follow-up of Council referrals considered by
a subsidiary body, which should review them and,
whenever needed, recommend Council action. That is a
matter that is not only relevant to the ICC. It has to do
with a broader issue, which is the implementation of the
Council’s own decisions.
Before I conclude, I would like to highlight with a
few brief remarks, in view of the time available, some
of the very important aspects related to the Council’s
working methods.
First, the annual reports serve two purposes:
statistical records and information. A considerable
part of the report is not meant to be read, but rather
consulted. That is the part containing statistical data
for historical record and future reference. The other
part, which is basically the introduction, should be
informative, and that is where there is still much work
to do. We think that it is through more informative
monthly assessments, particularly on subjects
discussed in consultations, that those parts should be
substantially enhanced. Next month, we will have the
opportunity to debate this issue when the annual report
will be presented in the General Assembly.
Secondly, on penholders, we welcome the note
by the President (S/2014/268) on this issue and recent
positive examples of co-penholdership in drafting
initiatives, which is encouraging. We would welcome,
in that vein, more joint initiatives by Council members.
We encourage in particular the newly elected members,
who we take the opportunity to congratulate again
on their election, to use the avenue opened by this
note. Through co-penholdership, we believe one can
improve the end result in substantive terms, even in
the facilitating of the negotiating process within the
Council.
Finally, on the election of the chairs of the subsidiary
bodies, again, the Council already agreed in December
2012, in its note contained in document S/2012/937 to

18/38

23/10/2014

“support an informal process with the participation
of all Council members as regards appointing the
Chairpersons of subsidiary bodies from among
Council members in a balanced, transparent,
efficient and inclusive way” (S/2012/937, para. 2).
We would encourage members of the Council to
use these coming months before the end of the year,
in consultation with the recently elected members, to
put into practice this agreement, thereby engaging in
a more participatory informal process of appointment
through the establishment of a facilitation arrangement
involving the incoming members, but also the
participation and experience of those who remain in
and those who will be leaving the Council.
I would say one final word to congratulate the
Council for reintroducing and reinvigorating the wrapup meetings. We think that they represent a bold step
in the right direction in promoting the relationship
between the Council and the wider membership. They
are good news for accountability and transparency, two
aspects very dear to the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, of which Portugal is a member.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Allow me to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important open
debate and taking the lead in our common endeavour to
improve the working methods of the Security Council.
The topic of improving the working methods of the
Council is indeed an issue of great interest for both
Council members and non-members alike. I would like
to take this opportunity to thank you for preparing and
circulating the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) for
this meeting, which highlights some of the key topics,
issues and challenges to be addressed in our debate.
In undertaking the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
effectively, it is critical that the Security Council’s
action and decisions garner the support of the greater
United Nations membership. Therefore, enhancing the
level of communication and interactivity between the
Council and the entire United Nations membership is an
essential part of helping the Council achieve its aims.
Against that backdrop, and with a view to contributing
to the advancement of dialogue between Council and
non-Council members, Indonesia would like to share
the following views.

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

First, Indonesia reiterates the importance of the
effective implementation of Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter of the United Nations, inter alia by increasing
regular consultations with non-Council members,
especially with States that have special interests in
the matters being considered by the Council. Through
those consultations, the Council should give particular
attention to the ability of States to implement the
Council’s decisions.
Secondly, in relation to the use of veto rights,
Indonesia welcomes the initiative for the early
commencement of dialogue among the permanent
members of the Council on a voluntary code of conduct
regarding the use of veto, in particular one in which
all permanent members are committed to exercising
voluntary restraint on the use of the veto in situations
of mass atrocities. With clear and agreeable modalities,
the code of conduct can help the Security Council
arrive at a united voice and live up to its mandate under
the Charter, particularly in situations where there
are violations of international law, human rights and
humanitarian laws relating to acts under the definition
of war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity.
Thirdly, as a major troop-contributing country
(TCC), Indonesia welcomes the note of the President
of the Security Council contained in S/2013/630,
dated 28 October 2013, in which Council members
reaffirmed their commitments to enhancing interaction
with troop- and police-contributing countries. While
Indonesia welcomes the enhanced engagement
between the Council and TCCs that ensued following
that commendable initiative, we believe that there is
still room for improvement. In that regard, to further
enhance transparency, understanding and coordination
between the Council and TCCs, Indonesia proposes
that more consultations with TCCs be conducted,
especially before decisions are taken with regard to the
establishment, conduct, review or change of mandates
and the termination of peacekeeping operations, as
well as when urgent situations that may affect mission
operations and the safety of personnel arise. We believe
that such an improvement will help to expedite the TCC
decision-making process of TCCs.
Fourthly, it is incumbent upon the Council to
increase and strengthen its collaboration with the
various relevant United Nations bodies. Indonesia sees
that as a matter of urgency in the light of the multifaceted
global challenges that have surfaced in recent years

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

and demand the immediate and equal attention of the
Council. One issue that comes to mind immediately
pertains to peacebuilding. As an active member of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Indonesia also sees the merit of
enhancing the relationship between the Council and
the PBC. The interactions between both bodies should
remain mutually proactive at both the ambassadorial
and the expert levels. Furthermore, the Council should
also continue to make use of the advisory, advocacy
and resource mobilization roles of the Peacebuilding
Commission and hold regular informal dialogues and
consultations to develop trust and confidence between
the two bodies.
Lastly, Indonesia reaffirms its support for the efforts
to enhance due process within the sanctions regimes.
In that regard, Indonesia commends the creation and
the work of the Office of the Ombudsperson Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and
strongly suggests that a similar mechanism be applied
in the other sanctions committees.
In conclusion, I would once again like to commend
you, Madam President, for your stewardship in
our efforts to improve the working methods of the
Security Council. I would like to reiterate Indonesia’s
commitment to supporting the Council in its work and
its efforts to realize greater transparency, inclusivity,
democracy, accountability and efficiency as it carries
out its responsibilities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Speaking
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), I
would first like to express NAM’s appreciation of your
holding, Madam President, this fifth open debate of
the Security Council on its working methods and for
having prepared the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
on that issue. NAM welcomes the note by the President
of the Security Council S/2013/515 and the intention
to provide more opportunities to the United Nations
general membership to express its views on the working
methods of the Security Council and to encourage the
continued participation of the broader membership
in such debates. NAM also notes the endorsement of
the notes by the President S/2013/630, S/2014/268,
S/2014/393, S/2014/565 and S/2014/739 through the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions under Argentina’s chairmanship.

14-5862419/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

For NAM, transparency, openness and consistency
are key elements that the Security Council should
observe in all its activities, approaches and procedures.
The Council has neglected those important elements
in numerous instances. They include reluctance
in convening open debates on some issues of high
significance, unscheduled open debates with selective
notification, repeatedly restricting the participation in
some debates and discrimination between members and
non-members of the Council, in particular with regard
to sequencing of and time limits for statements during
open debates, a failure to submit special reports to the
General Assembly, as required under Article 24 of
the Charter of the United Nations, the submission of
annual reports that still lack sufficient information and
analytical content, and a lack of minimal parameters
for the elaboration of the monthly assessment by the
Security Council presidency.
NAM calls for the following specific measures
to improve the working methods of the Council and
to enhance its efficiency in fulfilling its primary
responsibility, namely, the maintenance of international
peace and security.
First, the rules of procedure of the Security
Council, which have remained provisional for more
than 60 years, should be formalized in order to improve
transparency and accountability. Secondly, NAM
has repeatedly asked the Council to comply with the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter, which allows
any non-member of the Council to participate in the
discussions on any matter that affects it. We also believe
that rule 48 of the provisional rules of procedure should
be thoroughly observed.
Thirdly, the number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance of Articles 31 and 32 of the
Charter. Such meetings should provide real opportunities
to take into account the views and contributions of the
wider membership of the United Nations, particularly
non-members of the Council whose affairs are under
the Council’s consideration.
Fourthly,
closed
meetings
and
informal
consultations should be kept to a minimum as an
exception, not a rule, as they were meant to be. They
should also include briefings by the Special Envoys or
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General and
by the Secretariat.
Fifthly, the establishment of subsidiary organs by
the Security Council should be in accordance with the

20/38

23/10/2014

letter and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.
Those organs should function in such a manner as
to provide adequate and timely information on their
activities to the general United Nations membership.
NAM rejects the use of the Security Council as a
forum to pursue national political interests and agendas,
thereby aggravating situations rather than alleviating
them, contrary to its mandate enshrined in the
Charter. We reiterate the necessity for non-selectivity,
impartiality and accountability in the work of the
Council. The decision of the Security Council to initiate
formal or informal discussions on the situation in any
State Member of the United Nations or on any issue
that does not constitute a threat to international peace
and security is contrary to Article 24 of the Charter. In
such cases, there is a need for Council to continue to act
strictly within the powers and functions accorded to it
by Member States under the Charter.
In recent years, the Security Council has been
too quick to threaten or to authorize enforcement
actions, while being silent and inactive in other cases.
Furthermore, the Council has increasingly resorted
to Chapter VII as an umbrella for addressing issues
that do not necessarily pose an immediate threat to
international peace and security.
A careful review of those trends indicates that the
Council could have opted for alternative provisions
to respond more appropriately to particular cases.
Instead of an excessive and rapid use of Chapter VII,
efforts should be made to fully utilize the provisions
of Chapters VI and VIII for the pacific settlement of
disputes. Chapter VII should be invoked, as intended, as
a measure of last resort. Unfortunately, the provisions of
Articles 41 and 42 have, in some cases, been resorted to
too quickly without fully exhausting the other options.
Sanctions imposed by the Security Council remain
an issue of serious concern to the non-aligned countries.
In accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the imposition of sanctions should be considered only
once all means for the peaceful settlement of disputes
under Chapter VI of the Charter have been exhausted
and a thorough consideration of the short- and longterm effects of such sanctions undertaken.
Sanctions are a blunt instrument, the use of which
raises fundamental ethical questions of whether the
suffering inflicted on vulnerable groups in the target
country are a legitimate means of exerting pressure. The
objectives of sanctions are not to punish or otherwise

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

exact retribution on the populace. In that regard, the
objectives of sanctions regimes should be clearly
defined. Their imposition should be for a specific time
frame, be based on tenable legal grounds and should
be lifted as soon as the objectives are achieved. The
conditions demanded of the State or party upon which
sanctions are imposed should be clearly defined and
subjected to periodic review. Sanctions should be
imposed only when a threat to international peace
and security exists, or there is an act of aggression,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Sanctions are not applicable preventively in instances of
mere violation of international law, norms or standards.
Finally, NAM calls upon the Security Council to
further enhance its relationship with the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), including through
sustained, regular and timely interaction. Meetings
with TCCs should be held not only in the drawing up
of mandates, but also in their implementation, when
considering a change in, renewal of, or completion of, a
mission mandate, or when there is a rapid deterioration
of the situation on the ground. In that context, the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its
deliberations, especially in the very stages of mission
planning.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of Malaysia, whom I
congratulate on his country’s election as a member of
this Security Council.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you , Madam
President, for that congratulatory message. I wish to
echo earlier speakers in thanking you for convening
today’s open debate on the Council’s working methods.
I also express my delegation’s appreciation to you
and your delegation for so ably chairing the Council’s
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
just made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Movement Countries.
As an incoming member of the Council, Malaysia
is of the view that today’s open debate affords a timely
opportunity for the members of the Council and the
wider United Nations membership to take stock of,
and further discuss, measures aimed at improving the
Council’s working methods. We are encouraged to
note that, under Argentina’s current presidency, the

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Council will convene three open debates. We view this
practice as commendable, as it provides the broader
United Nations membership with more opportunities to
participate in the work of the Council.
Malaysia is also encouraged to note that the calls
for better transparency, coherence and accountability
on the part of the Council by the wider membership
has, to a certain extent, been implemented or taken
on board by the Council. Among other things, those
improvements have been reflected in the various notes
issued by the Council’s presidency over the course
of of the past year. In addition, Malaysia welcomes
the development of potential mechanisms to serve
as early-warning systems for the Council, including
through increased use of Arria Formula meetings as
well as more regular briefings, by the relevant United
Nations Special Advisers, Rapporteurs and other senior
officials. That said, there remains room for further
improvement in other areas of the Council’s working
methods.
At this juncture, my delegation wishes to underscore
that effecting possible improvements in the Council’s
working methods should not take place in a vacuum. In
that regard, Malaysia recalls that several initiatives are
already under way, or about to commence, such as the
upcoming review of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the review of peacekeeping operations and the review
of special political missions. The outcomes of those and
other relevant intergovernmental initiatives should be
factored into the Council’s deliberations on improving
its working methods. In that connection, the ongoing
initiative by the Governments of Australia, Finland,
Germany, Greece and Sweden on the high-level review
of United Nations sanctions is also worth noting.
In addition, there should be more coordination
between the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries
(TCCs)
towards
strengthening
the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. The Council’s
meetings with TCCs should be sustained, regular and
timely, in particular with regard to the resolutions and
mandates of operations. In that context, the Council’s
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and intensively in its
deliberations, especially at the early stages of mission
planning.
On the Council’s application of sanctions as
authorized under the Charter of the United Nations,
Malaysia recognizes the shift from comprehensive

14-5862421/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

economic sanctions to targeted sanctions. However,
despite such a shift, there should not be a generalized
assumption that targeted sanctions have no effect
whatsoever on the broader population of the country
concerned, and in certain cases on neighbouring
countries and populations. The Council must be open
to reviewing the negative or unintended consequences
of sanctions and respond as appropriate.
With a view to further contributing to today’s
debate, Malaysia wishes to make the following brief
comments.
First, with regard to transparency, Malaysia
supports the continuation of the existing practice on
wrap-up sessions and interactive briefings at the end of
Council’s presidencies.
Secondly, Malaysia also supports a fairer and more
inclusive allocation of penholderships, as well as a
more transparent process when electing Chairs of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies.
Thirdly, Malaysia welcomes the proposal by the
French delegation. In that connection, we reaffirm that
permanent members of the Council should refrain from
resorting to the veto in situations involving genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
aggression.
Fourthly, on a related note, the intersection
in terms of the roles of the Security Council and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) also raises
certain questions about the need to further clarify the
relationship between the two bodies, particularly in the
context of the designation of individuals for sanctions
by the Council and/or prosecution by the ICC.
Fifthly, Malaysia reaffirms its support for the
mandate of the Ombudsperson of the Council’s
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), which was recently renewed. In that regard,
Malaysia is of the view that the Council should fully
consider the recommendations of the Ombudsperson as
contained in her reports to the Council.
Sixthly, while giving due consideration to both
security and human rights concerns, Malaysia also
believes that there is merit in exploring the possibility
of extending the Ombudsperson’s role or mandate to
include all of the Council’s Sanctions Committees.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.

22/38

23/10/2014

Mr. Pedersen (Norway): As my contribution
to enhancing the working methods of the Security
Council, I will not read out my full statement, but it
will be circulated.
Norway aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the Nordic
countries and by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the informal group of like-minded
States on targeted sanctions, which comprises Austria,
Belgium, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Germany,
Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland.
In order to further strengthen the effectiveness and
due process guarantees of the United Nations sanctions
regimes, the group of like-minded States on targeted
sanctions re-invites the Security Council and Member
States to consider the following proposals and ideas,
which were submitted in writing on 17 April 2014.
First, the Office of the Ombudsperson should
be made permanent. That will give more weight and
credibility to the work of the Ombudsperson.
Secondly, information-sharing between Member
States and the Ombudsperson, as well as among the
Sanctions Committee and Member States, national
and regional courts and other authorities, should be
improved.
Thirdly, transparency should be enhanced. All
decisions, regardless of whether they maintain or
discontinue a listing of an individual or entity, should
be accompanied by adequate and substantial reasons
Moreover, those reasons, as well as a redacted version of
the comprehensive report of the Ombudsperson, should
be published, allowing for legitimate privacy, security
and confidentiality interests to be adequately protected.
We welcome the steps taken in resolution 2161 (2014) as
far as the provision of reasons for delisting and retention
as well as the transparency of the process are concerned
and encourage the Council to consider further steps in
that regard.
Fourthly, the Committee must continue to conduct
the triennial review in a timely and thorough manner
and regularly inform Member States about the results
of all reviews provided for under resolution 2161
(2014). In the course of the review, a reasoned decision
for a continued designation should be provided, if the

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

individual or entity is to be kept on the list. If a listing
is not reviewed and confirmed within the three-year
period, it should automatically be deleted.
Besides those four proposals for the immediate
future, the group of like-minded States would also
like to submit a few ideas for the longer term aimed at
ensuring that targeted-sanctions regimes satisfy basic
due-process guarantees and are in conformity with
internationally recognized human rights standards.
First, we recommend that the Ombudsperson be
given the authority to decide, after having examined
a request for a delisting, whether to maintain or
discontinue the listing. At the same time, Member
States and the relevant international organizations
and bodies should encourage individuals or entities
that seek removal from the Al-Qaida sanctions list to
challenge their listing by first petitioning the Office of
the Ombudsperson before the case is brought up at the
national or regional level.
Secondly, we propose to start reflecting on how
to improve due-process guarantees in other targetedsanctions regimes. We once again submit the idea
that the Ombudsperson’s process should be gradually
extended, on a case by case basis, to other appropriate
sanctions regimes. In so doing, the need for possible
adaptations in the Ombudsperson’s mandate should
be explored. We are of course fully aware that each
sanctions regime with its underlying political situation
is indeed unique and that some sanctions regimes are
more suitable for such an extension than others.
Moreover, the listed individual or entity should be
adequately informed about the listing, and a narrative
summary of reasons should be communicated. Lastly,
no decision to maintain or discontinue a listing should
remain pending before the respective Sanctions
Committee for longer than six months.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain, a newly elected
member of the Security Council for the next biennium.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for your congratulations.
At the outset, I should like to congratulate you on three
accounts — first, on the way you and Argentina are
conducting the presidency of the Security Council for this
month; secondly, for organizing this debate; and, lastly,
for the very useful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
that you have provided us with. I also want to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Criminal Court (ICC), and the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, for their briefings.
I will make a brief summary of the statement that
I have circulated in writing. As mentioned, Spain was
recently elected to occupy a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council. During our campaign, we presented
a series of documents that reflected what Spain would
be ready to do if it became a member of the Council.
That included a document entitled “Responsibility and
Transparency”.
What is our understanding of responsibility? It is
very simple. We understand responsibility to be the
exercise by the Security Council of its functions in a
manner that adequately represents the membership of
the General Assembly. We understand that approach in
the sense of enhancing the effectiveness of the Council.
That is why, when we become a non-permanent member
of the Council, beginning in the month of January, we
will get to work to try to improve the working methods
of the Council, as we are discussing today.
With regard to transparency, our understanding
is twofold. First, we need to be capable of adequately
taking into account the concerns and sensibilities of the
Members of the Organization, and, secondly, we need
to keep them abreast of current issues being debated
by the Council. In other words, we have to avoid the
Council becoming a hermetic body, which was the
case several years ago. However, not all the news is
negative. Quite to the contrary, I think the Council has
significantly improved its working methods in the past
decade, particularly in the past year.
I would like to especially note three specific
advances. The first is the wrap-up debate conducted in
the Council at the end of each month’s presidency. The
second, which is even more important, is the interactive
debate that occurs at the end of each presidency, and
the third would be the three presidential notes that were
adopted in this past year.
Madam President, you have asked us to focus on
some very specific aspects of the working methods. The
first deals with due process with regard to sanctions, and
the second with follow-up to referrals from the Security
Council to the International Criminal Court. With
regard to the procedural guarantees for the sanctions
regimes, I have to say that it is very important to re-read
and re-examine the very interesting recommendations
that the Office of the Ombudsperson has drawn up. I
also agree with many of the speakers who have said

14-5862423/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

that it would be important to expand the mandate
of the Ombudsperson, first on a case-by-case basis
and then perhaps on a more general basis. Generally
speaking, I endorse the very profound and interesting
statement made by the representative of Norway. The
second point on which we were asked to comment is the
follow-up to referrals by the Security Council of cases
to the International Criminal Court. In that regard, I
would like to say that it would be interesting to set up
a mechanism to ensure interaction with the Court in
line with the commitment that the Council adopted in
February 2013.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
commend your initiative, Madam President, to convene
an open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council, and I wish also to express our gratitude for the
very comprehensive concept paper (S/2014/725, annex)
prepared to orient our exchange of ideas today. We
also wish to thank the Ombudsperson of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for their statements. My delegation also expresses its
support for the statement made by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group.
At the outset, Peru would like to highlight the active
work of the delegation of Argentina as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions for almost two years, during
which period six presidential notes were adopted. Those
six instruments are an attempt to continue making
progress in building a more democratic and transparent
Security Council, making it possible for non-member
States to have access to more information, which is an
indispensable requirement for accountability. It should
be recalled that the mandate of the Security Council,
namely, to monitor international peace and security,
was given to it by all States Members of the United
Nations, and we have also committed ourselves to
comply with Council resolutions.
This meeting provides us the necessary opportunity
to express our interest in staying informed about the
Council’s deliberations. That is why we believe in
the importance of that issue on behalf of the entire
membership of the Organization. My delegation
therefore reiterates the urgent need to make progress in
24/38

23/10/2014

reforming the Council’s working methods with a view
to enhancing its legitimacy, the requisite transparency
in terms of multilateral relations and the effectiveness
and efficiency of its work. In that vein, my delegation
joins in supporting some of the initiatives already
mentioned by certain previous speakers, which shows
the range of agreement on those ideas.
First, in seeking transparency Peru believes it is
necessary for the Council to further convene more open
meetings. Such meetings should be of a substantive
nature and take place in a timely fashion. My delegation
also encourages the scheduling of open debates
such as today’s, as they make it possible for States
non-members of the Council to express their opinions.
We also believe it is important that documents to be
adopted at open debates result from the ideas stated
during the debate, and not be prepared beforehand.
My country also believes it is important to continue
the positive practice of conducting wrap-up sessions
at the end of each working month. We are grateful to
the countries that have opted to hold such meetings in
the course of their presidencies. We note the enormous
participation by non-members at those meetings, which
demonstrates their interest in having more information.
Secondly, with regard to the much-needed
democratization of the Security Council, Peru has
steadfastly supported a position of principle whose
ultimate purpose is the elimination of the right of the
veto. We are aware of the difficulties entailed in doing
that, which is why my delegation supports, as a first
step, the adoption of a code of conduct whereby the
veto would not be used in cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity or persistent flagrant violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law. In that
context Peru, commends the proposal made by France
and calls on other permanent members to work on that
basis. We reiterate that without genuine reform of the
Council’s working methods in terms of the use of the
veto, the Council’s effectiveness will be at risk and
highly important principles such as those related to
international humanitarian law and the responsibility
to protect will remain unprotected.
Thirdly, in order to foster greater interaction
and participation in meetings of the Council, Peru
believes it is essential to consolidate the practice of
the Council’s consultations with troop-contributing
countries involved in peacekeeping operations.
It is true that the increasingly complex and often
multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping operations

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

call for close coordination between the Council and
troop-contributing countries, with a view to ensuring
that the expectations and opinions of those countries
in terms of the design, implementation and renewal
of mandates be duly heard, since it is their uniformed
troops who will bear the responsibility for effectively
implementing in the field the mandates adopted by the
Council.
Lastly, I wish to mention that although the
implementation of such measures would substantively
improve the work of the Council, we believe that it is also
necessary to reform the Council’s work culture, moving
from the current reactive stance to one that favours
prevention. My delegation believes it is necessary that
the Council adopt a comprehensive, holistic focus on
security and peacekeeping matters that is not limited
to conflict situations. The Council should develop
preventive diplomacy strategies and early-warning
systems in order to avoid conflict and reduce the risk of
such conflict spreading or reigniting. That is the only
way to ensure full compliance with the main goal for
which the Organization was created, namely “to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I make
this statement on behalf of Ambassador Hilale, who
would have liked to be present but was called upon to
attend to other functions of his office.
I thank the Argentine presidency for organizing
this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council and for providing a helpful and
thoughtful concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) to
guide our discussions. We welcome the fact that this
debate has become institutionalized and is now part
of the annual practice of the Security Council, which
allows States non-members of the Council to express
their views on likely ways of improving the Council’s
working methods. I also take this opportunity to
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing this
morning.
My delegation takes the opportunity to commend
you, Madam, for your able chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, which culminated in the
adoption of six important presidential notes.
The Charter of the United Nations endows the
Security Council with the primary responsibility in

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Council can fulfil its role only on the basis of an
efficient and transparent approach. In that context,
Morocco welcomes the many positive developments in
recent years to improve the functioning of the Security
Council.
In that regard it is important to note the greater
number of open debates, the dynamic return to
the practice of wrap-up sessions and monthly
informal briefings and the more frequent use of
videoconferencing. Those new practices contribute to
enhancing the transparency of the Council’s work and
its quality as well, and enable it to take advantage of the
diversity of positions and views of States Members of
the United Nations.
The presidential note of 2010 (S/2010/507),
which summarizes experiences and provides specific
recommendations to improve the working methods of
the Council, is a major achievement in the quest for
transparency and in strengthening the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the Council — but it can always be
improved. As was the case in the past, that presidential
note can be improved according to new measures
agreed upon to develop and enhance the Council’s
work. In that regard, the Kingdom of Morocco is always
willing to contribute to that important project, as it had
the opportunity to do during the two years of its term
of office when it participated in the adoption of a set
of measures, spread over several presidential notes, to
ensure the full implementation of note 507.
The task of improving the working methods still
calls for follow-up in many areas. Given the time
limitations, I shall mention only the most important
ones.
First, the importance of close cooperation with
police- and troop-contributing countries is no longer in
doubt. Given the multidimensional, complex mandates
they are expected to implement and the growing number
of challenges they must respond to on the ground with
limited resources, troop- and police-contributing
countries must be regularly and promptly consulted
when necessary, to discuss urgent matters as dictated
by the evolving situation in the area of operations, in
order to ensure strengthened decision-making on the
part of the Council and the appropriate conduct of its
functions.
Secondly, we emphasize the importance and
usefulness of the open debates, which encourage greater

14-5862425/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

interaction between the Security Council and Member
States. Nevertheless, in order for the Council to take
full advantage of those deliberations, it is essential that
the discussions be focused on precise themes with a
specific scope.
Thirdly, we appreciate the increased cooperation
with the Peacebuilding Commission, particularly
the contributions made by chairpersons of the
country configurations to the Council’s debates and
consultations. We urge the Council to intensify its use
of that practice.
Fourthly, access to Council documents and
their availability can assist in achieving the goal of
transparency. We welcome the efforts made by the
secretariat of the Council for that information to be
regularly updated on the website of the Council, in
particular in relation to the monthly programme of
work.
We believe that beyond technical or practical
considerations, improving the working methods of the
Council will clearly lead to strengthened capacities in
the maintenance of international peace and security
and to effectively responding to its increasing workload
as well as the multiple complex issues on its agenda.
That is why we hope that today’s debate will give rise
to specific proposals in this area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Madam President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for convening today’s
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. The Maldives aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Switzerland, who
spoke on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, a cross-regional group of
23 States, of which Switzerland is Coordinator.
The Security Council represents and acts on behalf
of all States Members of the United Nations, pursuant
to article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. In
keeping with that mandate, there is an obligation
among every member of the Council to ensure that
every decision is transparent and in the best interests
of the global community. The Maldives welcomes these
inclusive annual debates on the working methods of
this august body as integral to productively engaging
with the entire membership of the United Nations.
We especially welcome the issuance of presidential
note (S/2014/268) ,on a Security Council member
26/38

23/10/2014

or members acting as penholders for the drafting of
resolutions, presidential statements or press statements.
It is particularly pleasing to note that penholder
members are encouraged to exchange information
and consult with all members of the Council and
relevant stakeholder Member States from the general
membership of the United Nations.
In this modern day and age, the importance of
engaging with all States Members of the United
Nations cannot be overstated. The Maldives echoes the
call for the Council to take note of recommendations
made today by the wider membership and calls for
it to provide a summary of recommendations based
thereon, with the intention of guiding the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
The need for democratization and the maintenance
of the rule of law at the international level is widely
accepted and of paramount importance to the
functioning of the core organs of the United Nations. In
that spirit, the Maldives continues to advocate for the
willing waiver of the right to exercise the veto in cases
of mass atrocity crimes. The Maldives commends the
proposal made by France to that effect. We encourage
all permanent members of the Council to engage with
ACT on exploring this issue further. The time is now
for finalization of a code of conduct on refraining from
the use of the veto in situations of mass atrocities.
As we approach 2016 and the appointment of a new
secretary-General, the time has also come for greater
transparency and inclusion. The role of the SecretaryGeneral has evolved immensely since the foundation of
the Organization, and, as the premier representative of
the global community, his or her selection is rightfully
subject to the input of the global community. The
general membership of the United Nations deserves
to understand the vision and personality of the future
Secretary-General before he or she is selected. Similarly,
the selection process should reflect the concerns of the
wider membership in order to enhance the legitimacy
of the Secretary-General as a true representative of the
global community. The Maldives stands behind ACT’s
initiative to create a constructive dialogue with both
the Security Council and the General Assembly and
encourages all Member States to support this initiative.
It is only together, with both permanent and
non-permanent members of the Council working
in tandem, that higher standards of accountability,
coherence and transparency can be reached in the
14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

functioning of this core organ of the United Nations.
It is our enduring hope that we continue to strive for
better practices with outcomes that support global
peace and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Hodžić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I would also like to
congratulate you, Madam President, for Argentina’s
very active and successful two-year chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. I would also like to thank
the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost, and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for their respective comprehensive briefings.
With regard to increasing transparency and
interaction with non-Council members and bodies,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as former Chair of the
Informal Working Group, has raised the issue of
increasing transparency in the Council’s work and has
suggested to Informal Working Group members that
they consider the idea of holding regular briefings
on Security Council working methods for States that
are not members of the Council. Keeping in mind the
complexity of promoting such an initiative, I wish to
congratulate Argentina on its able stewardship of the
Informal Working Group, which resulted in the note by
the President contained in document S/2013/515. We
call upon Council members to fulfil their commitments
set forth in that note, as it supports maintaining regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations,
enhancing cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, and encouraging the subsidiary bodies
to improve the transparency of their activities.
With respect to non-members’ contribution to the
Council’s work, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s experience
in the 1990s, when the first Arria Formula meeting was
organized, indicates that civil society and non-State
actors can contribute significantly to the understanding
of certain situations. We therefore invite Council
members to intensify informal forms of dialogue with
non-members, particularly in the form of Arria Formula
meetings.
On implementing the peacekeeping mandates with
more efficiency, Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a police

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

contributor, encourages frequent regular briefings and
consultations and more interactive dialogue by the
Council with troop- and police-contributing countries,
as outlined in the note by the President contained
in document S/2013/630. For 14 years, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has engaged in peacekeeping operations.
Until now, we have had 212 police officers, including
female officers, participating in United Nations
operations. Currently, 47 police officers from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, 21 per cent of whom are female,
have been deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Liberia, South Sudan and Cyprus.
One month ago, during the high-level week,
Ministers gathered to support the French initiative
on the voluntary commitment of the Permanent
Five to refrain from using the veto in situations of
genocide and mass atrocities. Bosnia and Herzegovina
wholeheartedly supports this initiative. At that event,
the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Zlatko Lagumdžija, said:
“Speaking from the lessons learned in my
country — from Tomasica to Srebrenica — the
international community needs to introduce a code
of conduct in working methods of the Security
Council that, through the refraining from the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities, will
strengthen the international community’s capacity,
responsibility and commitment to protecting
civilians.”
In that regard, we also support the work of the United
Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
In accordance with the Charter, the Security Council
is responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is therefore crucial that the
Council ensures that a peace will be durable, which,
in cases of suspected genocide, war crimes and other
forms of mass atrocities, can only be attained through
the rule of law and achieving justice. One of the ways
that justice can be achieved is by referring certain cases
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Bosnia and
Herzegovina joins the countries that have requested a
more efficient follow-up to the Council’s referrals to
the ICC. Establishing accountability and achieving
justice are preconditions for success in peacebuilding
and reconciliation processes, as well as for durable and
stable peace and security in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

14-5862427/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

Bosnia and Herzegovina has always advocated for
more efficient, transparent and interactive working
methods in the Security Council, and we remain
committed to continue our engagement together with
the members and non-members of the Security Council
alike in initiatives and dialogue with a view to further
improving the Council’s practices.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends Argentina
for organizing today’s debate and for its effective chairing
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. The Group has been
particularly active this past year, with the adoption of
five presidential notes. I also wish to thank both the
ICC prosecutor and the Al-Qaida sanctions Committee
Ombudsperson for her briefing today.
Ireland aligns itself with the comprehensive
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the 23 members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) Group.
Today we wish to highlight three key aspects of
working methods which we believe are of particular
importance to the effectiveness of the Security Council:
sharpening the Council’s preventive role; the use of the
veto; and strengthening engagement with countries
contributing troops and police to peacekeeping
operations.
For us, it is clear that the Council needs to enhance
its preventive capacities and needs to be alerted as early
as possible to potential crises, so that appropriate action
can be taken. Current experience reveals a Council
that frequently finds itself responding to crises in an
incremental manner, escalating the tools at its disposal
as situations deteriorate. Better outcomes can be
achieved where the Council’s tools are utilized much
earlier.
There have been a number of practical initiatives
aimed at strengthening the Council’s preventive role,
including the establishment of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
the introduction of horizon-scanning briefings and,
more recently, the increased use of informal discussions
with the Department of Political Affairs, as well as the
use of “any other business” to raise emerging issues of
concern.

28/38

23/10/2014

Ireland welcomes these initiatives as well as the
adoption of resolution 2171 (2014), on 21 August, which
strengthens existing acquis on the Council’s preventive
role.
But more needs to be done to develop a genuine
culture of prevention. Innovative formats such as
Arria Formula meetings can trigger fresh thinking on
the dynamics of a conflict and inform the necessary
response. We saw this recently in the case of the
Central African Republic, and we welcome the growing
transparency and interactivity by the Council in holding
these meetings.
We also welcome the suggestion by the former
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay,
at the August open debate on conflict prevention (see
S/PV.7019) that her successor would regularly and
routinely provide an informal briefing to Council
members on situations of concern in order to strengthen
early warning.
Ireland believes that the unfettered use of veto
rights by permanent Council members inhibits
the effectiveness of the Council and needs to be
reconsidered. The veto is not and cannot be viewed as
a privilege, but, rather, it brings particular duties and a
special responsibility to resolve conflict.
Ireland welcomes the initiative by France for a
voluntary code of conduct on the use of the veto in
mass atrocity situations. Ireland encourages permanent
members to agree to a statement of principles on a
voluntary code of conduct by the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations, next year.
Finally, as a significant peacekeeping troop
contributor, we are strongly of the view that a
dynamic, interactive and meaningful partnership
between Council members, the Secretariat and troopand police-contributing countries is of benefit to all.
Presidential note 630, adopted this time last year, joined
a substantial existing acquis on peacekeeping working
methods, which go a significant way towards enhancing
the quality of the interaction and consultation with
troop and police contributors.
The main challenge now is implementation, and
we commend efforts which seek to strengthen this
triangular relationship.
All States Members of the United Nations have a
legitimate stake in how the Security Council is run;
the Council was established, after all, to ensure prompt

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

and effective action on behalf of the full membership. I
think that the fact that the Council has been discussing
this topic since 10 o’clock this morning shows that this
is an issue that matters to the entire membership.
In that regard, on conflict prevention, and across a
broad range of topics, Ireland, together with the ACT
Group, will continue to work for constructive and
cooperative engagement with Council members. We all
have an interest in taking practical steps to improve the
way in which the Council does its business and in order
to enhance its effectiveness.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Today is the auspicious
festival of Divali in my country, and I greet you, Madam
President, on this occasion.
Let me begin by thanking you, Madam, for
organizing this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. I thank your delegation for
circulating the concept note (S/2014/725) for this debate.
I put on record our deep appreciation of your stewardship
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Procedural Questions during the period 2013/2014.
The working methods of the Council are of paramount
importance and interest to all States Members of the
United Nations, given the fact that under Article 25 of
the United Nations Charter, all Member States “agree
to accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council”.
The concept note advises Member States that the
issue of Security Council reform, which is being debated
by us in the General Assembly, does not constitute the
subject of this debate. We beg to differ with this advice.
Any debate on its working methods must have the issue of
Security Council reform as its overarching framework.
The three paragraphs on the Security Council in the
2005 Outcome document of the sixtieth anniversary
of the Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) are
clear on the subject. The accountability of the Council
to the wider membership of the United Nations, as well
as the need for transparency in its functioning, require
us to address the shortfalls in the Council’s working
methods in the context of the urgent need for early
reforms of the Council. My delegation therefore aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier today by the
Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia on behalf of
the L.69 group.

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

In the interest of brevity, I would like to speak
today on two issues related to the topic of our debate.
These are, first, the shortfalls in the methods which the
Council is using in drawing up the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and, secondly, the
impact of the Council’s particular use of its working
methods, which we feel dilute the international effort
against terrorism, which is fast emerging as the single
most important challenge to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
On the first issue of peacekeeping mandates,
Madam President, you have yourself been witness to
the complete disregard in the working methods of the
Council for the clear provisions and obligations set out
in Article 44 of the United Nations Charter. Whereas
the Article calls for troop-contributing countries not
represented in the Council to be invited “before” such
mandates are drawn up “to participate in the decisions
of the Security Council concerning the employment
of contingents of that Member’s armed forces”, India,
for example, has not been so consulted. This is despite
the fact that India is the single largest contributor of
troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
having contributed more than 170,000 troops in 43 of
the 69 peacekeeping operations mandated so far by the
Council.
What is the impact of this shortfall in the working
methods of the Council? It is clear that a major casualty
has been the absence of the contribution that troopcontributing countries could give the Council during
Article 44 consultations on issues such as deployment,
the required profiles of troops and equipment, as well as
the nuances of strategy. In the process, the perceptions
available within the United Nations membership on
how to actually use peacekeeping to bring about peace
have been sacrificed in favour of enforcing the will of
a small, privileged minority within the Council to look
at peacekeepers as instruments to wage war. This has
resulted in an increasing demand for more and more
resources, military and financial, and experiments
with new technology. This demand is at the expense of
a politically brokered peaceful settlement of disputes,
which, in our view, is also the most effective and
sustainable way to protect the civilians caught up in
conflicts where peacekeeping operations are mandated,
not to mention the steadily rising toll on the lives of
United Nations peacekeepers themselves.
On the second issue of the impact of the working
methods on countering terrorism, we strongly believe

14-5862429/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

that the Council must seriously and transparently
take the measures available to it under the Charter to
require Member States to implement its resolutions on
countering terrorism without exception. To condone
the use of terrorism on account of perceived political
purposes is counterproductive and will engulf more
and more Member States in an ever-widening spiral of
violence and destruction.
We therefore specifically call for the Council’s
working methods to include a mandatory time-bound
reporting requirement to the wider membership of
the United Nations on the implementation of Council
resolutions on countering terrorism. Let us make a
beginning on this proposal by having a report to the
wider membership of the United Nations with respect
to the latest such resolution adopted by the Council,
resolution 2178 (2014), of 24 September. We would
be interested especially in the Council’s assessment
of the implementation of operative paragraphs 11 and
12 of that resolution, which deal with international
cooperation. My delegation would like to participate in
any open and transparent exercise that the Council may
organize under its working methods on this subject,
given the fact that my country has been one of the
longest-suffering victims of terrorism.
We have noted the use of the working methods of the
Council to regulate the mechanism of the Ombudsman,
created by the Council in 2009. We note that though the
General Assembly has the responsibility for electing
the non-permanent members of the Council, the
appointment of the Ombudsman is outside the purview
of the General Assembly. As the Ombudsman deals
with substantive aspects of international law, including
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
pertaining to countering terrorism, we have concerns
regarding the operation of this mechanism within the
opaque working methods of the Council. Matters are
exacerbated when we look at the highly unsatisfactory
nature of the annual report of the Council to the General
Assembly, in which there is no transparency or detail
regarding the way in which the Council actually works.
The Council’s provision that “where the
Ombudsperson recommends that the Committee
consider delisting, the individual or entity will be
delisted unless, within 60 days, the Committee decides
by consensus to maintain the listing” appears to us to be
contradictory to the uniform application of the rule of
law, which would impact adversely on the use of legal,
as opposed to political, means to counter terrorism.

30/38

23/10/2014

To conclude, we would reiterate that our interest
in participating in this debate stems from the primary
role given by the United Nations Charter to the Council
for upholding international peace and security. Our
concern is that the current working methods, which
have been provisionally applied since the Council was
established, have deviated from the clear provisions, and
indeed, objectives of the Charter of the United Nations,
making the Council ineffective and unrepresentative of
the world as it is on 23 October 2014. Can we at least
expect the Council to adopt clearly defined working
procedures, taking into account our views expressed in
this debate, by the time our Organization celebrates its
seventieth anniversary in September 2015?
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Egypt associates itself
with the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate, and for providing a
thought-stimulating concept paper (S/2014/725, annex).
This meeting bears testimony to the need to intensify
our collective efforts to ensure that the Council truly
acts on behalf of the entire membership in discharging
its mandate in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter.
Enhancing the transparency, inclusivity, openness
and democratization of the Security Council’s work
is indispensable for the credibility of the Council in
carrying out its mandate, and ensures its effectiveness
and ability to address the rising challenges.
We commend the efforts to hold more open
meetings, interactive dialogues, Arria Formula
meetings, monthly wrap-up sessions. Nevertheless, in
our view, there is still a need for further improvements
in the Council’s working methods, particularly in the
following areas. First, it is fundamental to reaffirm that
the work of the Council is a collective responsibility.
Equal participation and contribution from all Council
members, permanent and elected, in the conduct of
activities and the formulation of outcomes is a principle
to be safeguarded. It can be enhanced through a more
substantive and genuine intra-Council dialogue,
exchange of information and communication.
Secondly, the Council should benefit from a more
participatory distribution of responsibilities among
its Member States, with the objective of a further
democratization of its decision-making process. All

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

members of the Council should be enabled to take the
lead as penholders, while ensuring a timely exchange
of information and early engagement in consultations.
Thirdly, as a considerable amount of the Council’s
work takes place in its subsidiary bodies, the need
for greater transparency and inclusiveness in their
work is self-evident. Full engagement with the wider
membership, and as appropriate other institutions
and organs, are requisite steps towards that goal.
We also believe more efforts can be done to ensure
the representativity of subsidiary bodies, the early
appointment of new chairpersons and the setting of
modalities for the handover of chairmanship would be
very beneficial.
Fourthly, we recall with appreciation the note by
the President (S/2013/630) regarding consultations with
the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs).
As a major TCC, Egypt strongly calls for enhancing
engagement decision-making phases of relevant
Council action, including any pertinent change to the
mandate or operation of the mission.
Egypt has pronounced itself earlier with regard to
the important initiatives to regulate the use of the veto
in situations of mass atrocities, where we expressed
our readiness to address any new constructive
approach to reform the Security Council within the
intergovernmental negotiations, as an integral part of
a comprehensive package, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 62/557.
Both of the issues flagged in the concept paper
of our open debate today — due process in sanctions
regimes and the follow-up to Security Council referrals
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) — are timely.
We note in that regard that the Special Rapporteur on
the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
has indicated that the non-deliberative nature of the
process has raised concerns that the regime is open
to misuse. There is merit in considering granting the
Ombudsperson greater authority so as to make the
appeal process similar to judicial proceedings.
The issue of the follow-up to Security Council
referrals to the International Criminal Court has to
be addressed through a balanced approach, bearing
in mind the different positions and points of views
of Member States and parties. That issue cannot be
considered in isolation from other pertinent aspects of
the relation between the Council and the ICC. I would

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

like here to recall cases where the Council has not
responded to requests by groupings, such as the African
Union, for using the Council’s authority, under article
16 of the Rome Statute, to defer an investigation or
prosecution in specific cases for a period of 12 months.
Egypt believes that the tools available at the Council’s
disposal for the peaceful settlement of disputes under
Chapter VI should not be overlooked before resorting
to coercive measures.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation congratulates you, Madam President,
on the accession of your country, Argentina, to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October, and thanks you for your initiative to organize
today’s debate on the important issue of the working
methods of the Security Council. My delegation would
also like to thank Ms. Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2001) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
their constructive briefings for the debate.
The question of the working methods of the
Security Council is closely linked to that of the
reconfiguration of the Security Council. However,
until we are able to find a consensual point of entry
that will someday, hopefully, enable expansion and
equitable representation in the Council, the collective
duty now is to do everything possible to ensure the
greatest efficiency in the Council’s actions, with a view
to maintaining international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter.
My country suffered a severe post-election crisis,
which left more than 3,000 dead and 1.5 million
displaced persons at the height of the crisis. However,
thanks to the consensus that prevailed in the Security
Council on that issue, resolution 1975 (2011) was
adopted in 2011 and allowed us to put an end to the
violence and save countless human lives. Imagine
for a moment if the veto had been used in the case of
the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire, then today we would be
deploring another genocide in Côte d’Ivoire. With that
experience, the news of the mass atrocities that we are
witnessing now calls on us and obliges us to condemn
the Security Council’s inaction in the face of those
situations, due mainly to the misuse of the veto.

14-5862431/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

Lest we forget, the right to veto conferred to
permanent members of the Security Council is an
enormous privilege, which, in our opinion, must yield
to the moral imperative of protecting populations
against mass atrocities. In that sense, Côte d’Ivoire
understands the French initiative to implement a code
of conduct to govern the use of the veto in situations of
mass atrocities. That is why again today, Côte d’Ivoire,
expresses its full support for that initiative and will
reiterate it whenever it is necessary, just as it did on
25 September, through its Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Minister of State His Excellency Charles Koffi
Diby, during the ministerial meeting on that issue,
co-chaired by France and Mexico, on the margins of the
general debate of the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly.
It is clear that the effectiveness of the Council’s
working methods will increase significantly with the
adoption of such a code of conduct, especially since
we have seen the emergence of an encouraging trend
with the adoption of resolutions 2150 (2014), on the
prevention of genocide, and 2171 (2014), on conflict
prevention. In that regard, my delegation urges the
Council to organize more briefings by the Special
Advisers to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, as
well as by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The importance of that was highlighted
in the joint briefing of the Council on South Sudan by
Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Navi Pillay (see S/PV.7168).
In that context, my delegation also supports the
horizon-scanning approach of the Department of
Political Affairs and any Arria Formula initiative aimed
at informing the Security Council on situations where
there is a potential risk of mass atrocities.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that as the
seventieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations approaches, the expectations of people all over
the globe are increasingly desperate to see a safer, more
peaceful and more just world. The Security Council is
on the front lines when it comes to providing answers to
such legitimate expectations. That is why we encourage
the permanent members of the Council to adopt a
declaration of principles for a code of conduct on
refraining voluntarily from using the veto in situations
involving mass atrocities. That will certainly help to
give the Security Council all the credibility and strength
it needs to deal effectively with its various challenges.

32/38

23/10/2014

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Argentina
for convening this important open debate and
congratulate you, Madam President, on your energetic
and productive chairing of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We also thank the Ombudsperson of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
their briefings today.
In the interests of time, I shall deliver an abridged
version of my statement. The full version will be
circulated, including a discussion of the issues raised in
the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex) and support for
the French initiative on the veto.
We are pleased that there is a regular opportunity
in the Council’s programme to consider working
methods in this way, but we remain of the view that
an annual discussion is insufficient. We believe that
more frequent, transparent discussion that includes the
wider membership and is accompanied by follow-up
and monitoring is required.
The notes that have been agreed on by the Council
under Argentina’s stewardship in the past year are
very positive steps. We particularly welcome Council
members’ renewed emphasis on the importance
of early and regular consultation with troop- and
police-contributing countries, and the important role
that the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations can
play in that regard. We also welcome the confirmation
that all Council members can be penholders, and
the commitment that has been made to enhancing
the participation of all members in drafting Council
documents. Those commitments are significant because
they relate to issues over Council practice in recent
years that have generated such concern, prime among
them the fact that most Member States are locked out
of the substance of Council deliberations. However, the
notes are a challenge to the Council to act rather than
an end in themselves. They must be implemented if any
kind of practical change is to flow from them.
This year we have been pleased to see more frequent
and flexible use of meeting formats such as Arria
Formula meetings, which have helped Council members
to consult more widely on sensitive but pressing issues.
Wrap-up meetings and informal briefing sessions have

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

also become the norm over the past year. The challenge
now is for all Council members to ensure that those
sessions are used for substantive exchanges of views
that improve the Council’s performance and practice.

process of reform of this important body. In that regard,
my delegation is concerned that after two decades of
regular debates and engagements, the question of
reform of the Council is still unresolved.

As we have said in previous debates this year, more
must be done to enable the Council to perform its most
neglected responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations, those that come under Chapter VI concerning
conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We welcomed the Council’s consideration
of conflict prevention in August (see S/PV.7247) and
the resolution that followed. The Security Council has
developed many tools for action under Chapter VII,
but is much less well adapted for peaceful action under
Chapter VI. Adapting the Council’s working methods
to that end is vital. In recent years, relevant tasks
have become more pre-programmed, more formal and
more concentrated in a few penholder hands. It is also
unfortunate that the practice of horizon-scanning does
not appear to have taken hold this year. We recognize
that some States have concerns about that format and
welcome continued attempts to improve the concept.
Regardless of the name or form given to the concept,
the Council should have mechanisms whereby it can
regularly look ahead and plan for emerging threats to
peace and security, so as to promote early and effective
responses. Discussions on emerging crises are often
likely to be very sensitive, and are not always best
suited to formal Council meetings. We believe the
potential exists for a greater role for Council subsidiary
bodies to help facilitate more active Council roles in
conflict prevention. Similarly, the Council would
be much better placed to respond to threats if it had
more effective processes for engaging with regional
organizations. That has been a focus of some efforts on
the part of Council members, but further improvement
and greater consistency of engagement are required.

The Security Council remains the principal
guarantor for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The way it conducts its business
is therefore of paramount importance to the entire
membership of the United Nations. As a result, we
place a high premium on the relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly on the one hand,
as well as between the Council and the international
community at large, on the other.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this important debate
and for continuing to involve us in the discussion. We
would like to recognize the presence here today of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the Ombudsperson, and to thank them for their
briefings and for all the information they have given us.
Today’s debate now marks six years since the
adoption, on 15 September 2008 of General Assembly
decision 62/557 launched the intergovernmental

It is regrettable that since the moment of its
creation in 1945 the Security Council has lacked both
geographic and democratic representation of the United
Nations membership. It defies human logic that Africa
still remains the only constituency unrepresented in a
body whose legitimacy and strength must derive from
the totality of its membership.
As we move forward, we would like to see greater
accountability, coherence and transparency in the
Council’s working methods. My delegation welcomes
the proposal to extend the mandate of the Ombudsperson
to all Sanctions Committees in order to improve their
efficiency and effectiveness. We also call on the
Council to assume its responsibility for following up its
referrals to the International Criminal Court. Leaving
the financial burden to the Court and the States parties
is tantamount to abdicating responsibility.
My delegation believes it is now time to reform the
character, shape and working methods of the Security
Council in order to bring it in line with the realities
of contemporary international relations. Only then can
the Charter of the United Nations be used, as noted in
its preamble, to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, and be able to serve the fundamental
rights of humankind.
The African position, as outlined in the Ezulwini
Consensus, is loud and clear. It is inspired by the desire
to see the continent take its rightful place among the
community of nations in making key global decisions,
and proposes expanding both the permanent and
non-permanent membership categories of the Council.
Furthermore, it views the question of the veto as divisive,
exclusive and subject to abuse by the veto-wielding
Powers. We therefore welcome the French proposal that
calls on permanent members to refrain from the use of

14-5862433/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

the veto in situations of mass atrocities. We believe that
proposal is genuine and morally appropriate. It must
therefore be embraced.
My delegation looks forward to the resumption
of the intergovernmental process on the question of
the reform of the Council under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Tanin. We have every confidence that,
as we resume those negotiations, we shall take into
consideration all proposals brought forward by various
groups, find areas of convergence and build consensus
on them. As always, my delegation stands ready to
work cooperatively with all parties to ensure that our
collective efforts during those negotiations bear fruit
and achieve good results.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): At the outset, I would
like to commend the Argentine presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important annual
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council and preparing the concept paper (S/2014/725,
annex). I would like also to thank the two briefers,
Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost and Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda, for their valuable presentations.
It is obvious that the effective functioning of the
Security Council has a direct impact on the maintenance
of international peace and security. Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations indicates that the Council
acts on behalf of the entire membership of the United
Nations. Therefore, the Council’s working methods
do not belong only to its 15 members — they are the
collective responsibility of the general membership. For
that reason, reforming the Security Council’s working
methods is one of the five linked items to be negotiated
in the context of the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 62/557.
Algeria appreciates the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions under the chairmanship of
Argentina to improve the Council’s working methods
and notes the different documents agreed upon by the
Informal Working Group since last year’s open debate
(see S/PV.7052).
Yet we think that more efforts should be exerted
to promote the full implementation of the note by the
President contained in document S/2010/507 of July
2010 and subsequent notes. Obviously, we must also be
34/38

23/10/2014

more ambitious and advance our discussions beyond
those notes. For example, formalizing the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, which have
been in force for over 60 years, would be a major step
towards improving the transparency, openness and
consistency of the Council.
In the same vein, private meetings, informal
consultations and closed meetings should be kept to
a minimum. In addition, issues to be covered at any
briefing by the Secretariat should be determined in
coordination with the concerned State. Moreover,
the concerned party should be given the opportunity
to express its views on such briefings. We think
transparency and openness would not undermine
efficiency.
Let me recall that, through the note contained
in document S/2013/515, Security Council members
committed themselves to implementing a number of
measures to enhance the efficiency and transparency of
the Council. In that regard, Council members agreed to
make more effective use of public meetings, informal
interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings.
Those meetings should be used effectively by providing
for real opportunities and more meaningful exchanges
of view to take into account the contributions of
non-Council members, in particular those that may be
directly affected by the decisions of the Council.
For instance, wrap-up sessions have proven useful
in taking stock of the activities of the Security Council
at the end of each month. We thank those Council
members that have held wrap-up sessions at the end of
their presidencies. That practice complements the one
whereby Council Presidents brief the wider membership
on the programme of work at the beginning of each
month.
My delegation would like to stress its strong view
on the need to submit to the General Assembly the
Council’s annual report, which should include enough
information and analytical content. We think that the
entire United Nations will benefit from such bold steps.
We also believe that it is crucial to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations. Equally, States who have
embarked upon or undertaken initiatives such as
mediation should have more opportunities to interact
with the Council. That would definitely work to the
benefit of the international community as a whole, since
such endeavours are aimed at early warning, conflict

14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

prevention, conflict resolution and the promotion of
peace. Messages from such States or organizations
should be heard, if not followed, by Security Council
members. We strongly believe that the monthly
presidency could do a lot in that regard.
Regarding the issue of sanctions, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the imposition
of sanctions should be considered only after all means
of peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of
the Charter have been exhausted. Accordingly, Chapter
VII should be invoked as a measure of last resort.
Sanctions should be imposed only when there exists a
threat to international peace and security.
In conclusion, let me say that there is still much
room for improvement. Algeria counts on all members
of the Council, in particular its permanent members,
to make greater progress in improving the Council’s
working methods so as to strengthen its ability to carry
out its mandate of maintaining international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I thank you very much
for giving me the floor, Madam. I would like to thank
the presidency of Argentina for having convened
today’s open debate. Poland believes that the process
of improving working methods is crucial for enhancing
the Council’s ability to carry out its responsibilities.
We are confident that transparency in the Council’s
activities serves not only the wider membership, but
also the Council itself. Public wrap-up sessions and
briefings for United Nations members are a useful way
of providing information outside the Council. However,
there is still much more to be done. Troop-contributing
countries should be involved in the Council’s
peacekeeping deliberations to a greater extent. The
Council should work towards closer cooperation with
civil society. Arria Formula meetings and informal
dialogues are extremely useful in that respect.
Guided by the excellent concept paper (S/2014/725,
annex) prepared by the Presidency, I would like to pay
special attention to the question of sanctions and the
Council’s referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Sanctions are an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security. Security
Council sanctions regimes should grant fair and clear
review procedures that can improve the Council’s

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

credibility and effectiveness. In that regard, the
creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson was a step
in the right direction. Let me thank Ms. Kimberly Prost
and reiterate our full support for her work. In our view,
the Council should seriously consider the possibility of
extending the mandate of the Ombudsperson to other
sanctions Committees.
There is a general consensus among Member
States that if the Security Council decides to refer a
situation to the International Criminal Court (ICC), it
must also urge the States concerned to cooperate fully.
Lack of follow-up by the Council with its own referrals
undermines the credibility of the ICC. It also hinders
our efforts to put an end to impunity for those who have
committed the most serious crimes falling under ICC
jurisdiction.
The establishment of a mechanism to implement
the Council’s referrals to the ICC will be a positive step.
We believe that entrusting the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals with that task is the right
thing to do, given the fact that the Group already has
the necessary expertise in the matter. The international
community, particularly members of the Security
Council, must take action to enhance cooperation with
the Court.
Finally, let me also stress Poland’s full support
for the French proposal to limit the use of veto in the
situations of mass atrocities. The initiative is much
appreciated especially as it is the first one coming
directly from the permanent Council member. We hope
that constant progress in the reform process will make
the Security Council a stronger and more credible body
that will be able to face emerging challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Madam, for holding this important meeting and
for your useful briefing as the Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, as well as to congratulate
you on the successful Security Council presidency
of Argentina. Our appreciation also goes to other
briefers — Ms. Kimberley Prost, Ombudsperson of
the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, and Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Ukraine fully appreciates the emphasis in the concept

14-5862435/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

paper (S/2014/725, annex) before us on the Council’s
cooperation with the ICC and due process in targeted
sanctions. We welcome the contribution of today’s
debate to take forward those important issues.
With that in mind, I would like to touch upon some
other aspects of the Council working methods which,
in our view, are of no less relevance to its effectiveness
and efficiency and, therefore, of equal interest to the
wider United Nations membership.
On the issue of procedure of this body, we welcome
continuation of the Council’s own efforts aimed at
streamlining and improving its day-to-day operations.
Among such positive steps in 2014, I would like to
point out the further increase in the number of public
meetings; the active use of the practice of wrap-up
sessions, including the first such public session since
2005 organized by Rwanda; monthly informal briefings
at the end of each presidency; and so on. Other welcome
developments are the notes by the President S/2014/368
of 14 April and S/2014/393 of 5 June, encouraging,
respectively, a more inclusive system of penholders
and consultative and earlier appointment process of the
Chairs of the subsidiary bodies.
Let me recall the long-standing position of
Ukraine on the necessity to give a stronger voice in
the Council decision-making processes to those States
Members of the United Nations directly involved in
implementation of its decisions. First and foremost,
it should apply to the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs). As
an active and dedicated participation in United Nations,
peacekeeping efforts Ukraine also sees the continuous
need to adjust the timing of Council decisions on
extensions of mandates of peace operations so as not to
put the relevant TCCs and PCCs in difficult position in
terms of their domestic legislative procedures. Ukraine
encourages Council members to further maintain
and build on the dynamics in streamlining its modus
operandi in line with Article 30 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Now let me turn to the more complex issues
underlying the Council procedure and bearing direct
impact on the way it functions. External aggression
against Ukraine made my and many other countries
take a deeper look at the Council working methods.
What became even more crystal clear is the direct
linkage between ensuring effective functioning of the
Council and genuine commitment of each and every
of its members — permanent ones above all — to the
36/38

23/10/2014

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
In other words, it is impossible to effectively
address the Council’s working methods without first
fixing and then preventing the scenario of one of its
permanent members abusing core United Nations
values, going unpunished for it, and continuing to
occupy a permanent seat in this Chamber as if nothing
had happened. That is why we believe that the idea
that the status of permanent member does not provide
immunity from the obligations under the United
Nations Charter should lie at the heart of any concept of
the Council reform, including in terms of the working
methods. We regard the initiative of France for the
permanent members to renounce their veto powers in
the event of mass atrocities as an important first step
in this direction. We welcome the holding last month
in New York of a ministerial meeting on framing the
veto and express our readiness to contribute to this
discussion.
My delegation believes that the elaboration of a
proposed code of good conduct for permanent members
of the Council should also encompass, besides
mentioned genuine commitment to the core values of
the United Nations, such vital aspect as prevention
of the use of the veto power for aggression. It should
also include revitalization and making operational
provision of the Article 27 of the Charter of the United
Nations stating that a party to a dispute shall abstain
from voting in the Council. In conclusion, I would like
to reiterate Ukraine’s unwavering commitment to the
strong, effective, efficient and transparent Security
Council — a commitment that was a cornerstone of our
only tenure to date in this body as an independent State
in 2000-2001.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): Allow me
to congratulate you, Madam, on your country’s
presidency and to thank you for organizing this annual
open debate on Security Council working methods.
We appreciate Argentina’s leadership and devotion
to the Council’s working methods, as well as the
results achieved so far under your chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court and the Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
14-58624

23/10/2014

Security Council working methods

individuals and entities for their useful presentations
and extend our appreciation and support for their
respective work.
We welcome the tangible progress made in recent
years towards improving the working methods of the
Security Council, including most recently the three
presidential notes adopted since the convening of last
year’s debate. It is important to recognize that the efforts
to improve transparency, inclusiveness, efficiency and
openness have been considerable. This is reflected in
holding of open and public debates, wrap-up and Arria
Formula meetings, interactive and informal dialogues,
all of which contribute to enhanced transparency and
improving of the dialogue between Security Council
and general membership.
But there is still a lot of room for improvement
in the working methods. One particular area we feel
deserves our renewed attention is the interaction
between Security Council and the General Assembly.
We believe that the entire membership can benefit from
a more substantive dialogue on issues of importance
and relevance between the two principal organs of the
United Nations.
Another aspect is preventive work of the Security
Council. Montenegro is of the view that Council
should better utilize the options at its disposal so as
to prevent the emergence of conflicts. In that regard,
we deemed useful the horizon-scanning briefings by
the Department of Political Affairs, as they represented
valuable opportunities to identify potential crisis
before developing and act proactively to mitigate the
effects of escalation of violence. In that spirit, I would
like to mention that measures under Chapter VI should
be given priority in addressing crisis around the world.
Only after all means of peaceful settlement of disputes
under Chapter VI have been exhausted, should the
Security Council resort to Chapter VII provisions.
In the context of the responsibility to protect, to
which Montenegro is firmly attached, let me also
welcome the timely initiative of France on the voluntary
restraint in the use of the veto in cases of genocide,
mass atrocities and crimes against humanity. That
initiative, which Montenegro fully supports, is all the
more commendable since it came from a permanent
member. My country strongly believes that Council’s
ability to effectively respond to situations of mass
atrocities should not be held hostage by exercising
or threatening the veto. Using veto in the face of
mass atrocities, as we have witnessed for example

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

in Syria’s case, has devastating consequences on
human lives, livelihoods and basic respect for human
rights. It also harms reputation and credibility of the
Security Council and of the United Nations as a whole.
Therefore, we remain very keen to see the idea of the
code of conduct materialize, in the spirit of dialogue
and constructiveness and in the manner that will ensure
the effectiveness and sustainability of the solution. We
hope that voluntary self-restraint on the use of the veto
will open the way for a much-needed and long-overdue
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, in order
to bring the Council in line with contemporary world
realities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Mr. Körösi (Hungary): As the last speaker in today’s
open debate, I would like to pay tribute to Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda, the members of the Security Council
and the other Member States that are still here at
this late hour. I also wish to thank you, Madam, for
convening this open debate and for preparing a focused
concept paper (S/2014/725, annex).
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, Hungary aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Switzerland, as well as with the statement delivered by
the representative of Liechtenstein. Let me add a few
observations in our national capacity, starting with
the relationship between the Security Council and the
International Criminal Court (ICC).
It is our firm belief that, when the Council exercises
its prerogative to refer cases to the ICC, it is the Council’s
responsibility to follow up and ensure cooperation with
ICC proceedings. While the Council has announced its
readiness to do more in that regard, all seven letters of
the ICC President related to cooperation have remained
unanswered to date. That is hardly surprising, since
the Council has no internal framework to address such
issues in a systematic manner. Therefore, we reiterate
our call for the creation of a permanent internal
mechanism for the purpose, which should deal with all
aspects of the Council’s relationship with the ICC.
Taking a broader view, ensuring accountability
for crimes is a top priority for peace and security. As
we have stated many times, there is no lasting peace
without justice. Furthermore, military means may
only stop the perpetration of further atrocity crimes,
but cannot prevent them. Prevention is best served

14-5862437/38

S/PV.7285 (Resumption 1)

Security Council working methods

by the perspective of inevitability, as far as bringing
perpetrators to justice. However, this preventive aspect
is non-existent without a coherent accountability
strategy, developed and applied by the Council in a
predictable and evenhanded manner.
A failure to act will only invite further atrocities. To
appreciate that we just have to look at the lack of action
by the Council on the request for referring the situation
in Syria, and the crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other armed groups, in
particular against religious and ethnic minorities both
in Syria and Iraq. Those crimes most probably amount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In order to establish and nurture the mutually
reinforcing correlation between peace, security and
accountability, the Council must act decisively, This
relates to another type of accountability, that of the
Council. As pointed out by the International Law
Association back in 2004,
“Accountability is linked to the authority and
power of an international organization. Power
entails accountability, that is, the duty to account
for its exercise.”
In our humble view, there is also a duty to
account for the lack of action. That aspect of Council
accountability also requires the development of a set of
clear and public criteria to guide the Council’s future
decisions on referrals.
Furthermore, there seems to be a lack of appreciation
for the important interrelationship between peace,
security and accountability in general, and the duties of
the Council in the area of accountability in particular.
A look at the Council’s homepage, not a word is devoted
to the role of the Council in ICC-related proceedings. In
our view, that omission has to be rectified.
With regard to the Sanctions Committees, Hungary
appreciates the work carried out by those bodies.
We work closely with them and, when called upon,
fully assists in their investigations. Having said that,
Hungary is also ready to support initiatives aimed at

38/38

23/10/2014

further enhancing due process in the Committees.
Hungary acknowledges the important and growing
role played by the Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee, as a necessary element for checks
and balances. Despite the lack of a formal agreement,
Hungary is willing to assist the Ombudsperson with
sharing confidential information on an ad hoc and asnecessary basis. Furthermore, as other countries have
done as well, Hungary strongly supports the initiative
to extend the mandate of the Ombudsperson to the other
Committees.
The fact that we are still here at 6.35 p.m. shows that
many countries, including Hungary, truly appreciate
the opportunity to speak in the Council and the holding
of open debates. In that regad, Madam President,
I commend your leadership. In our view, this most
welcome interaction could be further strengthened if
Member States, in providing suggestions and ideas,
could get some form of feedback from the Security
Council on such initiatives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Hungary for pointing out the shared
interest in the methods of work of the Security Council.
I also wish to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court.
Members know me, and so I would like formally
to close out the meeting by mentioning the fact that the
delegation of Argentina has, over the past two years,
worked with members — the experts — who have
made possible the six presidential notes that have been
adopted. With the Council’s permission, I shall now
give the floor to a colleague to conclude the meeting.
Ms. Millacay took the Chair.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Madam President, for this honour.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

14-58624
