S/2015/1025

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 December 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 21 December 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 9 December 2014 (S/2014/893) informing the
President of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon -Nigeria
Mixed Commission, and to his reply dated 12 December 2014 ( S/2014/894), in
which he took note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations
support team to the Mixed Commission, with funding from the regular budget. By
the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest achievements and
activities of the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice of
10 October 2002 on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial dispute. The
mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of the land
boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the withdrawal and
transfer of authority, addressing the situation of affected populations, and making
recommendations on confidence-building measures.
Achievements to date include the withdrawal of Nigeria and transfer of
authority to Cameroon in the Lake Chad area (December 2003), along the land
boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi Peninsula (a process which began in June
2006 and was completed in August 2008); the delineation of the maritime boundary
(May 2007); and the end of the special transitional regime of five years, established
under the Greentree Agreement in June 2006, and the exercise by Cameroon of full
rights of sovereignty over the Bakassi zone (August 2013). The Mixed Commission
also approved all of the recommendations of the Working Group on the Maritime
Boundary, including the provisions for cross-border cooperation on hydrocarbon
deposits straddling the maritime boundary (March 2011).
In 2015, the Mixed Commission continued to facilitate the process, including
by helping to maintain dialogue and communication between the two countries.
However, the deteriorating security situation impeded the conduct of field visits,
given that the three border States of Adamawa, Borno and Yobe in north -eastern
Nigeria have been under a state of emergency as a result of the terrorist activities of
Boko Haram. The demarcation process was further slowed down by the general
elections in Nigeria in 2015.
Despite the commitment made by the heads of delegation of Cameroon and
Nigeria on 11 October 2014 in Yaoundé to complete the remaining tasks in
cartographic demarcation with an in-office cartographic methodology that dispenses
15-22850 (E)

281215

*1522850*

S/2015/1025

with the need for field missions in the north and in areas affected by Boko Haram,
the parties have been unable to assess and agree on the remaining areas along the
land boundary. Consequently, a final working session initially scheduled for
November 2015 has been postponed until the first quarter of 2016. In that regard,
the newly inaugurated Government in Nigeria has expressed its intention to renew
its efforts to resolve the outstanding issues.
The heads of delegation of Cameroon and Nigeria have expressed confidence
that the remaining assessment tasks can be completed without dispatching
additional field missions to the boundary, as the technical teams have acquired
consistent and reliable knowledge of geographical and demographical data deemed
sufficient to complete their work. To date, the parties have agreed on the
demarcation of 2,001 kilometres of an estimated total of 2,100 kilometres of land
boundary. In November 2015, the United Nations support team held bilateral
meetings and working sessions with the Cameroonian delegation to record and
confirm toponyms for the final mapping. A similar exercise will be undertaken with
the Nigerian delegation once the leadership of its National Boundary Commission
has been confirmed.
Meanwhile, the construction and emplacement of pillars to physically mark
the land boundary has continued. Of the estimated 2,696 boundary pillars that will
be required, a total of 665 have already been successfully constructed. In line with
the Mixed Commission’s completion strategy for the period 2015 -2017, the
construction and emplacement of an additional 231 pillars in lot 3, located in the
central area of the land border, commenced in October 2015 and is current ly
ongoing. The construction is expected to be completed by April 2016. This will
bring the total number of pillars constructed to 896, to be followed by an additional
469 pillars by the end of 2016. During the meeting of the heads of delegation in
Yaoundé in October 2014, the parties formally expressed their willingness to make
additional, individual contributions of resources towards the construction of the
remaining 1,800 boundary pillars required for the pillar emplacement project under
the trust fund, and also agreed to call on international donors for renewed
assistance. Additional fundraising initiatives, through my Special Representative for
West Africa and Chair of the Mixed Commission, will also be required.
Supplementary resources are also required to implement joint cross-border
programmes in support of the populations affected by the demarcation. This
includes funding for quick-impact projects for confidence-building among
communities, with a particular focus on women and youth. During the peri od
between the general elections in Nigeria in March 2015 and the inauguration of the
new Government in November 2015, the United Nations support team to the Mixed
Commission worked with the United Nations country team in Nigeria to relaunch
confidence-building initiatives.
These initiatives have since been endorsed by the United Nations country team
for incorporation into the country programme, where applicable. In addition, the
United Nations support team is in the process of implementing a framework to
coordinate with the United Nations country team in Nigeria to carry out feasibility
studies and determine cost estimates for six sectoral projects.
In Cameroon, projects focused on food security and microcredit, access to
drinking water, green energy, capacity-building for women and youth for
employment and the protection of civilians in Bakassi and in the Far North region

2/4

15-22850

S/2015/1025

have been updated at the request of the Government of Cameroon to reflect
demographic changes brought about by the terrorist activities of Boko Haram. The
Chair of the Mixed Commission will seek extrabudgetary resources to implement
the confidence-building projects consistent with the revised United Nations
Development Assistance Frameworks of both countries.
The drafting committee, which was established in February 2014 to prepare
the land and maritime boundary statement, has held two meetings with the active
support of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat. The United Nations
technical team of the Mixed Commission is also working with the support of the
Geospatial Information Section to produce maps to be annexed to the boundary
statement.
Overall, it is expected that the field assessment of the areas of the boundary
not yet agreed would be completed by the end of 2016, depending on the
commitment of the parties to their joint undertaking. Regarding the settlement of the
outstanding areas to be agreed, most, if not all, could be resolved during the same
working session if the parties demonstrate flexibility and adhere to compr omise
solutions. This, in turn, would allow the finalization of the demarcation process, the
final maps and the pillar emplacement operations by the end of 2017. Through the
good offices of my Special Representative for West Africa, in his capacity as Chai r
of the Mixed Commission, the Presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria pledged in July
2015 their commitment to complete the demarcation of their joint border. The
completion of the bulk of the demarcation work is dependent on the willingness of
the two parties to reach an agreement on all outstanding issues.
After 31 December 2015, the following activities are required in order to
conclude the work of the Mixed Commission:
(a) Agreement on the remaining outstanding areas using in -office evaluation
and demarcation methodology;
(b)

Production of the final maps and the boundary statement;

(c) Facilitation of the construction and emplacement of boundary pillars,
financed by the trust fund for the demarcation activities;
(d) Promotion of cross-border cooperation, including maritime cooperation,
and coordinated security monitoring along the land boundary;
(e) Finalization of confidence-building initiatives for local communities
affected by the demarcation;
(f) Implementation of the completion strategy for the period 2015 -2017 by
progressively handing over the activities of the Mixed Commission to the Joint
Bilateral Commission and other subregional structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. Thereafter, from 2004 to 2015, the activities of
the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular budget. The
Governments of Austria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay have provided in-kind contributions for the substantive and
technical work of the Commission (military and legal experts), in addition to the
logistical support provided by the Governments of Camer oon and Nigeria, and the
voluntary contributions of both countries, as well as those of Canada, the United

15-22850

3/4

S/2015/1025

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European Union, to the trust
fund for the demarcation activities.
As has been the case in recent years, and given the cost-effectiveness of the
operation and the important tasks remaining at this juncture to help advance the
peaceful implementation of the judgment of the International Court of Justice, it is
my intention to ask for resources from the regular budget for the Mixed
Commission for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2016.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

4/4

15-22850
