UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

JAN 2121993
UN/S& (JJ~~~B;rlcw

2535”

MEETING:

7 MAY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgendaI2535) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514) ,*....,............,.,.............,............,..,......

1

WV.2535

NOTE
I
Symbols ofUnited
Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
+

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.‘_
:
-_

:
::
.

:
:

:
::

__‘.
::.
_‘.I.
:.
_’
.:.

.

;:
:
:.

2535th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 7 May 1984, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

I have received letters from the representatives
of
Cuba, Guyaria, Jamaica, Mongolia and Viet Nam in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2535)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr. Carr (Jamaica),
Mr. Erdenechuluun (Mongolia) and Mr. Le Kim Chung
(Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor them at the side
of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker is the representative of Jamaica. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

was called to order at 4 p.m.
Adoption

4. Mr. CARR (Jamaica): At the outset I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
Your experience and renowned diplomatic skills give
us the assurance that under your presidency the Council will be able to live up to its important responsibilities
in the best possible way. I should like also to pay a
tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets of
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted the business of
the Council last month. Finally, may I thank you,
Mr. President and through you the other members of
the Council for agreeing to my request to address the
Council today.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the previous
meetings on this item [253Zst to 2534th meetings]
I invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and
Barbuda, Australia, Ecuador, Sri Lanka, the Syrian
Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. The question of Cyprus, as members of the Council
are fully aware, is rooted in the difficulties encountered
by two peoples that have been constrained by history
and geography to coexist and live together as one in the
same territory. It may be recalled that, at its accession
to independence on 16 August 1960, the island of Cyprus became a bicommunal
Republic, pursuant to the
agreements reached in February 1959 in Zurich and
London between the parties-namely,
the Greek Cypriots, the Turkish Cypriots, Greece, Turkey and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
(Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey) took places at the Council table; Mr. Zarif
(Afghanistan),
Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Jacobs
(Antigua and Barbuda), Mr. Woolcott (Australia),
Mr. Albornoz
(Ecuador),
Mr. Wijewardane
(Sri
Lanka), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic) and
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. It is pertinent also to recall that the Constitution
adopted at the advent of independence recognized the
existence of two communities--the
Turkish Cypriot
and the Greek Cypriot-whose
interests were to be

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1

guaranteed and safeguarded by that Constitution. In
addition, the 1960 Treaty of Guarantee’ signed by
Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom further guaranteed the fundamental principles of that Constitution,
including the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
new Cypriot State, as well as an equitable balance
between the interests of both communities.

and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
My Government deeply regrets that the intercommunal
talks remain stalled after they had been so briefly resumed in Nicosia. We are seriously concerned at the
continuing delay in resuming them.
12. The Secretary-General’s latest report remains an
ominous reminder, if any were needed, of the perils
confronting this question if a peaceful and acceptable
solution continues to elude us. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General that in order, to prevent any further
deterioration of the situation it is indispensable to maintain a continued process of communication and negotiation in the search for a comprehensive political settlement of the Cyprus question.

7. ‘Members of the Council are fully aware of the
salient and tragic events in the ensuing years: the
bloody events of 1963, resulting in the establishment of
a peace-keeping force in Cyprus following the adoption
of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) and sporadic
intercommunal talks beginning in 1968; renewed military activities in 1974, leading to General Assembly
resolution 3212 (XXIX) later that year calling upon all
States to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and non-alignment of Cyprus, reaffirming the constitutional nature of the two communities and urging them to continue negotiations under the
auspices of the Secretary-General in order to reach a
political solution based on their fundamental and legitimate rights; and, last year, unilateral action to proclaim a so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus,
which was subsequently declared invalid in Security
Council resolution 541 (1983).

13. It is therefore the earnest hope of my Government
that the parties on which the successof the search for an
agreed settlement of the problem ultimately depends
will extend their increased co-operation to the Secretary-General so as to overcome the persistent difficulties that have hitherto impeded his efforts.
14. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

8. There has been a series of disturbing developments
since the beginning of this year, as contained in the
Secretary-General’s report of 1 May 1984 [S/16519],
namely, the announcement by the Turkish Cypriots on
6 March of their intention to adopt a flag of their own
and the decision to conduct a constitutional referendum
and elections this year in August and November, respectively.

15. Mr. SAHNOUN (Algeria) [interpretation from
French]: First of all, Mr. President, I should like to
express to your predecessor, Mr. Kravets, the deep
appreciation of the delegation of Algeria for the outstanding manner in which he carried out the duties
which are now yours for the month of May. The relations of trust, friendship and co-operation between our
two countries further enhance my pleasure in congratulating you most warmly on behalf of my delegation and
on my own behalf. I am convinced that under your
competent guidance the Security Council will have performed a useful function in once again considering the
situation prevailing in Cyprus.

9. In our view, these developments will further exacerbate and complicate the search for a peaceful and
equitable solution to the question of Cyprus and cause
added concern to the international community. In the
view of my Government, these latest developments not
only flout the General Assembly’s resolution with respect to the unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus and
Security Council resolution 541(1983), but equally violate the 1960 Cypriot Constitution and the -Treaty of
Guarantee governing the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Cypriot State.

16. The question of Cyprus, which the United Nations has been discussing actively for some 20 years, is
clearly linked to the will of peoples which, emerging
.from the colonial period, wished to enjoy independent
national existence in full sovereignty. However, this
question is increasingly assumingthe characteristics of
a race against time.

10: My Government believes that the latest unilateral
proposals are incompatible with the efforts of the international community to preserve the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Cyprus and incongruous with
the existing constitutional provisions and treaties goveming the political life of the State of Cyprus. It is
inconceivable that the international community could
be expected to accept these measures, and we therefore
urge the initiators of the proposals to withdraw them.

17. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, of
which the Republic of Cyprus is a founding member,
has repeatedly insisted-and these words carry .full
weight today-on full respect for the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and non-aligned
status of Cyprus. At the same time, it has sought to
defend the cardinal principles of contemporary international law and to be a driving force in the search for a
final political solution based on these principles and
taking into account the common destiny of the component parts of the Cypriot people. Quite naturally, the
Non-Aligned Movement has taken an active part in

11. From the very beginning of the Cypriot crisis,
Jamaica has firmly supported and continues to support
the resolution of the Cyprus question on the basis of
ensuring the genuine independence, sovereignty, unity
2

forming the international consensus on the necessarily
peaceful final settlement of the Cyprus crisis. and it is
because of its conviction that the Cypriot communities
must perforce coexist harmoniously that it has constantly called for constructive dialogue and reconciliation. This conviction led to the creation of the contact
group of non-aligned countries on Cyprus, over which
Algeria has the honour to preside. With discretion and
perseverance, the group is endeavouring to make a
modest contribution to the implementation of the resolutions and decisionsof the Non-Aligned Movement on
Cyprus by resolutely, calling for responsible dialogue
between the Cypriot communities.

legitimate fears of the two communities, we feel bound
to state that measures that could call into question yet
again in one way or another the fundamental principles
embodied in the Charter are so serious that the international community must denounce them.
23. Today not only the unity but the sovereignty and
the independence of the island are seriously threatened.
Partition and annexation of Cyprus threaten to become
reality. This would be tragic, not only for the people
of Cyprus in all its component parts, but also for peace
and stability in a particularly disturbed region which
arouses so many expansionist desires and ambitions.

18. It was in this spirit and with this outlook that the
representatives of the member countries of the contact
group, after the Movement’s Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government had reaff+ned its position on this question, went to Cyprus, at the invitation
of that country’s Government, and held many meetings
with Government authorities and spokesmen for both
communities: At that time we clearly expressed our full
support for the Secretary-General’s initiatives. The
commendable efforts of the Secretary-General gave
ground for great hope for the establishment of conditions conducive to launching the process of dialogue
and settling the crisis.

24. We are fully aware of the complexity of the problem. Having visited the island at the head of the nonaligned contact group on Cyprus, we know what still
remains to be done to create a climate conducive to
dialogue and the quest for a peaceful settlement. It is
incumbent upon the Security Council and the international community to act as the essential catalysts,
first to halt the process of deterioration of the situation
and then to re-establish real communication between
the two communities, which alone can gradually restore relations of trust with full respect for all their
legitimate rights and within the framework of harmonious coexistence.

19. Looked at in the light of the justifiable optimism
created by the facts I have mentioned, the proclamation
of a so-called independent State in the northern part of
the territory of the Republic of Cyprus on 15November
1983clearly seemed to be an unfortunate development
containing the seeds of further complication of the situation.

25. In this connection I should like to stressthe importance of the clear and specific recommendations of
the Secretary-General in his report of 1 May 1984
[S/26519]. The Secretary-General stresses that it is for
the Council to give a new impetus to the search for a
peaceful settlement, after ensuring that everything possible is done to see that the situation does not continue
to deteriorate, and he states that he is ready to continue
to carry out the mission of good offices entrusted to him
by the Council as long as there is clear support for this.

20. The Security Council, in resolution 541 (1983) of
18November 1983, handed down on behalf of the international community an authoritative opinion on the
political meaning of the de&to
situation which had
been created and on its lack of legal validity. It was
therefore reasonable to hope that there would be a
healthy reversal of the trend and a new spur to efforts,
particularly by the Secretary-General, to generate and
maintain a real dynamic for peace in place of the escalation of tension and the exacerbation of the crisis, to the
advantage of all. The current meetings of the Security
Council prove, unfortunately, that events are taking a
different course.

;

26. The Security Council can and must revive hope. It
must change the course of events, once again bring its
unanimous authority to bear in achieving an intemational consensus on this question and give a decisive
impetus to the peaceful settlement process so that the
people of Cyprus may come through this time of trial in
peace and harmony.

27. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): It has just occurred to me,
Sir, that, this will be the second and the last occasion in
21. The measures and initiatives taken or contemmy lifetime on which, as a representative to the Counplated in the extension of the act of 15 November 1983, cil, I shall have the pleasure of complimenting you on
which the Council has declared null and void, cannot
your assumption of the office of President. I assure you
claim any kind of legitimacy. Above and beyond the
that this fact in itself will in no way diminish the high
legal aspect of the question, we are compelled to note
regard I have always had for your friendly charm, your
that those measures and initiatives run counter to the
diplomatic skill and your experienced handling of difnecessaryreconciliation that would be conducive to the
ficult situations. I think it is particularly appropriate
just and definitive solution that the international comthat we have you to guide us on this delicate question
munity advocates.
today. I wish also to express my deep appreciation to
Mr. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
-22. While we appreciate that there is a certain frustrafor the excellent way he handled the duties of President
tion and disappointment and while we are aware of the .‘.-.last month.
3
,

Once more,, with great concern, we are constrained to speak in the Council on the situation in
Cyprus. Malta speaks with a sense of regret and foreboding about the latest turn of events, but we hope
eventually to break away from this mood of despondency and deadlock. We speak from the perspective of
a sister island Republic in the Mediterranean,
with a
sense of solidarity with the people-all
the people-of
Cyprus, as we strive together for reconciliation
and
peace in the island and throughout the Mediterranean.

well as a strong feeling ,and clear determination
that
they should be left in peace to prosper as one nation,
free from outside interference, and with all indigenous
citizens enjoying equal rights. There is, similarly, a
sense of international outrage at what is being done to
the island today.
,
35. After the tragic events that led to the armed military intervention in 1974-10 troubled ‘years ago-the
environment in Cyprus was heavy-handedly changed.
The details are still vivid in our minds and were restated
last week. The grim evidence cannot be denied: families
untraced, families uprooted from their homes, forced
changes in the demography and a line of mines and
barbed wire dividing the; island,, with foreign troops
in large numbers occupying more than a third of the
country.
. I
36. Yet, .even under,this ominous duress; .the Government of Cyprus has remained calm and exercised
maximum restraint; It has made every effort and taken
several initiatives to co-operate with the international
community and with the Turkish Cypriot leadership. A
welcome ray of hope at last pierced the despondent
gloom when the leaders of the two communities negotiated and signed, at the highest level, the accord of
1977 [see S/12323, para. 51 and the IO-point agreement
of May 1979 [see S/13369, para. 511. Those accords
were intended to reassure both sides that neither enosis
nor partition. would henceforth be pursued.

28.

29. We also speak from the perspective of another
small country, with abiding faith in the United Nations but alarmed at the frequency with which powerful
countries are resorting to lawlessness and the use of
force incompatible with the Charter. Nevertheless;we
remain convinced that recourse to the United Nations
is the proper course for nations to follow.
30. Finally, we speak out of ties of sincere friendship
with all the other countries of the region, including
those that were valiant adversaries in the past and are
valued friends today. It is perhaps on that last note that
we would prefer to concentrate our participation today.
3 1. Cyprus is a country with a long and eventful history, proud in its ancient civilization.
One unchangeable facet of that history is the presence of two communities on the island and the island’s proximity to
Greece and Turkey. It is a historical fact that complex
difficulties of a political, constitutional,
administrative
and cultural nature arose between the two communities
in the island, both before and after independence.

37. Two of the most significant elements in the latter
agreement bear quoting in full. They are as follows:

32. We need not today delve into the reasons, but the
cries of “enosis” and “partition”
respectively were
raised loudly by the leaders of the two communities in
the struggle for independence.
The echoes of those
stirring slogans, so strong to their respective supporters
but so frightening to their opponents, unfortunately
have not yet faded away completely, as has been all too
evident from the debate so far. On the contrary, those
concepts have remained part of the political lexicon
of spokesmen and leaders-not
so much, it seems to
me, in terms of practical possibilities,
but, rather,
as enduring cultural links with long-held traditions of
thought.

“2. The basis for the talks will be the Makariosl
Denktas guidelines of 12 February 1977 and the
United Nations resolutions relevant to the Cyprus
question.
‘6 . . .
“6. It was agreed to abstain from any action
which might jeopardiie the outcome of the talks, and
special importance will be given to initial practical
measures by both sides to promote goodwill, mutual
confidence and the return to normal conditions,.”
;
38. In all fairness, and with the greatest respect, even
though -we are told here that those agreements are the
basis on which the intercommunal
talks are being held
and that the agreements remain valid, it is difficult to
regard the actions taken on 14 November last year, and
17 April this year-as well as others already publicly
declared to be going to take place in future-as being
compatible with the provisions of the points quoted
above, or, perhaps even less, with the studious, patient,
quiet and dedicated efforts of the Secretary-Generai in
exercise of the mandate given to him by the Security
Council Indeed, the developments do speak for themselves; they are completely against the Council’s decisions and cannot be accepted.

33: It is also on record that many objective and independent observers of different
nationalities-for
instance, Lord Radcliffe of the United Kingdom and
Mr. Galo Plaza of the United Nations-after
careful
study in the island of Cyprus saw the best prospects for
the future of the island in a unified, independent country. That certainly was the negotiated basis of the independence of Cyprus. This view has been, and remains,
supported strongly and consistently by the intemational community,
as the decisions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council have confirmed on
innumerable occasions.
34. There has always been a tremendous fund of international good will towards all the people of Cyprus, as
4

39. This reflection of opinion is not a monopoly of this
building. I could-but
will not--quote reams of independent opinion in articles from a wide selection of
newspapers, magazines and other periodicals which
deplore the stalling tactics in the intercommunal
talks.
These talks, as has been recalled, have already dragged
on now for almost six years, since June 1978. The
Council of Europe, the British Commonwealth
of Nations and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries in
general terms have followed suit, denouncing the military actions of 1974, calling for the withdrawal of foreign forces and not recognizing the subsequent unilateral measures of the Turkish Cypriot leadership.

good offices with the bonafide co-operation and support of those concerned. That, therefore, is the first
essential prerequisite; the parties must recall that the
international community is striving to help them overcome the mutual fears and suspicions that are preventing them from making the progress that they both
claim to seek but have not so far obtained.
43. The second prerequisite is the.continuation
of the
Secretary-General’s
good offices, despite this regrettable setback. We wish to~re’call that both the 1977 and
the 1979 agreements were negotiated by the SecretaryGeneral. He has mastered all the details of the complex
negotiating process and has a keen perception of the
positions of both communities as well as of the mandate
entrusted to him by the Council.

40. It should, I submit, be clear to all that there is no
international conspiracy against the Turkish community in Cyprus. There is only a widespread international
concern that it is not helping the objectives of peace by
the divisive methods it is pursuing. The United Nations
has scrupulously ensured, in a proper manner that the
concerns of the Turkish Cypriot community are heard.
Decisions of the United Nations are expressed after due
consideration,
and taking into account all the known
facts of the situation. The decisions should therefore be
heeded for what they are;not misconstrued into what
they are not meant to be.
: I
I

44. The third requirement
is for,,the Council to act
with solidarity and in concert now; ‘so as unambiguously to urge all parties to co-operate, in good faith and
with renewed dedication, in the work of the SecretaryGeneral, which could perhaps also be intensified. We
are glad to note at least from this debate the importance
that all sides attach to the debate itself and to the need
for a peaceful solution. The Security Council has entrusted the Secretary-General
with the task of working
precisely for that purpose. He has made prodigious
efforts and shown an admirable commitment
to progress. He therefore deserves unequivocal support. This
determination
could also appropriately
be conveyed
to the protagonists by influential friends of the parties much more insistently than ever before, for there
are powerful collective forces at play in the Cyprus
question.

41. The question now before us is to assess the current impasse and to suggest a fair and practical course
of action. For this, our best counsel continues to be
to rely on the latest report of the Secretary-General
[S/16519]. What is contained in his latest report should
come as no surprise. The frequency and stridency of the
letters from both sides addressed to the Council before
the presentation of the report, the intemperate language
of those letters, the complex argumentation
on constitutional issues and, above all, the constant accusations and counter-accusations,
told their own sad
story, which was openly demonstrated in the debate
last week. It is obvious that a debate for the public
gallery is no substitute for hard negotiation. It is equally
obvious that quiet diplomacy on the complex issues at
stake is the best course for progress. But progress
requires a determination
to succeed; not to destroy,‘to
co-operate in, not to frustrate, the search for steady
progress. Because of negative attitudes, even language
becomes contorted. We read in paragraph 12 of the
report, for instance, that President Kyprianou encour- :
aged the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts to
develop “an approach to improving on an interim basis
the situation concerning certain disputed issues in order
to facilitate a high-level meeting leading to a resumption
of the intercommunal
dialogue”. Yet even with such
limited objectives, these initiatives encountered Turkish Cypriot obstruction and delaying tactics.

45. The fourth prerequisite is the continued, unhindered stationing of United Nations forces in Cyprus;
they have already rendered sterling service to the country and to the cause of peace. We renew our thanks and
appreciation to the contributing countries for this service.
46. In the final analysis, a solution cannot and should
not be imposed on Cyprus. The people-all
the indigenous peoplc+of.Cyprus
have to learn to live with one
another in peace with themselves and with their immediate neighbours. No one community can prevail over
the other, nor can any one neighbour impose its will on
Cyprus or on any part of the island, if peace is really to
be secured.
47. The tragic events of 1974 have only served to
confirm this reality. A continu,ation of the policy of
division is only a prescription for perpetual tension and
strife. At this critical period, therefore, at this the.moment of truth, we wish to compliment the President of
Cyprus for the dignified way in which he has pleaded his
country’s cause, and to thank him for his presence
among us, for his abiding faith in this Organization and
for his patient quest for peace and reconciliation.

42. The Secretary-General’s
comprehensive
summary is commendably objective in its fairness and restraint, despite the obstacles and frustrations placed in
the way of his dedicated efforts. It is obvious, as he
rightly observes in his letter of 14 April to Mr. Denktag
[ibid., annex ZZZI, that he can only pursue his mission of

48. The Government of Malta wishes to reassure the
President that we will spare no effort within our modest
5

.‘.
_‘,

:
:.
.
:.
_‘.

.
:.
:.
:.:.
:.:_
:.
.-..
:.
:_

:.
:_
-.

means. We urge the leaders of the other parties concerned to rally to his call to start writing a new chapter
in the history of Cyprus and the Mediterranean.
The
London and Zurich Agreements* under enlightened
leadership heralded a new vision of hope for the independence of Cyprus-“a
start in freedom”, as the former Governor of the island, Lord Caradon, then Sir
Hugh Foot, called it. That freedom has passed through
a period of turbulence and travail, but that turbulence is
in itself proof that it is no solution, that it should not be
prolonged.

rity of his country. Moreover, his account demonstrates beyond any doubt that the grave threat to the
very existence of Cyprus is the work of external forces
and that these forces of disintegration are the same ones
as prompted the unilateral and illegal declaration of the
so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus by the
Turkish Cypriot leadership on 15 November 1983.
54. Secondly, in reaffirming its full confidence in the
Secretary-General,
the delegation of the Republic of
Zimbabwe wishes also to place on record its appreciation of and satisfaction at the energetic and extremely
objective manner in which he went about carrying out
his very delicate and difficult mission of good offices in
search of a just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem, as mandated by the Council’s resolutions,
including resolutions 541 (1983) and 544 (1983). In this
connection we would like to join those who have
already very warmly welcomed the Secretary-General’s report of 1 May 1984 [S/16.519], which was submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of resolution 544 (1983).
As the Secretary-General
observes in paragraph 23 of
that report, he has simply allowed the developments
outlined in his report to speak for themselves.

49. On the contrary, the leaders of Cyprus and its
neighbouring countries should in the near future get
together at the highest level and chart a course solemnly
recognizing the sovereignty, unity, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment
of a demilitarized
Cyprus, as a shining jewel of reconciliation in the eastem Mediterranean,
at peace and on friendly and equal
terms with both its important neighbours.
50. Let me end by recalling that, in the past, ethnic
harmony prevailed for centuries in Cyprus. There is no
reason why this should not be so in future, in a free and
independent Cyprus. There are many ways in which the
international community can guarantee equal rights to
all Cypriot citizens should this really be necessary. The
tragedy of 1974 should never have happened. We have
to make sure that its repercussions will not stifle the
genuine progress that is in the common interest of the
two communities,
of neighbouring
countries and of
peace, with the continued help of the United Nations,
through its dedicated Secretary-General.

55. I wish now to turn to the developments
which
prompted the Government ofthe Republic of Cyprus
to call for an urgent meeting of the Council. In making
that request [S/Z65141 the representative of Cyprus
mentioned
as justification
for such a meeting the
grave situation in his country as exemplified by the
“exchange of ambassadors” between Turkey and the
so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. It must
be pointed out here that this action is only one in a
catalogue of similar dangerous developments,
such as,
for instance, the talk about the creation and adoption of
a so-called national flag of the illegal secessionist entity,
the holding of a constitutional
referendum and other
such activities.

51. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Permit me
first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. My
delegation is greatly pleased and satisfied at that, and
your well-known diplomatic talents and skill, as well as
your rich experience, give us justifiable confidence that
the deliberations of this Council will ,be guided effectively. I should like also to express my delegation’s
deep appreciation of the distinguished and dignified
manner in which your predecessor, Mr. Kravets of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, presided over the
Council last month.

56. The position of Zimbabwe regarding these developments is very clear. Just as we unreservedly condemned and rejected the illegal unilateral declaration
of independence by the Turkish Cypriot leadership on
15 November 1983, so also we cannot accept recent
developments and efforts by the Turkish Cypriot leaders and their external allies designed to consolidate that
same unilateral declaration of independence. We also
regard the adoption of a so-called national flag by the
Turkish Cypriot community
and the exchange of socalled ambassadors with any State as totally incompatible with the letter and the spirit of the Council’s resolutions on Cyprus, especially resolution 54 1(1983), which
not only calls for the withdrawal of that legally invalid
unilateral declaration of independence, but also enjoins
all States not to grant recognition to any Cypriot State
other than the Republic of Cyprus. Moreover, we view
the purported exchange of so-called ambassadors and
the contemplated holding of a so-called constitutional
referendum and elections as moves designed specifically to consolidate and perpetuate the unilateral declaration of independence and therefore to prejudice and

52. The Council is currently seized of a matter that is a
delicate as it is serious, and I should like to express my
delegation’s position on it. Before doing that, however,
I must pay a special tribute to certain individuals for
their respective contributions to efforts towards placing
the current debate in its proper context and perspective.
53. First, the delegation of Zimbabwe very warmly
welcomes and appreciates the major statement made in
this Chamber on 3 May [25.?1st meeting] by Mr. Spyros
Kyprianou, President of the Republic of Cyprus. In that
objective, balanced and analytical statement the President gave an account of the very grave threat to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integ6

frustrate the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral
to use his
good offices in the search of ajust and lasting settlement
in Cyprus.

sovereignty, independence, unity, territorial integrity
and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus.
60. The Republic of Cyprus has requested an urgent
meeting of the Council because not only has resolution 541 (1983),remained unimplemented,
but it is also
already being flagrantly violated by a Member of the
United Nations. The Council must reject any attempts
to present the international community with a series of
illegalfairs accomplis in Cyprus. It should insist instead
on the need to guarantee the constitutional
and territorial unity and indivisibility
of the Republic of Cyprus. It is our understanding that the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus will soon submit to the Council a
draft resolution designed to achieve these objectives.
We, for our part, will co-operate with the delegation
of Cyprus and other delegations to ensure successful
negotiations on the adoption of such a text.

57. In talking about actions and activities which render the Secretary-General’s
already difficult mission of
good offices even more complicated and frustrating, we
regret to observe once again, as we did ‘while contributing to the Council’s debate on the question of the
unilateral declaration of independence on 18 November
1983 [250&h meeting], that the actions of the Turkish
Cypriot leadership constitute a rude and intolerable
slap in the face of the international
community.
For,
just as the unilateral declaration of independence was
conceived and made last year at a time when the Secretary-General’s
own personal efforts in search of a
peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem were under
way, so the recent announcement
of the purported
exchange of so-called ambassadors, as well as of other
measures to consolidate the illegal unilateral declaration of independence, was made at a time of intensive
exchanges between the Secretary-General and the parties directly and mainly concerned in the Cyprus question with a view to clarifying and elaborating a draft
scenario for consideration by the Cypriot communities,
This point is very clearly stated in the eleventh paragraph of the Secretary-General’s
report which we have
already cited. And, by the way, as the Secretary-General observers in the same paragraph, “Throughout
those exchanges I had reason to feel confident that
I could count on the understanding and assistance of the
Turkish Government in moving forward.”

61. Mr. BASSOLE
(Upper Volta) [interpretation
from French]: Mr. President, it is a great satisfaction to
see you, a son of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, guiding over the Security Council for this
month, which is proving to be one involving a great deal
of work. Your eminent qualities as a seasoned and
competent diplomat and your wisdom guarantee the
success of our work. You can rely on the willingness of
my delegation to work indefatigably
with the other
members of the Council to ensure that your task is as
easy as possible. I should also like on behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf to address very warm
and sincere congratulations to Mr. Vladimir Kravets of
the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, who so competently directed the work of the Council last month.

58. Regrettably, however, it is now very clear that
there can be no forward movement for the SecretaryGeneral at this stage because the understanding which
had given him hope has been removed by the recently
announced developments. Despite what appears to be a
bleak situation, however, we remain encouraged by his
willingness, indeed determination,
to continue to the
best of his ability his mission of good offices. But, as he
rightly reminds the Council, if his efforts are to meet
with any success at all he must have the Council’s
unambiguous
support, collectively
and individually.
For our part we would like to assure the SecretaryGeneral of our continued support for his efforts in
search of ajust and lasting solution, since we cannot see
any viable alternative line of action.

62. Once again the Security Council is meeting to
consider the thorny question of Cyprus. My delegation
has listened closely to the statements made by the
representatives of the parties concerned. It is good to
see that a number of common points seem to exist
between the two, above all the quest for national unity,
territorial integrity and the sovereignty and independence of the Republic of Cyprus.
63. Nevertheless we must admit that there are very
deep differences that day by day take us further away
from a peaceful solution.It
is extremely regrettable that
actions such as the occupation of part of the territory of
Cyprus by foreign forces and the unilateral declaration
of independence by a self-styled Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus have constantly frustrated the efforts
of the international community.

59. While calling upon all the other members of the
Council similarly to pledge their support for the Secretary-General’s
efforts, we also wish to remind them
of the pressing concerns of the Republic of Cyprus,
namely, the immediate restoration of a state of legality
in the northern part of the island and the need to ensure
the constitutional
oneness, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Cyprus. Members of the
Council will recall that the Council has already pronounced itself very clearly on this matter in its resolution 541 (1983), which, infer alia, called for the immediate withdrawal of the illegal unilateral declaration of
independence and enjoined all States to respect the

64. Upper Volta, which is a non-aligned country profoundly wedded to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, deplores the situation and
appeals that all resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council on this matter be respected,
particularly Council resolution 541 (1983). In adopting
that resolution on 18 November 1983, the Council not
only deplored the declaration made by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities but also considered it juridically
7

null and void and demanded its retraction. It went on to
call upon all States not to recognize any Cypriot State
other than the Republic of Cyprus and also asked the
two parties to co-operate fully and openly with the
Secretary-General
in his mission of good offices.

Secretary-General,
to whom we should like to pay a
well deserved tribute for his untiring efforts.
71. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

65. It was our hope that that resolution would cause
common sense and the voice of reason to prevail,
making it possible for negotiations to continue under
the auspices of the Secretary-General,
who for years
now has been constantly working for a peaceful solution. Unfortunately
that was not the case. Our hopes
crumbled, and the United Nations was left emptyhanded.

,

72. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): Mr. President, it is
with great rejoicing and pleasure that the delegation of
the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan takes note of
the fact that a person of so many high qualities has been
entrusted with the task of steering the Council in its
deliberations on a very complicated issue. Your exemplary wisdom, your rich and vast experience and your
well-established- reputation as a master of the art of
diplomacy are all valuable and much needed assets in
ensuring the useful and constructive discussion of the
question before the Council. To all that should be added
the pleasant fact that you represent ,a great country
which for the first time in man’s history denounced the
use of force in international
relations and adopted a
foreign policy based on the principles of good-neighbourliness, friendship and co-operation among nations.
Mutually faithful and consistent application of those
cardinal principles in the relations between our two
countries has provided history with one of the most
brilliant examples of friendly and fraternal relations
between nations. We wish, you every success in the
fulfilment of your responsible duties.

66. Thus, in flagrant violation of resolution 541(1983),
the Turkish authorities not only recognized the selfstyled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus but also
proceeded to exchange so-called ambassadors. Already, on 10 April 1984 Turkish Cypriot leaders announced that a draft constitution was ready for submission to referendum in August and that elections would
take place in November 1984. Such steps needlessly
complicate the process of communication
and negotiation which has so constantly been advocated by the
Secretary-General
and which he has duly emphasized
in his report.
67. It is thus to the Turkish Cypriot leaders that we
make an urgent and heartfelt appeal to heed Security
Council resolution 541 (1983) and thus enable the Secretary-General fully to exercise his functions.

73. I wish to congratulate very warmly the representative of the fraternal Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Mr. Vladimir Alekseyevich Kravets, on the outstanding and most commendable manner in which he
guided the Council’s work last month.

68. My country believes that the unity, territorial
integrity and independence of the Republic of Cyprus
must be defended and preserved. That will be possible
only if the foreign occupying forces are withdrawn from
the island, which we believe would make it possible for
the Cypriot peoples to settle their differences in the
light of their higher interests.

74. The Security Council is once again requested by
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus to convene
to consider yet another ominous development on the
unfortunate question of Cyprus. The gravity of the
present situation in Cyprus, as stated in the letter dated
30 April 1984 from the representative of Cyprus to the
President of the Security Council [S/26524], arises from
new actions expressed in the “exchange of ambassadors” between Turkey and the illegal regime established in the occupied territory of the Republic of Cyprus in violation of the fundamental principles of the
Charter and the provisions of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the matter.

69. Upper Volta would not attempt to defend the
cause of one community against another, because for us
both Cypriot communities form a single people sharing
the same rights and duties. The purpose of these remarks is, rather, to call for the restoration of unity and
to reiterate our attachment to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of a State Member of
the United Nations and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. Our fidelity to the fundamental principles of
those two organizations,
as well as to many others,
enjoins that attitude on us.

75. Less than six months ago the international community was struck by the appalling news of the unilateral declaration of independence by the so-called
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. That declaration, which dealt a severe blow to all the efforts of the
international community to bring about a peaceful and
acceptable solution to the question of Cyprus, cast
serious doubt on the professed sincerity and willingness
of the Turkish Cypriot leadership regarding the negotiations. That secessionist action came at a time when
the world had attached great hopes to the efforts of

70. The situation that prevails in Cyprus is grave and
delicate, and ifit is to tackle it successfully the Council
must be firm in seeking implementation
not only of past
decisions but also, and above all, the one it will take as a
result of this series of meetings. We believe the Council
should particularly emphasize the imperative need for
the parties strictly to abide by its decisions and find the
proper ways and means to strengthen the role of the
8

the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative
to find an early solution to the Cyprus issue on the
basis of the relevant United Nations rtsolutions,
the
decisions and declarations of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the high-level agreements on
12 February 1977 and 19 May 1979.
-

Afghanistan and President of the Revolutionary
Council of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, in a
message addressed to the President of the Republic of
Cyprus, stated:
“The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, as you
know, has always stood for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus and recognizes only one CypruS
i
-the Republic of Cyprus.

76. Only a few months before the unilateral declarati& aimed at the partition of ‘Cyprus, the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAIigned Countries reittrated its full solidarity with and
support.for the people and Government of the Republic
of Cyprus and reaffirmed its respect for that country’s
independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and non-alignment.
The heads of State or Government
also expressed their deep concern atthe fact that part of
the Republic of Cyprus continued to be under foreign
occupation, and they demanded the immediate withdrawal of all occupation forces as an essential basis for
the solution of the Cyprus problem. They welcomed the
proposal made by the President of Cyprus for the total
demilitarization
of Cyprus.

“I would like to assure you once again that the
people and Government of the Democrtitic Republic
of Afghanistan will continue their resolute support
for the restoration of the territorial integrity and unity
of the Republic of Cyprus.”
81. In conclusion, I should like to express the Afghan
delegation’s
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and
through you to the other members of the Security Council for according it the privilege of participating in the
Council’s debate on the question of Cyprus.

77. It w& against that background that the intemational community was unequivocal and almost universal in condemning the declaration of 15 November
1983:The Security Council; after considering the complaint by Cyprus, deplored the declaration of the Ttirkish Cypriot authorities of the purported secession of
part of the Republic of Cyprus, considered the declaration as legally invalid and called for its withdrawal. It
called upon all States not to recognize any Cypriot State
other than the Republic of Cyprus and requested the
Secretary-General to pursue his mission’of good offIces
in order to achieve the earliest possible progress towards a just and lasting settlement in Cyprus.

82. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is ,the representative
of Guyana.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
83. Mr. KARRAN
(Guyana): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for permitting my delegation to address the Council on
this agenda item.
84. Permit me at the very outset to extend to you, Sir,
my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The international
community is well aware of your experience and diplomatic skill, which give us, the assurance that the
Council’s work will be competently guided during the
month of May. May I take this opportunity also to pay a
special tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Vladimir Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for the /
capable manner in which he conducted the Council’s
business during the month of April.
.’
,.,

78. Since then the Secretary-General
has pursued his
commendable
and tireless efforts. Regrettably, h&wever, the potentially dangerous situation on the island
has not only persisted but continues to deteriorate as a
result of further provocative actions and announcements by the leadership of the Turkish Cypriots, the
most recent of which prompted the convening of this
series of Security Council meetings.

85. The Security Council is meeting again at the request of the Government bf CyIjrus to consider the
grave situation in Cyprus. It wasonly in November of
last year that the Council was forced to’nieet as a result
of the events which took place there on 1’5 November,.’
The declaration of the Turkish Cypriot community or
that date purporting to create an independent State has
caused much concern the world over. That action is
definitely an attempt to consolidate and to give legitimacy to a situation created by invasion and occupation. As we are all aware, it has been denounced by the
international community.

79. We listened most attentively to the passionate and
moving statement of the President of the’Republic
of
Cyprus, Spyros Kyprianou,
who rightly warned the
international
community
of the grave consequencts
of the present action for the future and the very existence of the Republic of Cyprus [2531st meeting]. The
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan fully associates
itself with the demand that not only should an end be
put to such actions but appropriate measures should be
taken to reverse all previous actions taken in violation
of the principles of international law and the provisions
of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
.
on Cypnis.

86. As a consequence of that illegal act, on 18 Novem- :
ber the Security Council adopted resolution 541(1983),
which inter aliu deplored the declaration by the Turkish Cypriot authorities of the purported secession of

80. Babrak Karmal, General Secretary of the Central
Committee
of the People’s Democratic
Party of
9

part of the Republic of Cyprus, considered the declaration legally invalid and called for its withdrawal, and
requested the Secretary-General to pursue his mission
of good o&es in order to achieve the earliest possible progress towards a just and lasting settlement in
Cyprus.

Turkish Cypriot authorities proceeded to create institutions and fairs accomplis which tend to.place insurmountable hurdles in the path of ariy peaceful solution
of the Cyprus problem.
93. My Government has the honour of serving as a.
member of the non-aligned contact group on Cyprus
and as a member of the Commonwealth action group on
Cyprus. We are committed to the peaceful resolutionof
the problem of Cyprus based on the principles of international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

87. My delegation compliments the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts in pursuance of his mandate
under resolution 541 (1983), as reflected in his report
contained in document S/16519.The realistic proposals
he submitted deserve greater attention and consideration by the parties concerned. The international community had looked forward hopefully to progress when
the talks were initiated under the auspices of the Secretary-General. But the response from the Turkish Cypriot authorities left no doubt, if there had been any, of
their intention.

94. My delegation feels that the Secretary-General
has a very important role to play in finding a peaceful
solution to the Cyprus problem. He has said in his
report:
“The members of the Security Council will wish to
give careful thought to the steps that will have to be
taken in order to prevent any further deterioration of
the situation.” [See S/16519, para. 23.1

88. On 10 April 1984this intention became manifest,
when the Turkish authorities, in keeping with their
partitionist policy, announced their intention to hold a
“referendum on a new constitution” on 19August and
“general elections” in the occupied areas on 4 November. These decisions are in clear and flagrant violation
of resolution 541 (1983) and in direct conflict with the
proposals submitted by the Secretary-General.

And he added:
“It is for the Council now to assessthe present situation and to decide what action needs to be taken to
revitalize the search for a peaceful settlement and to
provide it with the necessary political support.*’

89. Guyana has always taken a special and keen interest in the question of Cyprus. At stake here are the
principles of respect for the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States, non-use of force in the
settlement of disputes, and non-intervention and noninterference in the internal affairs of States.

[Ibid.,

para. 24.1

My delegation expresses deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for continuing to make his good offices
available to this cause.

90. My delegation listened carefully to the address
delivered by the President of the Republic of Cyprus,
Spyros Kyprianou, on Thursday, 3 May. He explained
in the most lucid terms the possible fate of his country
should the international community fail to act to bring a
halt to the current illegalities and reverse the trend of
events. My delegation feels that the responsibility rests
with the Security Council, and the more so with its
permanent members, to ensure that the Republic of
Cyprus remains a unified State.

95. The Security Council must take such measures as
to ensure the implementation of its resolutions on this
problem. Its resolution 367 (1975) called on the parties
concerned to refrain from any action which might jeopardize the negotiations between representatives of the
two communities and to take steps that would facilitate
the creation of the climate necessary for the successof
those negotiations. The Council has a duty to ensure
that the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment of the small State of the
Republic of Cyprus be respected.

91. General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) calls
upon all States to respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the
Republic of Cyprus. In March last year at New Delhi
the heads of State or Government of non-aligned countries also reiterated their support for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment of Cyprus.

96. The President of the Republic of Cyprus has made
an appeal to the Council and the international community. His call for the Council’s support deserves a positive response.
97. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

92. My delegation listened carefully to the statement
made to the Council last Thursday by Mr. Denktas as
representative of the Turkish Cypriot community.
Guyana has always advocated that the legitimate rights
of the Turkish Cypriot community should be respected.
However, we cannot see any justification for the illegal
acts perpetrated by the leaders of that community. In
total disregard for the international community, the

98. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam): Last month
my delegation had an opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
on his assumption of the presidency of the Council. He
fulfilled his duties brilliantly and that responsibility is
10
!
I

mistrust and hostility among peoples and States, to
resort to the use offorce, to causetensions and to create
instability in various regions of the world, thus serving
the arms race and their global strategy. Cyprus, with its
strategic significance, has caught the eye of the evil
forces, which makes it what it is now. Not only are the
independence and unity of Cyprus undermined, but
peace, security and stability in the Mediterranean and
adjacent areas and in the world at large are endangered
as well.

now yours, Mr. President, the skilful, experienced and
talented representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. Allow me to say how pleased I am to seeyou
presiding over this body for the month of May. I am
confident that you will be successful in guiding the work
of the Council. I also wish to express my thanks to
all the members of the Council for giving me another
opportunity to take part in this important debate.
99. Time and again we have had to take up the question,of Cyprus in the Council. For the past nine years
the General Assembly and the Security Council have
been seized of the developments on that once peaceful island. Its two communities had been mingling there
for years without any problem because Cyprus had
carefully preserved its independence and unity and its
status as a founding member of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and as a Member of the United Nations. Then came the foreign military occupation of
its northern part, followed by attempts to change the
demographic composition and social structure of the
occupied areas.

104. The situation in Cyprus has now reached a new,
critical point which deserves special attention. The independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity of Cyprus, as well as its very existence as a
unified country, have been gravely threatened. A small,
non-aligned country Member of the United Nations
runs the risk of being erased from the political map of
the world. The fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic norms of international
law are being trampled upon. The President of Cyprus
himself had to come to New York and address the
special plenary meeting of non-aligned countries convened at the United Nations Headquarters. The representative of India, the chairman of the meeting, on
behalf of the participants, expressed concern about the
situation in Cyprus and firmly pledged support for its
people, in conformity with the Political Declaration of
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries.

100. As Mr. Kyprianou, the President of Cyprus, has
convincingly pointed out to the Council, they have been
brazenly and gradually carrying out a premeditated
scheme of permanent partition of Cyprus, which has
culminated in the proclamation of the establishment of
a separate State. In his words, a divided Cyprus could
not survive, for that could be the end of Cyprus.
101. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, in a statement by the spokesman of the Foreign Ministry distributed under the symbol S/16174, joined the world
public in denouncing and condemning this act of partition. Yet, in total disregard of the wishes of the international community, of Security Council resolution 541
(1983) declaring the aforementioned proclamation null
and void and of the continued exercise .of his good
offices by the Secretary-General, the separatists, supported by a big foreign country, decided to exchange
so-called ambassadors with the latter-which the Secretary-General considers as having placed in jeopardy
his current efforts-and to proceed with the so-called
constitutional referendum and elections aimed at legalizing the partition.

105. We come from a country that was forcibly divided for more than 20 years. The imperialists, with the
connivance of international reactionary forces, made
the utmost effort to prolong the partition for their own
benefits. But we fought the longest war in history, with
great sacrifices, and succeeded in reunifying our country. From our own experience we can say to the people
of Cyprus that we fully understand and really share
their overriding concern; we completely support their
resolve to exercise their right to self-determination,
their efforts to seek national reconciliation and a comprehensive political solution to the problem. We are
convinced that the conditions should be created to
enable the people of the island to solve their internal
affairs without any interference or pressure from outside.

102. Meanwhile, the legitimate Government of Cyprus, for its part, has been making every effort to bring
about national reconciliation and unity. It is also
anxious, as stated in its letter of 11January 1984to the
Secretary-General [S/16272], to secure as soon as possible a peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the Cyprus problem that would take into due
account the legitimate interests of both eommunities on
the island. But so far there has been no response to
those efforts.

106. My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his tireless efforts to contribute to finding a peaceful
solution to the problem, which he seesto be the better
way. The events in Cyprus have created a dangerous
precedent. The same thing might happen in other parts
of the world as well-South-East Asia for one. Would
we stand aside and watch if the expansionist Power in
Asia were to manipulate a community of people of the
same origin as itself in a third country to split away and
set up a separate State? We demand that the manipulator country stop meddling in the internal affairs of
Cyprus and let the people there decide their own destiny. Time is running out for Cyprus. We fully believe
that some stronger action should be taken right now.

103. What is going on in Cyprus can be better understood in a broader perspective. These events are direct
consequences of the plots hatched by the imperialists.
It is their common practice to sow the seedsof discord,
11

We call earnestly upon the Council to show more serious concern about the situation in Cyprus, to provide
the Secretary-General’s
mission of good offices with
the necessary political support and to take urgent and
effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter to
guarantee the implementation
of the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council.
107. The PRESIDENT
[interprefution~
from Russian]: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
108. Mr. ROA KOURf (Cuba) [interpretation
from
Spanish]: Mr. President, I should like first to say how
pleased I am to see you presiding over the Security
Council. Your well-known talent and diplomatic still
guarantee the successful guidance of the meetings,
which are of particular importance to the international
community. I also wish to thank members of the Council for the opportunity to take part in the debate. Similarly, I express my delegation’s gratitude to Mr. Vladimir Kravets, your predecessor in the chair, Sir,
representative of the fraternal Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for the impeccable manner in which he
presided over the Council’s work during April.

vember 1983, however, we have been met with the
refusal of those leaders to implement Security Council
resolution 541 (1983) and more recently with the new
steps to which I have referred, which, unfortunately,
seek to create an impenetrable
barrier between the
Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot nations.
‘113. Whatever the arguments advanced-and
we listened carefully to what-the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community,
Mr. Rauf Denktaz, said in the
Council-we
can only agree that,the measures adopted
by the Turkish Cypriot side contravene the resolutions
of the United Nations and make increasingly difftcult
the achievement of a peaceful, negotiated settlement of
the conflict.
114. We are aware of the legitimate rights that can be
claimed, and indeed are claimed, by representatives of
both communities and of the basic fact that there are
two communities, a fact which defines the nature of the
Cypriot State. These are inescapable elements of any
real solution. But we are also aware that acts of force
can never replace agreements reached around the negotiating table, where every party willingly agrees to
what is just and reasonable and meets the legitimate
interests of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
peoples.

109. As on previous occasions, we are meeting once
again to consider the situation in Cyprus, a small nonaligned country whose independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity are seriously jeopardized as a result
of foreign occupation and actions taken to make a&it
accompli of the partition of the country by military
might.

115. In his dramatic statement to the Council, President Spyros Kyprianou warned us of the dire consequences for the independence of Cyprus of the unchecked development
of the process started by the
occupation of part of the national territory by foreign
forces, followed by last year’s unilateral declaration of
independence. The responsibility
for what has happened in Cyprus rests, of course, on those who have
abandoned the path of negotiations and have sought to
impose the way of force, even on the members of the
Security Council, who must not disregard the urgent
appeal of the President of Cyprus nor allow the Council’s own resolutions to be violated.

110. Indeed, several months ago the Security Council
saw the need to condemn the unilateral declaration of
independence by the leaders of the Turkish Cypriot
community and to condemn the establishment of a socalled Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus as defying
the rule of law and the efforts of the United Nations to
bring about a peaceful settlement to the question of
Cyprus. Today the Council has to deal with not only the
refusal of those leaders to end the illegal situation that
they created but also new steps, such as an exchange of
ambassadors between Turkey and the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, intended to lend validity to something lacking any legal foundation.

116. The process has indeed been long and arduous,
and today we are in the same position as we were in
10 years ago-or perhaps even further from a just,
lasting solution. Nevertheless, the events and the very
process itself show that no one has come up with a
better formula to resolve the question of Cyprus than
that accepted by the United Nations and advocated by
the Non-Aligned
Movement. We must therefore insist
on a resumption of the negotiations and on the need for
the Secretary-General
to play the role of catalyst in
them.

111. Like other members of the Movement of NonAligned Countries,
Cuba has always advocated a
peaceful, negotiated settlement to the question of
Cyprus, which of course presupposes the holding of
meaningful, open talks between both communities on
the island on an equal footing.

117. In this regard, we must stress the demonstrated
good will of the Government of Cyprus in the face of the
crudest provocations and its decision to opt for the path
of negotiation.
We were able to verify that decision
during our visit to Cyprus as part of the non-aligned
contact group, about two years ago, and throughout the
process, including the period since the unilateral declaration of independence.

112. In the months before the unilateral declaration
of independence by the Turkish Cypriot leaders we
cherished the hope that the dialogue fostered by the
Secretary-General
would lead to something acceptable
to both parties to the conflict. Since the events of No12

been reversed. In other words, only when there has
been an explicit renunciation by the Turkish Cypriot
side of those actions can there be a successful return to
the negotiating process which we all advocate.

118. The Government of Cuba deplores the most recent actions taken by the Turkish Cypriot leaders,
which flout Council resolution 541 (1983). I refer in
particular to the decision to exchange ambassadors
between Turkey and the so-called Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus, which we regard as null and completely invalid, because it deals a heavy blow to the
endeavours of the international community, and in particular the Secretary-General,
to promote a negotiated
solution. It also runs counter to law. The rebellious
attitude of the Turkish Cypriot leaders towards the
decisions of this Organization
deserve our vigorous
protest. The Council should condemn their actions and
take measures to discourage their continuation.

122. The Revolutionary
Government
of Cuba is
bound to the Republic of Cyprus by indestructible ties.
We have always unswervingly defended its right to
independence,
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and
non-aligned status, in other words, its right to decide its
own future without outside interference. We therefore
reject the unilateral declaration of independence. Today as in the past our support for the.just cause of
Cyprus is unwavering. That support is not only part and
parcel of the philosophy of the Non-Aligned Movement
but also the inescapable duty of this Council.

119. Despite all this, and even given the seeming
intransigence of the leaders of the Turkish Cypriot community at present, it would not be reasonable to abandon the path to a negotiated peaceful settlement laid
down by the United Nations if we really want to preserve the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Cyprus,‘on the basis of
the harmonious coexistence of the Greek and Turkish
communities.

123. We are confident that the members of the Council will not fail to adopt the appropriate measures based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations called for with justice by the Govemment of Cyprus and the international
community.
The meeting

120. Hence, my delegation shares the view expressed
by the Secretary-General
in his report of 1 May 1984,
which is the view of those who have declared themselves in favour of dialogue and the resumption of honest negotiations between the two Cypriot communities,
under the auspices of the Secretary-General,
as soon as
possible.

rose at 5.55 p.m.

NOTES
’ United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 382, No. 5475.
z Conference on Cyprus: Documents signed and initialled at Lancaster House on 19 February 2959, Cmnd. 679 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1959).

121. Of course, all this will be possible only when the
steps taken last November and more recently have

13

United Nations publications
ma) be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nation\. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et lcs agences dipositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des vents. New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
rodas panes del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijasc a: Naciancs Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York a Gincbra.

Las

,

.-.

_

,

..I.

__-..
Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

_
90-61313~January

t993--2,050
