S/2021/451

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2021
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2510
(2020) and 2542 (2020), covers political, security-related and economic
developments in Libya, provides an overview of the human rights and humanitarian
situation, and includes an outline of the activities of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of my previous report on UNSMIL
(S/2021/62) on 19 January 2021 and my progress report on the proposed ceasefire
monitoring arrangements in Libya (S/2021/281) on 22 March 2021.

II. Political, security-related and economic developments
2.
Since the issuance of my previous report on UNSMIL (S/2021/62) and my
progress report (S/2021/281), UNSMIL has continued to convene the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum to pursue the implementation of the road map entitled “The
preparatory phase for a comprehensive solution”, adopted in Tunis in November
2020. On 5 February 2021, the members of the Forum selected a new interim
executive authority to lead the country towards national elections, to be held on
24 December 2021. Mohammad Younes Menfi was selected as President-designate of
the Presidency Council, while Mossa al-Koni and Abdullah Hussein al-Lafi were
selected as members-designate of the Council. The Forum members selected Abdul
Hamid Mohammed Dbeibah as the new Prime Minister-designate.
3.
On 8 February, my new Special Envoy on Libya and Head of UNSMIL, Ján
Kubiš, took up his duties. He met with Libyan actors in Tripoli and Benghazi from 15
to 20 February, and subsequently held consultations with national, regional and
international actors, virtually and in person. In his engagements, the Special Envoy
highlighted the importance of advancing the implementation of the ceasefire
agreement signed on 23 October 2020 at the United Nations Office at Geneva. He
emphasized the need to support the new interim unified executive authority in its
mission to unify Libya and its institutions, and stressed the importance of preparing
for the holding of national elections on 24 December, as stipulated in the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum road map.
4.
Following discussions on the agenda and location of th e next session of the
House of Representatives, foreign fighters and mercenaries in and around Sirte were

21-06254 (E)

200521

*2106254*

S/2021/451

repositioned to enable the reopening of Ghardabiya airport so that the members of the
House could attend its meeting in Sirte from 8 to 10 March. Howe ver, most of the
foreign fighters and mercenaries subsequently returned to their original positions .
5.
On 10 March, with more than two-thirds of the total membership of the House
of Representatives present, the new Government of National Unity proposed by the
Prime Minister-designate received a vote of confidence, with 132 votes in favour of
the proposed Government, 2 abstentions and 36 absent members. I welcomed the
endorsement of the Government by the House in a statement issued on 10 March. The
Security Council welcomed the vote of confidence in a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2021/6) issued on 12 March. Several Member States and the Libya Quartet
partners, namely, the African Union, the European Union, the League of Arab States
and the United Nations, also welcomed the endorsement.
6.
On 15 March, the Government of National Unity was sworn in by the House of
Representatives during a ceremony held in Tubruq. The Speaker of the House, Agila
Saleh Gwaider, the President of the High State Council, Khaled Mishri, and several
international observers, including the Assistant Secretary-General and Mission
Coordinator, Raisedon Zenenga, attended the ceremony. The new Government
includes 35 ministers, 5 of whom are women, with the position of Minister of Defence
currently occupied by Mr. Dbeibah. Separately, the President-designate of the
Presidency Council and his two deputies-designate took the constitutional oath before
the Supreme Court in Tripoli, also on 15 March. On 17 March, the House announced
that it had received for its consideration from the Government a draft budget proposal
in the amount of 96 billion Libyan dinars (approximately $21 billion).
7.
Following the swearing-in of the Government of National Unity, power was
transferred from the outgoing Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord to the new Presidency Council and the Government of National Unity at a
handover ceremony on 16 March at the seat of government in Tripoli. On 23 March,
the Deputy Prime Minister, Hussein al-Qatrani, led a ministerial visit to Benghazi to
mark the handover of responsibilities from the parallel eastern -based “interim
government” to the Government of National Unity.
8.
From 23 to 30 March, my Special Envoy travelled to Libya to encourage the
implementation of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map, in particular to
mobilize the support and resources required to hold national elections on
24 December. The Special Envoy met with the Presidency Council, the Prime
Minister and members of the Government of National Unity. He also met with the
Chair of the High National Elections Commission to follow up on technical
preparations for the elections and the international support required, and with
representatives of civil society organizations and women’s groups in Tripoli and
Misratah.
9.
Meanwhile, in response to the request made in the letter dated 4 February 2021
from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Secretary -General
(S/2021/110), the Libya planning team at United Nations Headquarters established a
multidisciplinary and inter-agency advance team. From 3 to 28 March, the advance
team conducted consultations with relevant stakeholders, inclu ding the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, in Benghazi, Misratah, Sirte and Tripoli. The advance team
also conducted site visits to assess key operational, security, administrative, logistical
and medical requirements pertaining to the ceasefire monitoring co mponent to be
established within UNSMIL in support of the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned ceasefire
monitoring mechanism.
10. On 22 March, I submitted to the Security Council a progress report on the
proposed ceasefire monitoring arrangements in Libya ( S/2021/281). On 7 April, I
submitted additional information on the composition and operational aspects of the
2/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

proposed UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring component in a letter addressed to the
President of the Council (S/2021/353). The Council approved my proposals through
its resolution 2570 (2021), adopted on 16 April.
11. While the ceasefire agreement continued to hold, UNSMIL received reports of
fortifications and defensive positions being established along the Sirte -Jufrah axis in
central Libya, and of the continued presence of foreign elements and assets. Despite
the commitments made by the parties, air cargo activities reportedly continued, with
flights to various military airbases in the country’s western and eastern regions.
Reports indicated that there was no reduction in the number of foreign fighters or in
their activities in central Libya.
Implementation of the intra-Libyan dialogue tracks, facilitated by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
12. Sustained efforts were made to advance the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan
political, security and economic dialogues, within the framework of the conclusions
of the Berlin Conference on Libya. As a result, a power was peacefully transferred
from the Government of National Accord and the eastern -based parallel authorities to
the Government of National Unity. Moreover, further progress towards th e full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement was made.
13. On 19 January, the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum voted to approve the
proposed selection mechanism for a new interim executive authority to govern Libya
in the lead-up to the national elections, with 73 per cent of the votes in favour. A oneweek nomination period resulted in the nomination of 24 candidates for the three member Presidency Council and 21 candidates for the post of Prime Minister. The
selection process approved by the Forum was based on a proposal adopted by
consensus by the Forum’s 18-member Advisory Committee, established on 4 January.
14. From 1 to 5 February, UNSMIL convened the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
in Geneva, with the support of the Government of Switzerland. On 2 February, none
of the candidates for the Presidency Council attained the required threshold of 70 per
cent in the electoral colleges, resulting, as the next step, in the formation of lists
composed of candidates for the Council and the position of Prime M inister. On
5 February, the Forum held two rounds of voting to select one of four competing lists.
The winning list received 39 votes (out of 73) while the second-placed list, which was
composed of Mr. Gwaider as candidate for the post of President of the Council, Osama
Juwaili and Abdul Majeed Seif al-Nasr as candidates for the posts of member of the
Council, and Fathi Bashagha as candidate for the post of Prime Minister, received
34 votes. The candidates in the second-placed list promptly accepted the outcome of
the vote. The outgoing President of the Council, Fayez Serraj, congratulated the
winning list and commended the Forum on agreeing on a new interim executive
authority. The voting process was live-streamed for the benefit of all Libyans and the
international community.
15. From 8 to 12 February, the Constitutional Committee established by the House
of Representatives and the High State Council to determine a constitutional basis for
the national elections met in Hurghada, Egypt. The Committee formula ted a proposal
in accordance with which a referendum on the 2017 draft constitution would be held
prior to the presidential and legislative elections. The proposal includes a potential
amendment to the Constitutional Declaration to enable the holding of th e elections,
should the High National Elections Commission, House and Council assess that the
referendum cannot be organized before the elections. The proposal envisions the
election of the Head of State and the members of the House by universal and direct
suffrage in accordance with electoral laws to be promulgated by the House in

21-06254

3/16

S/2021/451

agreement with the Council. The Committee’s proposal was adopted by the Council
on 16 February but is yet to be considered by the House.
16. On 11 February, UNSMIL convened a plenary session of the Libyan economic
dialogue to seek the views of economic experts on recent economic reforms and receive
recommendations on the way forward. Participants stressed the need for subsidy
reform and increased transparency, in view of the prosp ective selection of a new
Government.
17. On 26 March, UNSMIL convened a virtual meeting of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum, the first since the formation of the Government of National Unity
on 5 February. My Special Envoy highlighted the continued rel evance of the Forum
as an instrument to ensure follow-up on the implementation of the Forum road map.
18. From 7 to 9 April, UNSMIL convened a meeting of the legal committee of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis. The committee made progress in finalizing
a draft constitutional basis that provides constitutional arrangements for the exercise
of legislative and executive powers after the elections and a process for reviewing the
2017 draft Constitution before submitting it to a referendum after the elections. On
4 May, my Special Envoy transmitted the committee’s proposal to the Forum, which
he intends to convene in plenary session in the second half of May to deliberate on
the proposal.
19. In the framework of national reconciliation, the Governmen t of National Unity,
in coordination with the leadership of the Libyan National Army and western armed
groups, facilitated the release of combatants and political detainees on 31 March. On
that day, 107 combatants from the western region, who had been capt ured by the
Zawiyah Security Directorate, were released by the municipality of Zawiyah. The
following day, the Libyan National Army Command approved the release of 8 women
from Grenada prison in the east, in addition to 27 other detainees from the east.
Subsequently, the Command released a total of over 200 detainees, mostly from the
eastern city of Darnah, in various batches. In addition, on 7 May, dozens of detainees
were released by the Command, which reiterated its commitment to release more
detainees, with more releases expected after Eid al-Fitr.
20. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission continued to provide leadership and build
confidence among the parties, including by providing security assurances for the
meeting of the House of Representatives in Sirte from 8 to 10 March. The
Commission held six meetings during the reporting period, including three with the
security working group of the International Follow -up Committee on Libya. It also
continued to work towards the reopening of the coastal road connec ting Misratah with
eastern Libya, to prepare for ceasefire monitoring and the deployment of joint security
forces, and to advocate the withdrawal of foreign fighters and mercenaries from the
country. The Commission met with the advance team deployed by the Secretariat to
inform their deliberations on the UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring component. They
also met with my Special Envoy on 27 April in Sirte to discuss progress in ceasefire
implementation and the remaining steps required to reopen the coastal road.
International Follow-up Committee on Libya
21. The International Follow-up Committee on Libya met virtually at the senior
level twice during the reporting period. On 25 February, the participants reaffirmed
their full support for UNSMIL and its new leadership in facilitating international
efforts to promote a Libyan-led solution to the conflict. On 21 April, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, Heiko Maas, delivered opening remarks and Mr. Dbeibah
provided an update on developments since the swearing-in of the Government of
National Unity on 10 March. In a joint statement, the co -chairs of the Committee,
namely, my Special Envoy and Germany, noted that holding elections was the primary
4/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

task of the interim executive authority and other relevant insti tutions, and called on
the House of Representatives to clarify and enact, at the latest by 1 July, the
constitutional basis and legal framework for elections. They emphasized that the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement remained critical and urg ed all actors to
expedite the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya without
delay, and to fully comply with the United Nations arms embargo. The four working
groups, covering security, political, economic, and international humanitari an law and
human rights aspects, continued to meet in support of the three intra -Libyan track
dialogue process.
22. The security working group, co-chaired by France, Italy, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the African U nion, held seven
meetings during the reporting period, including one with the participation of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission. The working group played an important role in
maintaining international consensus on the 23 October ceasefire agreement, and
reinforced the efforts of the Commission to implement the ceasefire provisions,
including the reopening of the coastal road, and the withdrawal of foreign fighters
and mercenaries and operationalization of the Libyan Ceasefire Monitoring
Mechanism.
23. On 21 January, the economic working group, co-chaired by Egypt, the United
States of America and the European Union, convened a plenary meeting with the
Governor of the Central Bank of Libya and the two ministers of finance to seek
agreement on unifying the budget under the facilitation of UNSMIL. The following
week, UNSMIL held meetings with the ministers of finance and the Central Bank of
Libya; as a result, an agreement was reached on a consolidated two -month interim
budget for January and February. However, with the formation of the Government of
National Unity, the interim budget was put aside pending the promulgation of a new
unified national budget by the incoming Administration. The economic working
group convened a second plenary on 22 March with the ne w Minister of Finance and
Economic Affairs. The meeting was intended to focus on the need for emergency
spending to stabilize the electricity grid, which was in danger of collapsing. The
meeting, however, was postponed at the request of the Prime Minister in order to
review the Government’s cooperation with the economic working group.
24. The political working group, co-chaired by Algeria, Germany and the League of
Arab States, convened three plenary sessions to review the progress achieved by the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and the efforts of the unified interim executive
authority. During its meeting on 25 February, the then President-designate of the
Presidency Council and the then Prime Minister-designate stated their commitment
to forming an inclusive national unity cabinet and highlighted their priorities. On
18 March, the Chair of the High National Elections Commission briefed the working
group on preparations for the national elections. He emphasized that, while the
Commission was ready to start preparations for the elections, the lack of a
constitutional basis and an electoral legal framework prevented it from taking
concrete steps in that regard. He indicated that the constitutional and legislative
frameworks should be ready by early July at the latest so that the Commission could
prepare for the elections scheduled for 24 December.
25. The international humanitarian law and human rights working group, co -chaired
by the Netherlands and Switzerland, convened three plenary sessions. The first
plenary focused on arbitrary detention and its impact, including on the political
process and local and national reconciliation activities. At the second plenary, held in
cooperation with the Libyan Civil Society Commission, the working group discussed
the imperative of preserving and expanding humanitarian space and of ensuring that
the ceasefire resulted in peace dividends for civilians, including freedom of
movement and access to essential services and markets.
21-06254

5/16

S/2021/451

International and regional engagement
26. Regional and international stakeholders continued to offer support and engage
with the Libyan parties to promote progress in the tracks of the intra-Libyan dialogue.
Egypt hosted the meeting of the Constitutional Committee of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council from 8 to 12 February in Hurghada to
formulate proposals on a constitutional basis for elections. On 17 March, the President
of Tunisia, Kaïs Saïed, became the first foreign head of State to visit Tripoli since the
election of the new Government of National Unity. Subsequently, the Foreign
Ministers of France, Germany and Italy, the Prime Ministers of Egypt, Greece, Italy,
and Malta, and the President of the European Council visited Tripoli. Several
embassies have relocated to Tripoli or are in the process of doing so.
27. Mr. Menfi undertook visits to Egypt, France and Turkey in March, while
Mr. Dbeibah visited Kuwait, the Russian Federation, Turkey and the United Arab
Emirates in early April. On 13 April, Mr. Dbeibah and a large delegation of ministers
from the Government of National Unity travelled to Ankara for a two -day visit.
28. My Special Envoy held consultations, virtually and in person, with senior
representatives of Member States participating in the Berlin process and other
stakeholders. He also undertook visits to Egypt, France, Germany, Italy, the Russian
Federation, Tunisia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates. At his meetings, the
Special Envoy highlighted the importance of advancing the three -track intra-Libyan
dialogues, including the full implementation of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
road map, and the critical importance of holding national parliamentary and
presidential elections on 24 December and supporting the new interim executive in
its efforts to unify Libya and its institutions. The Special Envoy also stressed the need
to fully implement the ceasefire agreement, including the withdrawal of mercenaries
and foreign forces.
29. On 26 March, the European Union renewed the mandate of its military operation
in the Mediterranean for two years, until 31 March 2023.
30. My Special Envoy and UNSMIL maintained regular contact with the other
members of the Libya Quartet (namely, the African Union, the European Union and
the League of Arab States). From 11 to 13 April, he held consultations in Addis Ababa
with senior African Union officials. On 15 April, he met with the Secretary -General
of the League of Arab States in Cairo.
31. On 20 April, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, chaired the sixth meeting of the Libya Quartet. The meeting was attended by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Deputy Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Monique Nsanzabaganwa, on behalf of the Chairperson of the
Commission, and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, Josep Borrell. A
joint communiqué was issued after the meeting.
Situation in the western region
32. Latent rivalry and renewed competition among armed groups resurfaced in
Tripoli and the western region in the lead-up to and following the selection of a new
executive authority by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum. Ahead of the meeting of
the Forum in Geneva from 1 to 5 February, some Tripoli-based armed groups and the
armed groups from western Libya issued a statement on 31 January urging the then
President of the Presidency Council to reunite the Council and form a national unity
Government until the elections on 24 December.

6/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

33. On 21 February, a security incident in Tripoli’s Janzur district, involving the
security staff of the then Minister of the Interior, Mr. Bashagha, and members of the
Stability Support Apparatus, left one person dead and another injured. The
Prosecutor’s Office ordered the arrest of one of the members of the Minister’s staff
and two members of the Stability Support Apparatus, who were placed in the custody
of the Deterrent Agency for Combating Organized Crime and Terrorism, formerly
known as the Special Deterrence Force.
34. On 23 January, demonstrations by families of victims of human rights violations
in Tarhunah resulted in vandalism and the burning of five unoccupied houses
belonging to two pro-Libyan National Army families and supporters of the Ninth
Brigade. Additional mass graves were discovered in Tarhunah during the reporting
period, bringing the total number of graves discovered to 101. Despite challenges
related to the lack of resources, national authorities have been using secondary
identification processes to identify the bodies. In total, 44 bodies, including those of
3 women and 3 children, were identified and handed over to their families.
Situation in the eastern region
35. In eastern Libya, there were continued reports of criminal activity, including
killings, kidnappings for ransom, carjackings and extortion. A series of
demonstrations was held in February by wounded Libyan National Army veterans
demanding payment for medical care. On 28 February, the Libyan National Army
dispatched a large military force from its 166th Infantry Battalion to Darnah, east of
Benghazi, reportedly to establish law and order and target Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) elements still operating in the area. On 2 March, protestors stormed
the Central Bank of Libya branch in Benghazi. The branch subsequently suspended
its activities, demanding adequate protection.
36. On 24 March, Mahmoud al-Werfalli, a commander in the Al-Saiqa Brigade,
which is affiliated with the Libyan National Army, who had been indicted by the
International Criminal Court for war crimes, was shot dead in Benghazi.
Situation in the southern region
37. Criminal activity and violent confrontation between armed groups reportedly
increased in the southern region. On 16 February, UNSMIL condemned what
appeared to be a targeted mortar attack in the city of Sabha during a celebration held
to mark the tenth anniversary of the February Revolution. A 10 -year-old child was
killed in the attack and 29 others, including 2 childre n, were injured.
38. The Libyan National Army increased its activities and assets at airbases in the
region, in part because of recent events in Chad. Over the past several months, the
Libyan National Army has continued to operate mostly in the areas aroun d the Sharara
oil field, Awbari and the Shati’ junction checkpoints, maintaining control over key
points of access to the southern region.
39. The region also experienced a significant increase in the number of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) cases, which prompted a lockdown for several weeks.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya and Organization of Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb
40. Although no operations were attributed to them over the past several months,
ISIL and a support network of the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
remained a threat in Libya. Their presence and activities in Libya represent a direct
threat against civilian targets, government institutions and the United Nations.

21-06254

7/16

S/2021/451

41. In early March, the Joint Security Room of the Government of National Accord
coordinated a counter-terrorism operation in southern Tripoli, which led to the arrest
of elements reportedly affiliated with ISIL. On 14 March, the Libyan National Army
announced that its forces had carried out an operation in southern Libya, which led to
the arrest of a prominent ISIL leader, Muhammad Miloud Muhammad. Separately, a
member of the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb who had participated
in the attack on the Birak al-Shati’ airbase on 18 May 2017, Omar Abdeen
al-Mahmoudi, was shot and killed during a family dispute.
Economic situation
42. On 16 March, the Office of the Prime Minister requested the National Oil
Corporation to unfreeze oil revenue held in its accounts since September 2020, w hen
the eight-month-long blockage of oil production had been lifted. The Corporation,
which had accrued over $8 billion in revenue during that time, promptly complied
with the request. The end of the freeze was the result of numerous reforms by Libyan
authorities, including the reactivation of the Board of Directors of the Central Bank
of Libya on 17 December 2020, the unification of foreign exchange rates through the
devaluation of the Libyan dinar on 3 January 2021, an effort to address the banking
crisis through the provision of a 5 billion dinar (approximately $1.1 billion) loan to
the commercial banks on 1 February, the launching of a comprehensive audit of the
Libyan Investment Authority on 12 January and progress in the international financial
review of the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya.
43. On 17 March, the Office of the Prime Minister submitted a draft unified budget
to both the House of Representatives and the High State Council for review. On 19
and 20 April, the House met and decided to return the budget to the Government of
National Unity for review, stating that spending should not exceed 78 billion Libyan
dinars (approximately $17.4 billion). The adoption of the budget is urgently needed
in order to address the immediate needs facing the country, including the growing
electricity crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic.

III. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
44. The UNSMIL-led integrated electoral assistance office, including the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), continued to provide technical assistance
to the High National Elections Commission and the Central Committee for Municipal
Council Elections, including support in the coordination of international electoral
assistance. UNSMIL also worked with the Commission to advance the planning and
process design for the voting cards that the Commission intends to introduce ahead
of the upcoming national elections. The UNDP electoral assistance project entitled
“Promoting elections for the people of Libya” initiated a procurement process for
purchasing 12,000 ballot boxes to be used in the elections.
45. On 9 February, the Chair of the High National Elections Commission briefed
the Constitutional Committee of the House of Representatives and the High State
Council on the technical aspects of the implementation of a constitutional referendum
before the national elections. The Chair reiterated his position that holding a
referendum before the presidential and legislative elections w ould compromise the
scheduled date of 24 December. On 23 March, Mr. Dbeibah visited the headquarters
of the Commission in Tripoli, where he conveyed to the Chair the commitment of the

8/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

Government of National Unity to supporting the Commission in fulfilling its mandate,
in line with the electoral legislation, once issued.
46. In January and February, mayoral elections were completed for the eight newly
elected municipal councils of Rujban, Zawiyah West, Qarabulli, Qasr Khiyar, Zlitan,
Sabratah and Sawani Bin Adam, as well as Tripoli Centre. Municipal elections for the
Greater Tripoli municipality of Suq al-Jum‘ah were held on 3 April. Since 2019,
elections have been held for 40 municipal councils, while 74 other council elections
are to be held before the end of 2021.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
47. While the ceasefire has resulted in a dramatic reduction in civilian casualties,
violations of human rights continued. UNSMIL documented killings; enforced
disappearances; conflict-related sexual violence, including rape, arbitrary arrests and
detentions; attacks against activists and human rights defenders; and hate crimes.
During the reporting period, UNSMIL documented at least 31 civilian victims,
including 3 dead and 28 injured.
Unlawful deprivation of liberty, detention and torture
48. On 2 February, UNSMIL conducted a joint mission with the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to the Judaydah detention centre in Tripoli to assess the
situation of women and children detained for their alleged affiliation with ISIL. At
the time of the visit, 39 women and 59 children, from Algeria, Chad, Egypt, Ethiopia,
Iraq, Nigeria, the Syrian Arab Republic and Tunisia, were detained at the facility,
having been transferred in September 2020 from Misratah. Many had spent over five
years in arbitrary detention, with some children born in detention. On 11 February, in
cooperation with the Tunisian Embassy in Libya, UNSMIL conducted a mission to
assess the needs of the women and children held at the Mitiga detention centre in
Tripoli. A total of 14 women and 22 children had been held there for over five years
for their alleged affiliation with ISIL. Some of the children had spent most of their
lives incarcerated, while others had been born in the facility. Accounts suggested that
most of the women had been captured by unknown armed groups from Sabratah and
subjected to torture and sexual violence, including rape. As a result of UNSMIL
advocacy and cooperation by Libyan and Tunisian authorities, all the Tunisian women
and children were repatriated to Tunisia between 12 and 17 March.
49. On 17 March, the newly appointed Minister of Justice announced the
establishment of a 15-member committee to address the issue of arbitrary detention,
particularly for the thousands of pretrial detainees.
Conflict-related sexual violence
50. UNSMIL continued to document numerous reports of conflict -related sexual
violence, including in places of official detention. Female migrants and refugees
continued to face heightened risks of rape, sexual harassment and trafficking by
transnational smugglers, traffickers and armed groups, and, in some cases, by officials
of the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration. The Libya Monitoring, Analysis
and Reporting Arrangements Technical Working Group and Secretariat were
established on 25 February, in an effort to enhance protection for victims of rape and
other forms of conflict-related sexual violence, and in line with Security Council
resolution 1960 (2010). The Secretary-General, in his latest annual report on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2021/312), reiterated the recommendations that the Libyan
authorities adopt anti-trafficking legislation in order to increase protection from
sexual violence for women and children migrants and refugees, and strengthen their

21-06254

9/16

S/2021/451

rule of law institutions to promote accountability for crimes of sexual violence, in
line with resolution 2242 (2015).
Migrants and refugees
51. The International Organization for Migration indicated in its most recent
Displacement Tracking Matrix that there are more than 571,000 migrants in Libya,
most of whom come from neighbouring countries, including Chad, Egypt, the Niger
and the Sudan.
52. On 23 and 26 February, guards at the Abu Salim detention centre, operated by
the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration, indiscriminately opened fire, killing
at least five migrants and injuring many more. A similar incident occurred on 8 April
at the Al-Mabani detention centre, when guards shot and killed a migrant and injured
several others. On 2 March, the Ministry of the Interior announced the capture of the
lead suspect in the killing of 27 Bangladeshi and 4 sub -Saharan African migrants and
refugees in Mizdah, southern Libya.
53. Between 5 and 13 March, the 444th Battalion, operating under the Deterrent
Agency for Combating Organized Crime and Terrorism, conducted multiple raids on
Bani Walid-based human traffickers and made several arrests. Migrants and refugees
captured as a result of the operation were subsequently detained.
54. The number of migrants and refugees attempting to cross the Mediterranean
increased in early 2021. By the end of April, the Libyan Coastguard had intercepted
and returned to Libya 6,800 migrants and refugees who had b een attempting to cross,
a 115 per cent increase compared with the same period in 2020. In addition, over 500
migrants and refugees died on the Central Mediterranean route.
55. Increasing numbers of migrants and refugees continued to be arbitrarily
detained in official detention centres of the Directorate for Combating Illegal
Migration, without due process and in extremely poor conditions, with reported
deaths and injuries. As at 2 May, over 4,300 migrants and refugees were being held
at detention centres across the country, with significantly increased humanitarian and
protection concerns, including the imposition by the Directorate of new restrictions
on humanitarian access and monitoring by humanitarian agencies.
Human rights defenders and members of civil society
56. Human rights defenders and members of civil society continued to be subjected
to arbitrary detention, ill-treatment and torture by various armed groups. Freedom of
expression continued to be undermined, with activists and defe nders subjected to hate
crimes. Human rights defenders who spoke up continued to be targeted and subjected
to violence, abuse, social media vilification and threats.
Corruption
57. On 9 March, the Libyan Audit Bureau issued its annual report for 2019, wh ich
included allegations of corruption and serious financial crimes concerning a number
of national institutions, including the former Presidency Council and the former
Ministries of the Interior, Defence, Health, Foreign Affairs and Local Government.
The former Minister of the Interior rejected the allegations as false and politically
motivated. The Attorney General’s Office announced that it would launch an
investigation into the allegations raised in the report.
58. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Egyptian
Anti-Corruption Academy organized a four-day training workshop in March, with
19 participants from the Libyan law enforcement authorities, prosecution service,
judiciary and financial information unit, in order to strengthen the cri minal justice
10/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

response of Libya to corruption. The workshop was conducted as part of the Office’s
project, implemented jointly with the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute, to prevent and combat corruption and money -laundering in Libya.
Rule of law
59. On 28 February, the High Judicial Institute announced the resumption of its
regular education programme following a four-year suspension. UNSMIL is
coordinating the roll-out of the second phase of training for the six judges of the two
newly established courts for violence against women and children, in cooperation
with UNDP, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women), UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
UNSMIL also provided technical assistance to the Libyan Bar Association to develop
its first code of ethics.
Transitional justice and rights-based reconciliation
60. On 12 February, during an intervention in Tubruq, Mr. Menfi highlighted
national reconciliation as one of his priorities, alongside the unity of the armed forces
and service delivery by unified institutions. Those priorities are in line with the
commitments set out in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map. In addition,
on 5 April, Mr. Menfi announced the establishment of a High National Reconciliation
Commission to address past human rights violations and promote national
reconciliation based on justice and the rule of law.
61. UNSMIL initiated consultations with the African Union to discuss areas in
which the Libyan authorities could be supported in promoting human rights -based
reconciliation. From 5 to 6 April, UNSMIL and UNDP, in coordination with the
African Union, supported the Office of the Prime Minister in the organization of a
workshop to discuss the establishment of a national reconciliation commission. In
addition, my Special Envoy discussed collaboration with the African Union in the
provision of support for Libyan national reconciliation efforts, during his visit to the
African Union on 11 and 12 April.
Human rights due diligence policy
62. The United Nations system in Libya continued to implement the human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces
(see A/67/775-S/2013/110, annex), with a view to preventing and mitigating the
identified risks of grave violations of international humanitarian law, human rights
law or refugee law by Libyan security forces receiving United Nations support.

C.

Security sector
Implementation of the ceasefire
63. Significant progress was made in clearing explosive remnants of war from the
coastal road by military engineers from the west and the east. With the technical
advice and coordination support of UNSMIL and the Mine Action Service, and
despite serious shortages of human resources and materiel, the teams cleared
120 kilometres of the road and removed 7.5 tons of explosive ordnance during the
operations. Clearance operations were completed on 21 March, w ith the final
10 kilometres cleared jointly with and coordinated by the Libyan Mine Action Centre.
However, the road has not yet reopened, reportedly owing to political obstacles and
tensions between western-affiliated armed groups and pro-Libyan National Army
mercenaries in the vicinity of Abu Qurayn.

21-06254

11/16

S/2021/451

64. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission continued to prepare for the establishment
of the Joint Libyan Security (Police) Force and the Joint Libyan Military Force,
including the development of detailed requirements for possible international
assistance. On 29 April, following its meeting in Sirte, the Commission issued a
statement in which it welcomed the adoption of Security Council resolution 2571
(2021), and the participation of the President of the Presidency Council and my
Special Envoy in the meeting. The Commission also noted in the statement that it had
selected the head of the Joint Libyan Military Force.
65. On 29 April, the Security Council held an informal interactive dialogue on the
issue of foreign fighters. In their briefing, my Special Envoy and the Assistant
Secretary-General and Mission Coordinator underscored the importance of the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and the withdrawal of foreign fighters and
mercenaries, as well as security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
rehabilitation.
Arms and ammunition management
66. Recently completed mine action surveys in south Tripoli provided evidence of
the impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas during the 2019 –2020
conflict. Surveys identified 750 areas that are known or suspected to be contaminated.
Most areas had explosive remnants of war contamination, with some suspected to
have landmines. To date, survey teams have recorded more than 3.8 million square
metres as confirmed or suspected hazardous areas that require mine action
intervention. Ongoing clearance operations in Benghazi, Misratah, Sabha and Sirte
have yielded positive results. Additional resources and partnerships need to be
mobilized to clear the areas in a timely manner to facilitate safe returns, livelihood
activities and reconciliation.

D.

Women’s empowerment
67. UNSMIL facilitated the engagement and participation of women from across
the spectrum of Libyan society in the intra-Libyan dialogue tracks. A total of 23 per
cent of the participants in the meeting of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in
Geneva were women. UNSMIL and the International Follow -up Committee on Libya
highlighted the importance of honouring the pledge made by all candidates for the
position of Prime Minister to increase women’s participation in the affairs of the
State. On 26 February, Mr. Dbeibah stressed his commitment to appointing women to
no less than 30 per cent of senior executive positions, during a meeting with the
women’s caucus of the Forum.
68. In response to concerns raised by women’s groups over the limited participation
of women in the economic dialogue, three additional women joined the econo mic
track, increasing the number of women participating to 7 of the 34 members.
69. From 8 March, UN-Women, in collaboration with UNSMIL and the United
Nations country team, held a five-day virtual conference with support from partners,
including Canada and the European Union. The conference brought together
60 Libyan women from a broad spectrum of Libyan society, including the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum, academia, civil society and human rights defenders. The
participants discussed the situation of front-line Libyan women amid the pandemic.
They highlighted a range of concerns in areas such as security, human rights,
economic empowerment, the media, youth empowerment and humanitarian response.
They reiterated their commitment to ensuring the integratio n of the perspectives of
women and girls in the formulation and implementation of policies and programmes
in all spheres and stages of the pandemic response and recovery.

12/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

70. On 1 April, my Special Envoy gave a briefing to the Security Council Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security. He provided an update on the efforts
of the United Nations to support women’s participation in elections as both candidates
and voters. He stressed that United Nations support to ceasefire monitoring should be
inclusive of women and youth, and that women should be included in the subcommittees
of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.

E.

Young people, peace and security
71. UNFPA continued to partner with the Libyan Red Crescent, UN -Women and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to
empower young people engaged on the front lines of the humanitarian crisis in Libya
by awarding 14 microgrants to youth-led initiatives and mentorship programmes.
UNFPA organized and chaired regular monthly meetings of the youth working group,
responsible for developing an action plan for United Nations engagement with youth
in Libya, in line with resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security and the
2019–2020 United Nations Strategic Framework for Libya.

F.

Coordination of international assistance
72. The United Nations country team began preparations for the conduct of a
common country assessment and the development of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
73. Insecurity, lack of basic services, economic and governance crises, and the
COVID-19 pandemic have contributed to increased humanitarian needs across Libya.
The 2021 humanitarian needs overview contains the assessment that 1.3 million
people need humanitarian assistance in 2021, including 173,000 int ernally displaced
people, 228,000 returnees, 304,000 migrants, 44,000 refugees and 502,000 vulnerable
host community members, compared with 900,000 people in need of humanitarian
assistance in 2020. The situation was exacerbated by increasing food prices, which
remain 20 per cent above pre-COVID-19 levels. Moreover, in the Libya Humanitarian
Response Plan, 153,000 people were identified as at risk of gender-based violence
and requiring specialized prevention and response programming.
74. Since its inception, the UNDP Stabilization Facility for Libya, aimed at
restoring public trust in national and local authorities, thereby generating peace
dividends and fostering national unity, has supported 24 municipalities and completed
298 community-endorsed projects through inclusive community consultations. In
2020, the facility completed 114 projects to support the rehabilitation of educational,
medical, and public facilities and improve health and sanitation services to the benefit
of over 2.5 million people.
75. Since July 2020, the number of internally displaced persons decreased from an
estimated 429,000 to 278,000. Although more such persons are returning to their
homes, a lack of basic services and the presence of explosive remnants of war and
landmines in return areas, especially in southern parts of Tripoli, continue to present
impediments to return. During the reporting period, 15 people were killed and 5 were
injured by explosive contamination in Tripoli and Sirte. More explosive contamination
continued to be discovered and removed for disposal.

21-06254

13/16

S/2021/451

76. The COVID-19 pandemic continued to overwhelm the health system in Libya.
As at 29 April, approximately 177,000 confirmed cases of COVID -19 had been
reported, including 3,023 deaths, with the actual number of cases likely much higher.
Testing capacity, including human resources and supplies, remained very limited.
Several health facilities were still closed owing to a lack of oxygen cylinders and
sufficient health workers to care for the increasing number of sick patients. Numerous
municipalities across the country remained in lockdown owing to an increasing
number of COVID-19 cases.
77. In March, the Government of National Unity endorsed the national deployment
plan for COVID-19 vaccination in Libya, which was developed with support from
UNICEF and the World Health Organization. In accordance with the plan, 426 health
facilities or vaccination sites in 102 municipalities will support vaccination efforts.
Through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, Libya secured
2.8 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines. In April, Libya received over 258,000 doses
of the COVID-19 vaccine, of which 57,600 were delivered through the COVAX
Facility. The national COVID-19 vaccination campaign was launched in Tripoli on
17 April, followed by the western, eastern, and southern regions. As at 29 April, a
total of 63,152 doses had been made available at 430 sites across the country; 88 per
cent in the western and 11 per cent in eastern region. In the first stage of the campaign,
high priority is given to medical personnel and the elderly suffering from chronic
diseases. On 29 April, the National Centre for Disease Control and UNICEF launched
a campaign to increase people’s confidence in the vaccine.
78. Humanitarian partners continued to face access constraints owing to bureaucratic
impediments and insecurity. Some 283 access constraints were reported in February,
the lowest number in months. However, delays in the issuance of visas for aid workers
and the clearance of critical relief items, particularly health supplies, continued,
impacting the delivery of assistance to affected people.
79. As of the end of 27 April, humanitarian partners had assisted almost 203,000
people, about 45 per cent of the target group of the most vulnerable people in need.
An additional 63,000 people in need received assistance with humanitarian activities
outside the Humanitarian Response Plan. As detailed in the 2021 Plan, $189 million,
of which only $36.1 million, or 19 per cent, has been secured so far, is required in
2021 to meet the humanitarian needs of 451,000 of the most vulnerable people in
Libya.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
80. UNSMIL increased its international staff presence to 120 staff, on a rotational
basis, considering the improved security situation in the Tripoli area and the
requirements for staff to engage with Libyan interlocutors to continue the ongoing
political, security, economic, and international human rights law and humanitarian
law tracks, and the requirements for the provision of humanitarian assistance. All
international staff in Tripoli continued to be accommodated at the Oea compound,
protected by the United Nations Guard Unit. National staff continued to report to
work in the compound on a rotational basis, when their presence was required.
Alternatively, they worked remotely.
81. Comprehensive protective and preventive measures to safeguard staff and
interlocutors from contracting or potentially spreading COVID -19 remained in place,
and adherence to the measures was closely monitored. The measures were regularly
reviewed and adjusted in accordance with evolving advice by the World Health
Organization and UNSMIL medical staff, and to ensure alignment with measures put
14/16

21-06254

S/2021/451

in place by the Libyan and Tunisian authorities. Strict COVID -19 preventive
measures continued to be applied on all flights. Road movements in Tripoli were
conducted in compliance with security risk management measures.

V. Observations and recommendations
82. The smooth transfer of power to a new Presidency Council, Prime Minister and
Government of National Unity brings renewed hope for the reunification of the
country and its institutions, and for a lasting peace. The Council and the Prime
Minister now have the important task of leading Libya towards presidential and
parliamentary elections on 24 December. I commend the members of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum for the key role they played in achieving that outcome. The
momentum should be maintained and progress needs to be continued on the political,
security and economic tracks, to enable the holding of national elections on that date,
in accordance with the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map and as requested
in Security Council resolution 2570 (2021). Similarly, the international community
should remain aligned in its support for Libya and the Government of National Unity.
83. The vote of confidence of the House of Representatives in the Government of
National Unity, in which participation was high, was a significant political milestone.
The House must continue to fulfil its responsibility and complete the next tasks
necessary to enable the political process to move forward. Those tasks include the
approval of the budget and the adoption of a constitutional basis and legal framework
for the national elections, including the passing of electoral laws and other necessary
legislation.
84. The Government of National Unity must provide the High National Elections
Commission with timely support, including through relevant line ministries and
government institutions, so that the national elections can be held on 24 December.
That support includes the provision of sufficient funds, the ensuring of a conducive
security environment, and support for COVID-19 health and safety measures in the
conduct of the process. The Government’s support will be complemented by the
provision of international electoral assistance to the Commission, coordinated by
UNSMIL.
85. The holding of municipal elections, despite the political, security and pandemic related challenges, is an important achievement and a sign that many Libyans are
eager to participate in democratic processes. The time is ripe for the two committees
managing municipal elections in the west and the east to unify and complete the
elections for the remaining municipalities in a safe and secure manner, following
appropriate COVID-19 health and safety measures.
86. The full inclusion of women and youth in the Libyan political process and State
institutions is essential. The women’s caucus in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
played an instrumental role in securing a pledge by the new interim e xecutive
authority to appoint women to at least 30 per cent of senior executive positions. I urge
the Government of National Unity to honour that important commitment.
87. Recent positive developments in the political process would not have been
possible without the continued commitment by Libyan parties to the 23 October
ceasefire agreement. I call on the Government of National Unity and all Libyan actors
to continue supporting the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and its efforts to fully
implement the ceasefire agreement. The reopening of the coastal road and progress in
the priorities identified by the Commission will generate dividends for the political
process. To help support its implementation, and pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2570 (2021), a scalable UNSMIL ceasefire monitoring component will be

21-06254

15/16

S/2021/451

deployed to Libya, if the General Assembly approves supplementary resources
covering security, logistical, medical and operational requirements; th e related
proposal will be submitted to the Assembly in the near future.
88. Prioritization of security sector reform by the Government of National Unity is
also necessary to consolidate and build on political and security gains. Important
elements to that end include filling senior civilian and military appointments,
delivering a road map for the reunification of the Libyan army, and addressing the
proliferation of non- and quasi-State armed groups. Bringing one of the world’s
largest uncontrolled stocks of arms and ammunition under State control is vital. I
reiterate my call to Member States and Libyan national actors to put an end to
violations of the arms embargo and facilitate the withdrawal of foreign fighters and
mercenaries from the country. Those steps are essential to lasting peace and stability
in Libya and the region.
89. The establishment of the High National Reconciliation Commission to lay the
groundwork for a national reconciliation process to promote unity and social cohesion
is a significant development. The United Nations stands ready to work in close
collaboration with the African Union to support an inclusive process grounded in the
principles of justice and human rights. Such a process is essential to ensuring long term peace and stability.
90. I am gravely concerned about the continued arbitrary detention of migrants and
refugees at formal detention centres and informal smuggler sites, and the poor
conditions and treatment to which they are subjected at those sites. There is a clear
and urgent need to put in place measures to protect detainees from sexual violence,
provide assistance to victims, and ensure that allegations of sexual violence are
effectively investigated and prosecuted. The Libyan authorities should also secure the
release of refugees and migrants from detention centres as a matter of urgency,
provide them with safe shelter and a humane living environment, and ensure that they
are included in the country’s COVID-19 planning and response. Moreover, Member
States should revisit policies that support the interception at sea and return of refugees
and migrants to Libya, which is not considered to be a safe port of disembarkation. I
call on international partners to continue their support and to contribute generously
to the 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan.
91. I thank my Special Envoy, the Mission leadership, the staff of UNSMIL and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and efforts to support Libya and its
people on the path to peace and stability.

16/16

21-06254
