General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

42

should be so devised as to ensure the maximum possible
impact on world public opinion in support of all development efforts, particularly of the objectives and policies
for the Decade.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2572 (XXIV). Inlernational Education Year
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral,4~ prepared with the assistance of the Un~ted
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Orgamzation pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2412
(XXIII) of 17 December 1968;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1436 (XLVII) of 31 July 1969.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2573 (XXIV). International university
The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the SecretaryGeneral's remarks concerning the idea of an international university made in the introduction to his
annual report on the work of the Organization, 43
Welcoming the initiative taken by the SecretaryGeneral,
l. Invites the Secretary-General to undertake, in cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and in consultation with
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
and any other agency or organization he deems necessary and taking into account the views expressed at
the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly, a
comprehensive expert study on the feasibility of an
international university, including a clear definition of
its goals and objectives as well as recommendations as
to how it might be organized and financed;
2. Expresses the hope that the report on the study
will be available early in the International Education
Year and in time to be submitted through the Economic
and Social Council to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fifth session.
1832nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1969.

2577 (XXIV). Report of the Industrial
Develo1,ment Board
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its third session, 44
Noting in particular the Board's recommendations
concerning the programme of work. of. the United
Nations Industrial Development Orgamzat1on for 1970
relating to the field activities and supporting activities
of that organization, 4 :;
42 El 4 707 and

Corr. l and 2 and Add.1 and 2.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Supplement No. 1 A ( A/7601/ Add.I), paras.
196 and 197.
H Ibid., Supplement No. 17 (A/7617 and Corr.I).
45 Jbid., chapter VL
43 See

Recalling the recommendations of the International
Symposium on Industrial Development, held at Athens
in 1967, 46
Recalling further its resolution 2178 (XXI) of
9 December 1966 in which it, inter alia, requested the
Industrial Development Board to study in due course
the recommendations of the Symposium and to take
appropriate follow-up action,
Believing that an appropriate review and assessment
of the progress achieved in the implementation of the
aforementioned recommendations of the Board, as well
as those of the Symposium, could provide sufficient
information and impetus for devising effective ways
and means of attaining the speedy implementation of
those recommendations with a view to responding adequately to the urgent needs and problems of the developing countries in their efforts to accelerate their industrialization,
1. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its third session;
2. lm·ites the Industrial Development Board, with
the co-operation of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
to consiJcr the possibility of including in the Board's
annual reports:
(a) A summary of the progress achieved in the
implementation of all the substantive recommendations
and resolutions of the Board and of the International
Symrosium on Industrial Development, as well as practical me;1surcs and policies for attaining their early
implementation, as appropriate;
( b) An up-dated listing of the titles of all projects
and activities undertaken by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in each country and
region, with estimated cost, source of financing, nature
and duration by man-months of each project, and
titles of all seminars, expert group meetings, workshops, publications of research and studies;
( c) An outline of the future work programme of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
3. Suggests that the reports of the Industrial Development Board be made as concise and substantial as
possible, taking into account the additional information
called for in paragraph 2 above.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.

2578 (XXIV). Conference of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2089 (XX) of 20 December
1965 and 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the
establishment of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Having in mind Industrial Development Board resolution 22 (III) of 13 May 1969, 47 in which the Board
requested the Executive Director of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization to consult the
4 6 See United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Report of the International Symposium on Industrial Development (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.69.11.8.7).
4, See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/7617 and Corr.I),
annex VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Governments of member States on the possibility of
convening a special international conference on industrialization,
Considering the answers received so far, 48
Taking into account Industrial Development Board
resolution 24 (III) of 14 May 1969, 47 in which the
Board decided that high priority should be given to
the work of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization in connexion with accelerating industrial
development in the developing countries, particularly
in the less developed among them, within the framework .of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
1. Suggests that a special international conference
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, at the highest possible level of governmental representation, be held at an appropriate time, ensuring that
this conference and the third session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development are
not held in the same year, within a framework which
will reduce the expenditures for holding the conference
to a minimum;
2. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
consider the suggestion in paragraph 1 above and, if
necessary, to propose the venue, date and duration of
the special conference and to formulate its provisional
agenda and its basic objectives, including the longerrange orientation of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, its organizational structure
and the question of financing;
3. Further requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
to prepare a report on the above-mentioned subjects
for consideration by the Industrial Development Board
at its fourth session.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2579 (XXIV). Final report of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2188 (XXI) of 13 December
1966 regarding the enlargement of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination of the Economic and
Social Council with the purpose of undertaking a review
of the operational and research activities of the United
Nations family of organizations in the field of economic
and social development,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1367 (XLV) of 2 August 1968,
Reaffirming the central role assigned to the Economic
and Social Council in the economic, social and human
rights fields under Chapter X of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1467
(XLVII) of 31 October 1969,
Noting with appreciation the work completed by the
Enlarged Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
with the co-operation of the United Nations Secretariat,
the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and other United Nations organs and
related bodies,
48 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 38,
documents A/7693 and Add.1.

43

Having examined the final report of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, 49
Conscious of the urgent need to ensure the optimum
utilization of the resources of the United Nations system
of organizations, in particular by concentrating attention on co-ordinated efforts in areas of high priority in
the context of the international development strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade,
1. Reaffirms the following objectives set out in its
resolution 2188 ( XXI), which should guide the organizations in the United Nations system in carrying out
their research and operational activities in the field of
economic and social development:
(a) The maximum concentration of resources, at
present and increasing levels, on programmes of direct
relevance to Member States;
( b) A flexible, prompt and effective response to
the specific needs of individual countries and regions,
as determined by them, within the limits of available
resources;
( c) The minimum burden on the administrative
resources of Member States and of members of the
organizations in the United Nations system;
(d) The evolution of an integrated system of longterm planning on a programme basis;
( e) The institution of systematic procedures for
evaluating the effectiveness of operational and research
activities;
2. Welcomes the final report of the Enlarged Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, in particular
the document entitled Assistance for Economic and
Social Development Available from the United Nations
System: A Hand book of Criteria and Procedures, 110 and
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
preparing the clear and comprehensive picture of the
existing operational and research activities of the United
Nations family of organizations in the field of economic
and social development;51
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
organizational meetings in January 1970, to reconstitute
its Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in
accordance with the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination; 112
4. Further requests the Economic and Social Council, as soon as possible thereafter, to examine and to
keep under continuing review the machinery for coordination and programme review and to introduce improvements or modifications which may appear necessary in the light of the experience gained and of
relevant developments within the United Nations system of organizations;
5. Decides to review at its twenty-sixth session the
arrangements made by the Economic and Social Council
in pursuance of paragraphs 3 and 4 above;
6. Endorses the arrangements for co-operation between the reconstituted Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination and the Joint Inspection Unit outlined
4 9 Of!icial Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-seventh Session, document B/4748/Rev.1.
11o United Nations publication, Sales No.: B.69.1.23 and corrigendum.
Ill E/4744 (vol. I), E/4744 (vol. I)/Add.I and Corr.I, B/
4744 (vol.11) and Corr.I and 3.
112 See Of!icial Records of the Economic and Social Cormcll,
Forty-seventh Session, document B/4748/Rev.l, chapter
recommendation A.
'

m
