Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

2. Deplores the fact reported by petitioners that the
Mandatory Power has employed such means as deportations, dismissals from employment, threats of such
action and other methods of intimidation to secure the
removal of residents of the Windhoek Location to
Katutura despite the continued opposition of the residents to their removal ;
3. N ates with deep concern that the situation remains
critical;
4. Urges the Mandatory Power to refrain from the
use of direct or indirect force to secure the removal of
Location residents;
5. Requests the Mandatory Power to take steps to
prosecute and punish the civilian and military officers
responsible for the death of eleven Africans and many
other casualties in the Windhoek Native Location on
the night of 10 to 11 December 1959, and to provide
adequate compensation to the families of the victims ;
6. Draws the attention of the Mandatory Power to
the recommendations of the Committee on South \Vest
Africa concerning the measures which should be taken
to alleviate the tension and unrest in the Windhoek area,
and in particular to the recommendation that housing
developments in urban areas of the Territory should be
carried out in accordance with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples concerned.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

1568 (XV).

Question of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having recommended, in previous resolutions, that the
Territory of South West Africa should be placed under
the International Trusteeship System, and having repeatedly invited the Government of the Union of South
Africa to propose, for the consideration of the General
Assembly, a trusteeship agreement for South West
Africa,
Having accepted, in resolution 449 A (V) of
13 December 1950, the advisory opinion of 11 July
l 950 of the International Court of Justice on the question of South West Africa, 13
Taking note with deep regret of the refusal of the
Government of the Union of South Africa to modify
its administration of the Territory in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to enter into negotiations with the United
Nations, through the Committee on South West Africa,
with a view to placing the Mandated Territory under
the International Trusteeship System,
Noting with grave concern that the administration of
the Territory, particularly in recent years, has been conducted in a manner increasingly contrary to the Mandate,
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the advisory opinions of the
International Court of Justice and the resolutions of
the General Assembly,
Considering that all the efforts of the United Nations
to induce the Government of the Union of South Africa
to modify the present principles and practices of that
administration and to ensure the well-being and security
of the indigenous inhabitants of the Territory have been
of no avail,
Considering with concern that the present situation
in South West Africa constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security,

83

Considering that most of the Mandated Territories
which were placed under the International Trusteeship
System have acceded or will soon accede to nationai
independence,
Recognizing that the Territory of South West Africa
has an inalienable right to independence and tu till'
exercise of its full national sovereignty,
1. Regrets that the Government of the Uni011 of
South Africa has so far failed to respoml to the repeated
appeals of the Generai Assembly asking it to n•-;ise a
policy which infringes the fundamental rights and freedoms of the indigenous inhabitants of South West
Africa and imposes upon them disabilities of Yariou.,
kinds. hindering their political, economic anrl soci:!1
advancement ;
2. Deplorrs and disapproves the policy practised hy
the Government of the Union of South Africa contran
to its obligations under the international Manchte ~f
17 December 1920 for South \Vest Africa;
3. Deprecates the application, in the Territory of
South West Africa, of the policy of apartheid, and calls
upon the Government of the Union of South Africa to
revoke or rescind immediately all laws and regulations
based on that policy ;
,
4. Invites the Committee on South West Africa, in
addition to il.~ normal tasks, to go to South West Africa
immediately to investigate the situation prevailing in
the Territory and to ascertain and make proposals to
the General Assembly on :
(a) The conditions for restoring a climate of pear.e
and security;
( b) The steps which would enable the indigenous
inhabitants of South West Africa to achieve a wide
measure of internal self-government designed to lead
them to complete independence as soon as possible ;
5. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to facilitate the mission of the Committee on
South West Africa ;
6. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to make a preliminary report on the implementation of
the present resolution to the General Assembly at its
resumed fifteenth session;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide facilities
for the execution of the present resolution.
954th plenary mrrtina.
18 Decembrr 1960.

1569 (XV). Question of the future of Western
Samoa
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council on the Trust Territory of Western Samoa under
New Zealand administration, 26 as well as the report
of the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Trust
Territory of Western Samoa, 1959, 26
Having taken note of the Constitution adopted by
the Constitutional Convention of Western Samoa on
28 October 1960 and the resolutions adopted by that
Convention, 27
25 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Sr.csion, Supplement No. 4 (A/4404), part II, chapter V.
26 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twentvfourth Session, Supplement No. 2 (T /1483), document T /1449.
2 7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 44, documents NC.4/454 and Add.I.

34

General Assembly -

Noting the statements made in the Fourth Committee by the representative of the Administering
Authority and by the Prime Minister of Western
Samoa,28
1. Recommends that the Administering Authority,
in pursuance ::if Article 76 b uf the Charter of the United
Nations, take steps, in consultation with a United
Nations Plebiscite Commissionet, to organize, under the
supervision of the United Nations, a plebiscite in
Western Samoa under New Z<'.aland administration, in
order to ascertain the wishes of the inhahitants of the
Territory concerning their future;
2. Recommends further that the plebiscite should
lake place in the month of May 1961 and that the
que.,tions to be asked should be.
"1. Do you agree with the Constitution adopted by
the Constitutional Convention on 28 October 1960?
''2. Do yc,u agree that on 1 _Tan~1ary 1962 \Vestern
Samoa should become an independent State on the
basis of that Constitution?" ;
:::. Recommends further that the plebiscite should be
conducted on the basis of universal suffrage with all
adult citizens of 'vV estern Samoa being entitled to vote;
4. Decides to appoint a United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner for Western Samoa who shall exercise,
on behalf of the G:eneral Assembly, all the necessary
powers and functions of supervision, and who shall be
assisted by observers and staff to be appointed by the
Secretary-General in consultation with him;
5. Requests the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner to submit to the Trusteeship Council a report
on the organization, conduct and result of the plebiscite ;
6. R.equests the Trusteeship Council to transmit to
the General Assembly, for consideration at its sixteenth
session, the report of the United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner, together with any recommendations and
observations it considers necessary.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

*

*

*

At its 954th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1960, the
General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee,'9 appointed Mr. Najmiuldine Rifai (United Arab
Republic) United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner for W eslern
Samoa.

1579 (XV). Question of the future of
Ruanda-Urundi
The General Assembly,
Having received the reports of the Trusteeship
Council30 and of the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in East Africa, 1960,31 on the
Trust Territory of Ruanda-Urundi called for under
General Assembly resolution 1419 (XIV) of 5 December 1959,
Noting from the report of the Trustees?iP C:ouncil
that it is the Administering Authority's mtentton to
hold early in 1961 elections on the basis of universal
28 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Fourth Committee, 1081st meeting.
2 0 !bid., Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 44, docu-

ment A/4663, para. 10.
so Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4404),
part II, chapter II.
31 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (T/1551).

Fifteenth Session

adult suffrage, and under the supervision of the United
Nations, for the purpose of constituting national assemblies for Rnamla an<l Urundi,
Noting further the statement of the Administering
Authority that the elections arc scheduled to begin on
15 January 1961, and its invitation to the United
Nations to send a mission to Ruanda-Urundi about 15
December 1960 to see the actual implementation of the
arran!{ements for the elections, such as the, cmnposit!on
oi the electoral rolls, the course of the election campaign
and the organization of the poll,:i~
Being conscious of its responsibility to ensure that
the supervision of the elections by the United Nations
is efTective, an<l that the elections, which will furnish
the basis for the Territory's independence, are held in
proper conditions so that their results are completely
iree of doubt or dispute,
Having heard the views of the petitioners belonging
to various political parties and groups of RuandaUrundi,
l. Considers that the necessary conditions and atmosphere must be brought about expeditiously to ensure
that the legislative elections, which will lead to the
establishment of national democratic institutions and
furnish the basis for the national independence of
Ruanda-Unmdi in accordance with the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, take
place in an atmosphere of peace and harmony ;
2. Urges the Administering Authority to implement
immediately measures of full and unconditional amnesty
and to abolish the emergency regime so as to enable
political workers ant! leaders who are in exile or imprisoned in the Territory to resume normal, democratic
political activity before the elections ;
3. Considers that the expeditious return and rehabilitation of thousands of victims of recent disturbances in Ruanda who were compelled to take refuge
away from their homes in Ruanda or abroad will assist
the process of reconciliation, and urges the Administering
Authority and the local authorities concerned to adopt
all possible means to that end;
4. Recommends that a conference fully representative
of political parties, attended by United Nations observers, should be held early in 1961, before the
elections, in order to compose the differences between
the parties and to bring about national harmony ;
5. Appeals to all parties and political leaders of
Ruanda-Urundi to exert their efforts to achieve an
atmosphere of understanding, p~ce and harmony for
the good of their Territory and people as a whole on
the eve of independence ;
6. Calls upon the Administering Authority to refrain
from using the Territory as a base, whether for internal
or external purposes, for the accumulation of arms or
armed forces not strictly required for the purpose of
maintaining public order in the Territory;
7. Recommends that the elections scheduled to be
held in January 1961 should be postponed to a date
to be decided on at the resumed fifteenth session of
the General Assembly in the light of the recommendations of the Commission referred to in paragraph 8
below, so that, in addition to the fulfilment of the purpose
of the preceding paragraphs of the present resolution,
32 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document A/C.4/455.
