United Nations

S/PV.6739

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6739th meeting
Thursday, 22 March 2012, 10.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Parham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Menan
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2012/160)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-27246 (E)

*1227246*

S/PV.6739

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

directness of its people, irrespective of whether they
were subsistence farmers or traditional leaders in socalled up-country, or whether politicians or
intellectuals in the cities. It was also gratifying to see
how strong the role of women in Sierra Leonean
society is.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (S/2012/160)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Joseph B. Dauda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Sierra Leone.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Guillermo
Rishchynski, Chairperson of the Sierra Leone countryspecific
Configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Canada,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/160, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor Mr. Von der Schulenburg.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I am grateful for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/160) and to brief the Security Council before
the end of my assignment to Sierra Leone. Let me
therefore start by making some personal remarks.
Sierra Leone is a beautiful country and Sierra
Leoneans are lovely and kind people. Wherever I went
during my almost four years in Sierra Leone, I felt
welcomed and was often struck by the openness and

2

In the past, I have often spoken about the
exceptional successes Sierra Leone has achieved over
the past 10 years and the contributions that its three
post-conflict Governments have made — first by the
two previous Governments led by former President
Kabbah in restoring peace to the country, in rebuilding
State institutions and in uniting its deeply traumatized
people, and now by the Government led by President
Koroma, which is transforming the country
economically.
As I leave Sierra Leone, I would like to pay
tribute, first of all, to its people for their resilience and
their extraordinary ability to forgive and reconcile.
Today, victims and perpetrators live side by side in
communities all over the country. For anyone who
travels through Sierra Leone these days, it would be
difficult to imagine the horrors of the civil war that
occurred only 10 years ago.
We must recognize that Sierra Leone would not
be where it is today without the contributions of its
paramount chiefs and other traditional leaders, of its
Muslim and Christian religious leaders, of its diverse
and active civil society, of its women’s organizations,
of its often courageous journalists and of the country’s
artists, above all its musicians.
Sierra Leone benefited from one of the best truth
and reconciliation processes, and from a series of
independent democratic institutions — such as its
Human Rights Commission, its National Electoral
Commission, its Political Parties Registration
Commission, its Independent Media Commission and
its the National Youth Commission, to mention only a
few. Let me express here my deepest respect for all
their important work.
However, one does not have to search very
widely to discover the tremendous trauma that 17 years
of one-party rule, 13 military coups and, finally,
11 years of civil war have left behind. I remember the
void in Steven’s voice, a young electrician, when he
spoke of his longing to find his father, who disappeared
when he, his mother and his three siblings fled the
rebel onslaught. I remember Aisha, now in her 20s,

12-27246

S/PV.6739

whose eyes still fill with tears when she speaks in pain
of how her family handed her over to rebels in order to
save the rest of the family from attack; she was barely
14 years old. I remember Jusu, who is today my
security guard, who chose to defend his daughter from
being taken by rebel forces and was penalized for it by
having both his hands hacked off with a machete. And
there are the amputee football players who play on the
beaches of Freetown every Saturday, and who will
always receive one with their happy songs despite
being terribly poor and remaining socially
marginalized. Most of them had their limbs cut off
when they were small children. There is no bitterness
in the country, but there is a lot of human dignity. I will
always remember them all with the greatest admiration
and a deep sense of humility.
The forthcoming elections in November will be
the major test for the country’s nascent democracy.
Sierra Leone must pass this crucial test in its history
without allowing the demons of the past to re-emerge.
In that regard, Sierra Leone’s political elites bear a
heavy responsibility not to let the elections derail
Sierra Leone’s future. No doubt, most of that
responsibility rests on the shoulders of President
Koroma and his main challenger for the presidency,
Mr. Julius Maada Bio. What they decide and do over
the coming months will determine much of the
direction that the country will take. There will be times
when they will have to put national interest over that of
their political parties and over their own political
ambitions.
Against that backdrop, reports that the
Government imported assault weapons worth millions
of dollars in January to equip a recently enlarged
paramilitary wing of its police, the Operational
Services Division (OSD), are of great concern. Sierra
Leone is under no arms embargo. However, given
Sierra Leone’s progress in establishing peace and
security throughout the country and its relatively low
crime rate, it is not clear why the police would need
such weapons, especially as the shipment, according to
a leaked bill of lading, appears to include heavy
machine guns and even grenade launchers. I would
urge the Government to fully clarify those reports and,
if true, to explain the intended use of the weapons.
An enlarged, heavily armed and, allegedly,
ethnically imbalanced OSD risks undermining the good
work that has been done by the Sierra Leone Police in
creating a modern and operationally independent police

12-27246

force that serves the people of Sierra Leone. A peopleoriented police was one of the important pillars of the
successful security sector reforms after the civil war.
Because of the country’s painful experience, the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission had suggested that
Sierra Leone abandon all forms of paramilitary police
force. Such lessons from the past should be taken more
seriously.
There are other worrying signs, such as the attack
on the opposition presidential candidate in September
of last year, which was followed by an attack by
members of the opposition on property of the
governing party, the questionable imposition of a threemonth ban on all political party rallies, violence
surrounding a win by the opposition in by-elections for
the Freetown City Council and the recent break-in into
a newspaper critical of the Government.
In all of that, the main opposition must be aware
that it, too, is entering into the elections with
considerable historical baggage. It should therefore
help to dispel existing mistrust and allay fears that may
linger about any perceived ill intentions. I call on the
opposition to be more forthcoming in engaging the
Government and to refrain from a politics of
boycotting the Parliament and other meetings.
Furthermore, the hardening tone of the political
rhetoric is of concern. All sides must refrain from
extreme and unsubstantiated accusations. Given Sierra
Leone’s past, such allegations that either side mobilizes
ex-combatants or traditional warriors, such as the
Kamajors, are serious matters and should not be taken
lightly. True or not, politics is based on perceptions.
Such allegations must be laid to rest to prevent them
from creating a sense of insecurity. Both sides may
consider organizing a multiparty investigation, similar
to the approach that was taken in tackling alleged
illegal cross-border voter registration along the
Liberian border.
The all-important elections will take place in only
eight months, and the country would greatly benefit
from a number of confidence-building measures. First,
the Government and opposition parties must continue
to carry out a dialogue and, in the interests of the
country as a whole, openly discuss controversial issues
that could derail the elections. That must also include
face-to-face meetings between President Koroma and
his main challenger, Mr. Maada Bio. Senior politicians
simply do not have the luxury of stalling such dialogue

3

S/PV.6739

because of personal clashes in the past while expecting
ordinary Sierra Leoneans to reconcile.
The discussions must be designed to reassure the
general public that both the Government and the
opposition are working together in creating an
atmosphere for the elections that is free from any
intimidation and in which each citizen can make his or
her own choice without fear of retribution. In that
context, the Government should seek to clarify several
reports criticizing the role that the Minister of Internal
Affairs has allegedly played in various violent clashes.
As the Ministry for Internal Affairs is responsible for
internal security during the elections, it must have the
trust of the general public.
Secondly, all parties should revert to the spirit
and letter of the joint communiqué signed on 2 April
2009 between the two main political parties, which was
wholeheartedly embraced by the President. That would
essentially include three aspects. The first is that the
report of the Shears-Moses Commission of Inquiry,
which investigated the events that led to the most
serious outbreak, in March 2009, of political violence
since the end of the civil war, must be issued without
any further delay. It has now been two years since the
report was submitted to the President. In spite of
repeated pledges to publish it, most recently in a
meeting the President held with the entire diplomatic
corps in October 2011, that has not yet been done.
The second aspect is the establishment of an
independent police complaints commission, which was
agreed to in the joint communiqué but has now been
delayed for three years. I welcome recent indications
that the Police Council has taken initial steps.
However, if that is to have a calming impact on the
November elections, there is no further time to lose.
As part of the Joint Communiqué, President
Koroma took the bold decision to turn the Government
radio station into a fully independent national public
broadcaster, the Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation
(SLBC). In exchange, all political party radio stations
were closed. That move drew much international
praise, and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon joined the
President for the inauguration of the SLBC, in June
2010. Unfortunately, the SLBC has not fulfilled
expectations, and bad management practices have
begun to impact negatively on the quality and
impartiality of its programmes. Recent personnel
decisions made so close to the elections raise further

4

questions about the SLBC’s political neutrality. I hope
that the Government will stick to its courageous
decision and help to bring about the necessary
adjustments in the board and management of the SLBC
that would make it a truly national and independent
voice of Sierra Leone.
The third aspect entails all political parties
working together in support of the country’s electoral
management bodies, above all the National Electoral
Commission and the Political Parties Registration
Commission, and preventing any negative actions that
could undermine their credibility in the eyes of the
general public.
The revised election law must be approved by
Parliament without further delay. I call on all political
parties to join hands in the Parliament and approve the
revised law by consensus. The revised law has taken
into consideration concerns that had been raised
regarding the old law. Joint parliamentary approval
would send a positive signal to the public that the
elections can be held in a calm atmosphere.
Finally, all political leaders should continue
supporting various cross-party initiatives, especially
now in the heat of the election. I commend here in
particular the work of the All Political Parties Youth
Association and the All Political Party Women’s
Association. The first has made inroads in uniting party
youth wings to prevent the misuse of youth in
fomenting violence, and the second has greatly
contributed to raising political awareness for a stronger
role for women in politics.
Sierra Leone is not only a lovely country; it also
has the potential to be a very rich country. It is well
endowed with natural resources and rich in mineral
resources; it has large stretches of unused fertile land,
one of the world’s highest rates of rainfall, a large
natural deep-sea harbour and a rich seafront.
But all its riches are also the country’s potential
curse. The huge investments in the mining industry
have raised expectations, but so far have not benefited
the wider population. In fact, as a result of high
inflation rates, the purchasing power of fixed-income
earners and the poor appears to have decreased
considerably over the last few years, and no real
difference has been made in getting youth engaged in
the development of the country. Sierra Leone’s
persistent poverty levels are a factor that breeds unrest
and could undo all the successes of the past.

12-27246

S/PV.6739

In the 1960s, South Korea had a lower per capita
income than most West African countries. Today it is
the tenth largest industrial country in the world. Korean
Prime Minister Kim Hwang-sik recently explained the
secret behind such success — education, education,
and again education. My final advice to Sierra Leone
would therefore be for it to invest in education —
invest in universal primary and secondary education,
invest in technical colleges and invest in universities.
Education would help to turn Sierra Leone’s natural
and mineral wealth into sustainable development. It
would help to lift people out of poverty and help to
create new opportunities. It would help to reduce unfair
income distribution and it could help to maintain a
democratic and peaceful society. Freetown was once
called the Athens of Africa — why not again?
States Members of the United Nations have
invested heavily in Sierra Leone’s peaceful future, both
in blood and treasure. On a per capita basis, Sierra
Leone has probably received more funding for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding than any other country
in the world. That is the international community’s
investment, and we all have to make sure that that
investment pays a rich dividend. Sierra Leone has the
potential to become a success story, but it will need the
continued support and vigilance of the Security
Council — especially at this time of elections. For the
benefit of Sierra Leone, but also in our own interest,
we have to see this effort through.
Let me end here by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his confidence in me and the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for all his support. I would like to thank the
Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Rishchynski, for his interest in the
country and his support. I have enjoyed working with
my colleagues from the diplomatic corps and the
development group in Freetown and thank them for
their confidence. My very special thanks go, of course,
to my colleagues in the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations country team, who have been so supportive to
me. I thank them for their commitment to the future of
Sierra Leone and to the principles of the United
Nations. I would like especially to mention here my
Sierra Leonean colleagues who have remained loyal to
the Organization even at difficult times.

12-27246

But, above all, let me thank all Sierra Leoneans
for having welcomed me in their midst and for having
given me three and a half lovely years in their country.
I miss the smiles and warmth of Sierra Leoneans, I
miss the regular breakfasts with the country’s
politicians, I miss the discussions at the round table at
the Palaver Hut, and I also miss the regular tête-à-tête
meetings that I had with President Koroma.
It would not be truthful if I did not admit that I
also miss the spicy cassava leaves, the beautiful
beaches and a good game of tennis at Hill Station,
where there was a primary school next door with
children’s laughter floating in the background. I will
miss Kpaka, Stevens, Jusu and Obama, my gardener.
Let me wish Mama Salone the very best for its
future and hope that the Almighty protects and guides
the country and its people. After so many difficult
years, Sierra Leoneans deserve a brighter, prosperous
and peaceful future.
The President: I thank Mr. von der Schulenburg
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rishchynski.
Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to take
the floor.
In late January, I travelled to Sierra Leone to take
stock of progress on peacebuilding. Let me express my
gratitude for the warm welcome, strong support and
frank engagement of all national and international
interlocutors. Drawing on the findings of that visit, this
morning I would like to offer advice on three important
issues for Sierra Leone, namely, the forthcoming
elections, regional challenges to peacebuilding, and the
transition process that will take place in the country.
First, technical and financial preparations for the
elections are on track. At the same time, there is a clear
need to encourage more open dialogue, both among the
political parties and with the national electoral
institutions. It is also crucial to better convince the
public that all relevant stakeholders will behave in a
professional and responsible manner. Political leaders
have a particular responsibility to demonstrate their
commitment to free, fair and peaceful political
competition, including collectively through interparty
mechanisms and at public events. As electoral
campaigning begins in earnest, all parties must

5

S/PV.6739

redouble their efforts to implement their commitments
under the joint communiqué of 2009.
The international community has a clear and
constructive role to play in support of the electoral
process. Sierra Leone’s partners should respond
favourably to the Government’s requests for electoral
observers.
The
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) must
continue to have a unique legitimacy and mandate with
respect to enabling a favourable political environment.
That should be the mission’s immediate priority as we
approach the elections. The Security Council and the
wider United Nations system should stand ready to
provide any necessary support to UNIPSIL’s efforts.
In that respect, the configuration looks forward to
working closely with Mr. von der Schulenburg’s
successor, because the departure of Mr. von der
Schulenburg has created an unfortunate vacuum. The
configuration encourages the Secretary-General to fill
that position as quickly as possible. I would also like to
take this opportunity to commend Mr. von der
Schulenburg’s strong leadership and the considerable
contribution he made during his years of service in
Sierra Leone. At the personal level, I would like to say
that it is a pity that he will not have the opportunity to
see the conclusion of that excellent work.
(spoke in English)
The Security Council has recently focused more
closely on transnational threats to peace and security.
That is a welcome development, but much more is
needed. Sierra Leone has taken impressive steps
towards fighting transnational crime, yet it is hampered
by the slower pace of progress elsewhere in the
subregion. Stronger and more outcome-oriented
engagement with regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, as well
as increased support for regional programmes such as
the West Africa Coast Initiative, is very much needed.
The United Nations Office for West Africa plays a vital
role in those issues and warrants continued strong
support from the Council.
Thirdly, Sierra Leone will face two transitions —
one that is shifting from end-stage peacebuilding to a
focus on longer-term development, while at the same
time the Security Council may wish to consider
drawing down UNIPSIL following successful elections
later this year. Those processes need to be handled with
great care. The United Nations, with strong leadership

6

from UNIPSIL, has developed an innovative and
integrated approach — a best practice in the truest
sense of that term. Successful mechanisms should be
retained and any transition designed to produce
minimal shocks to existing practices. Some of the
functions currently performed by UNIPSIL will need to
be replaced by reinforcing other aspects of the country
team. Similarly, Sierra Leone will continue to face
significant development challenges and some of the
underlying causes of conflict will linger until longterm economic development truly takes hold.
International support must, in our judgment,
reflect those realities, and the Peacebuilding
Commission will shortly begin considering how its
own engagement should evolve as part of that
transitional process. The configuration will report back
to the Security Council in due course.
In closing, let me note that Sierra Leone has
made tremendous progress since the end of its civil
war. It is one of the success stories of United Nations
peacebuilding. Yet the process is not quite finished, as
repeated incidents of political violence over the past
year have demonstrated. The Security Council should
continue to pay close attention to peacebuilding in
Sierra Leone and stand prepared to offer any necessary
support. The Peacebuilding Commission will do the
same by working in close partnership with all relevant
national and international stakeholders towards
meeting that goal.
The President: I thank Mr. Rishchynski for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative to His
Excellency Mr. Joseph B. Dauda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Dauda (Sierra Leone): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and by thanking you, first, for having convened
this meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone and,
secondly, for giving my delegation the opportunity to
contribute to this debate. Let me also express our
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
detailed report on the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) for the period of 1 September 2011 to
29 February 2012 (S/2012/160).

12-27246

S/PV.6739

I convey on behalf of His Excellency President
Ernest Bai Koroma, the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone profound appreciation for the relentless
support and active interest of the United Nations and
friends of Sierra Leone in consolidating peace and
security in the country. Permit me to single out in this
regard the strong leadership and commitment that the
Canadian Chair continues to demonstrate in the pursuit
of peace and security in Sierra Leone, as amply
evidenced by Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski
during his recent visit to Sierra Leone. Our thanks also
go to the outgoing Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sierra Leone and Head of
UNIPSIL, Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, for his
role in the consolidation of peace and security and for
maximizing the gains of our post-conflict development
efforts.
The report seeks to reflect developments in Sierra
Leone, including progress made so far and the
challenges faced since September 2011. As we
commend ourselves for the gains made through the
joint efforts of the Government and people of Sierra
Leone, the United Nations and the international
community, it is crucial that together we resolve to
tackle the remaining challenges in order to consolidate
comprehensively the gains made.
President Ernest Bai Koroma remains committed
to the consolidation of peace, security and sustainable
development, as mapped out in our Agenda for Change.
As noted in the report, the Government has made
steady progress in addressing the three risks of youth
unemployment, corruption and illicit drug trafficking
and organized crime, identified in the Agenda for
Change and endorsed by the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission in its
outcome document of September 2009.
The Government has demonstrated strong
political will in dealing with issues of political
violence, in whatever shape or form and irrespective of
party affiliation, and will continue to use legal
instruments to bring perpetrators of violence to justice.
That was clearly demonstrated when the Government
took action in respect of the political violence in Bo, in
the Southern province of Sierra Leone, involving the
presidential candidate of the main opposition party,
which I referred to in my statement to the Council in
September 2011 (S/PV.6609).

12-27246

The presidential, parliamentary and local council
elections scheduled for 17 November 2012 indeed
remain a crucial test for peace and democratic
consolidation in the country. President Ernest Bai
Koroma will continue to constantly engage all
stakeholders, in particular the opposition parties, with a
view to enhancing political dialogue and collective
commitment to peaceful, free, fair, transparent and
credible elections. The Government is currently
considering the report of the Shears-Moses
Commission of Inquiry into the March 2009
disturbances and will soon release a white paper on the
recommendations of the Commission. We therefore
urge the United Nations and all our development
partners to continue to give their full support to the
ongoing electoral process.
The Government, in promoting women’s
participation in the decision-making process in line
with the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, has been working with
United Nations entities and various women’s groups,
including the Women’s Social Support Group, in
drafting a gender equality bill that will soon be
presented to Parliament. The Government continues to
make progress towards the education of the girl child
and the provision of free health care to pregnant
women, lactating mothers and children under five. The
Government will continue to promote human rights
issues in accordance with our national interest.
The Government’s commitment to democratic
governance and the maintenance of the independence
of our democratic institutions, such as the National
Electoral
Commission,
the
Political
Parties
Registration Commission, the Independent Media
Commission and civil society organizations remains
undiminished. The Government will soon take the
necessary steps to establish an independent police
complaints committee. The independence of the
judiciary has always been a feature of our democratic
governance, and the Government will continue to
maintain the inbuilt checks and balances provided for
in the Constitution. The National Electoral
Commission has duly taken ownership of the electoral
process by playing a leading role in the biometric voter
registration process and in the review and reform of the
electoral laws. The Government recognizes the
important role of the Independent Media Commission
in regulating the conduct of the media and will

7

S/PV.6739

continue to provide support to assist the Commission
in effectively performing its functions.
It is acknowledged that Sierra Leone is a success
story in peacebuilding and we therefore renew our call
on the international community to continue to invest in
success in the spirit of the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, adopted in Busan, Republic of Korea,
and to recognize the need for special attention to be
paid to countries emerging from conflict.
In conclusion, I wish to confirm that the
Government, recognizing the 2012 elections as a litmus

8

test for our peace and democratic governance
consolidation, is taking all necessary steps to ensure
that the elections will be peaceful, free, fair,
transparent and credible.
The President: I thank Mr. Dauda for his
statement.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

12-27246
