A/70/176–S/2015/560

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
24 July 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventieth session
Item 67 (b) of the provisional agenda*
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support

Security Council
Seventieth year

Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution
69/291 to review progress made in the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the 1998 report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa ( A/52/871S/1998/318).
This report takes stock of major peace and security developments in Africa
during the past year and highlights the growing linkages between political, social and
economic exclusion and violent conflict. Countering this trend will require inclusive
people-centred approaches in the promotion of peace, security and socioeconomic
development, as emphasized in the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and its first 10-Year
Implementation Plan.
Consistent with the mandate of General Assembly resolution 69/291 to develop
policy proposals on emerging challenges, and in line with the aspiration of the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 for “An Africa of Good Governance, Democracy,
Respect for Human Rights, Justice and Rule of Law”, the report addresses the role o f
regional and subregional organizations in promoting democratic governance in
Africa. It concludes with recommendations for strengthening the institutional
capacities of regional and subregional organizations and for enhancing their
cooperation with the United Nations and other partners in the promotion of
democratic governance in Africa.

* A/70/150.

15-11180 (E)

200815

*1511180*

A/70/176
S/2015/560

I. Introduction
1.
In 1998, following a request from the Security Council ( S/PRST/1997/46), my
predecessor undertook a comprehensive analysis of the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. The subsequent
report (A/52/871-S/1998/318) proposed specific measures aimed at reducing conflict,
building durable peace and promoting sustainable development in Africa.
2.
In 2009, the General Assembly, in resolution 63/304, requested me to submit a
report reviewing the status of implementation of the recommendat ions contained in
the 1998 report. I issued a review report (A/65/152-S/2010/526) outlining the
progress made, identifying persistent and emerging challenges facing Africa, as well
as providing recommendations and proposals for a renewed engagement with Africa.
3.
The review report highlighted that while “Africa has made substantial progress
in building democratic governance, encouraging pluralism and strengthening the role
of parliaments and civil society, … not all countries have embraced these principles”
(ibid., para. 41). The African Union equally reflects this outlook in its Shared Values
Agenda, which underscores the importance of democratic governance for
strengthening relations between governments and their peoples based on human rights,
rule of law, accountability, transparency, popular participation, gender equality and
inclusive development. Democratic governance thus constitutes one of the eight
priorities of the 50th Anniversary Solemn Declaration of the Organization of African
Unity/African Union and one of the seven aspirations of the Union’s Agenda 2063.
4.
In the above context, the present report has been prepared in consultation with
the African Union, the regional economic communities and the United Nations
system through the Interdepartmental Task Force on African Affairs, chaired by the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa. Following the introduction in section I,
section II provides an update of major peace and security developments in Africa .
Section III takes stock of key actions and initiatives undertaken by the United
Nations system from July 2014 to June 2015 to implement the recommendations of
the review report. The thematic section IV addresses the role of regional and
subregional organizations in democratic governance in Africa. Lastly, section V
contains conclusions and recommendations to enhance the critical partnership
between Africa and the United Nations.

II. The year in review
5.
Since my last report, Africa has made remarkable progress in defining its vision
for “an integrated, prosperous and peaceful Africa, driven and managed by its own
citizens and representing a dynamic force in the international arena”. 1 At its twentyfourth summit, held in Addis Ababa in January 2015, the African Union adopted
Agenda 2063 as its 50-year transformative agenda for peace, security and
development. The African Union Assembly also declared 2015 the “Year of Women’s
Empowerment and Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063”, reaffirming the
important role of women and girls in driving the implementation of Agenda 2063.
__________________
1

2/20

Preamble to the 50th Anniversary Solemn Declaration, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union on 26 May 2013.

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

6.
African countries and the regional economic communities are expected to
align their development plans with Agenda 2063 and its first 10 -Year
Implementation Plan (2014-2023), which was adopted by the twenty-fifth African
Union summit in South Africa in June 2015. The international community is also
expected to further enhance its support to Africa in the implementation of Agenda
2063 and its first 10-Year Implementation Plan. I welcome the historic adoption of
this agenda, which coincides with the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations.
7.
Africa progressed overall in boosting economic growth, improving governance
and elections management, preventing and resolving conflicts, combating terrorism
and violent extremism, and responding to disease outbreak. African regional and
subregional organizations and the international community, including the United
Nations, supported the efforts of African countries in those areas. Major economic
updates are highlighted in my report on the New Partnership for Africa ’s Development
(NEPAD) (A/70/175).
8.
On elections management, a number of countries, including N igeria, Togo and
Tunisia, showed improvements in the management of electoral processes.
Challenges remain in preventing and mitigating election -related violence, which is
often a result of lack of confidence in the credibility of the electoral process and
election administration, genuine participatory politics, a winner -takes-all approach
to elections and ineffective conflict management systems, among others. At the
request of Member States, the United Nations provided preventive diplomacy,
mediation, advisory or technical support to a number of African countries that
undertook elections in the review period.
9.
In Burkina Faso, the political situation is evolving following popular protests
that led to the resignation of President Blaise Compaoré in October 2014. The
Transitional Government under the leadership of President Michel Kafando has made
significant progress in implementing elements of the Charter for the Transition. The
National Independent Electoral Commission has released the electoral calendar and
completed the revision of the electoral register. As the country prepares for
presidential and general elections in October 2015, my Special Representative for
West Africa will continue to work closely with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the International Follow-up and
Support Group for the Transition in Burkina Faso, to support the full implementation
of the Charter for the Transition and the organization of credible elections.
10. In Burundi, a failed coup d’état and public protests against President
Nkurunziza’s decision to seek a controversial third presidential mandate led to
electoral violence and an influx of more than 145,000 refugees into neighbouring
countries. Amid heightened tensions, a number of senior government, opposition and
civil society representatives went into exile, including the First Vice-President of
Burundi, the Vice-President of the Constitutional Court and the Vice-President of the
Independent National Electoral Commission. In the light of the ongoing violence and
deteriorating human rights situation, the East African Community (EAC), the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the African Union, the United
Nations and other stakeholders called for the postponement of presidential, legislative
and local elections to allow for the creation of conditions conducive to the holding of
free, peaceful and credible elections. Despite these calls, parliamentary elections took
place on 29 June amidst electoral violence and a boycott by the opposition. My
Special Envoy and Head of the United Nations Electoral Observation Mission in

15-11180

3/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

Burundi and my Special Envoy and Representative for the Great Lakes Region and
Central Africa all worked closely with the African Union, EAC, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other partners to defuse tensions and
support a national dialogue process to find a political solution to the crisis and help to
create an environment conducive to peaceful, credible and inclusive elections.
11. Likewise in Somalia, the review of the Provisional Federal Constitution and
preparations for elections continue to lag. While legislation authorizing a National
Independent Electoral Commission was passed in February 2015 and its
commissioners were appointed on 6 July 2015, the secretariat of the Commission is
yet to be fully established. At the same time, Somalia made progress regarding
peacebuilding and State-building. The formation of federal States continued, as did
the deployment of civilian authorities to newly recovered areas. Leaders at the
federal and regional levels began a structured dialogue on their relations and agreed
on plans for integrating regional militias into the national army. Within the context of
the New Deal Compact for Somalia, the Steering Committee of the Somalia
Development and Reconstruction Facility approved, in March 2015, $100 million for
peacebuilding and State-building programmes. My Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) will continue to
support Somali stakeholders to intensify efforts towards the completion of the
political process, constitutional referendum and organization of elections planned for
2016, as well as remain engaged in coordinating support for Somalia’s stabilization
and reconstruction.
12. Mali also made progress in its peace and reconciliation process, although the
security situation remains fragile. Continued violence and terrorist attacks, including
on civilians, threaten to undermine the peace process. Attacks on international
forces, including the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), also increased. The Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali was signed between the Government of Mali and the
Coordination of Azawad Movements on 20 June 2015. My Special Representative
for Mali is working with partners to support the implementation of the Agreement
and facilitate political dialogue and reconciliation through continued good offices.
Efforts are also ongoing to strengthen the Mission’s capabilities to protect civilians,
improve security, assist the re-establishment of state authority in northern Mali and
enhance regional security cooperation.
13. In the Central African Republic, the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic established and supported the international mediation
process, which culminated in the signing of a cessation of hostilities agreement and
formation of a new government in August 2014. In September 2014, the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) transferred
authority to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
14. Building on this momentum, the Bangui Forum for National Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, held in May 2015, adopted the Republican Pact for Peace,
National Reconciliation and Reconstruction. The Transitional Government and armed
groups also signed an agreement on the principles for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation and integration. My Special Representatives for Central
Africa and the Central African Republic will continue to support efforts to implement
the recommendations of the Bangui Forum towards the holding of a constitutional

4/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

referendum and the conduct of credible presidential and legislative elections.
Furthermore, following the allegations of sexual abuses involving foreign military
forces in the Central African Republic, I have launched an independent expert review
panel to review and assess the handling by the United Nations of those allegations.
15. Ongoing large-scale violence in South Sudan is undermining peace, stability
and economic development in the country. Over 2 million people have been
displaced since the crisis broke out in December 2013. Serious human rights
violations, including the recruitment of child soldiers and sexual violence again st
women, persist. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) provided
protection to about 166,000 displaced persons as of July 2015 and continues to
provide shelter and assistance to internally displaced persons.
16. My Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan has continued to support
peace efforts by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Mediation to achieve a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in South Sudan, in
cooperation with my Special Representative for South Sudan and the African Union
High Representative on South Sudan. They will sustain these engagements with
partners on the mediation process and support national efforts to promote justice,
accountability, healing and reconciliation. In this respect, I welcome Sou th Sudan’s
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which oblige all parties
to respect and uphold the rights of children and women.
17. In the Sudan’s Darfur region, the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur remained fraught with challenges, arising from human rights
violations, sporadic ethnic tensions and armed confrontations that displaced at least
83,000 persons in the first half of 2015. Amidst discussions of an exit strategy for the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the African
Union-United Nations Acting Joint Special Representative for Darfur and my Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan are working closely with the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel on the mediation process. In the Sudan’s South
Kordofan and Blue Nile States, my Special Envoy continues to support the efforts of
the Implementation Panel to reach a cessation of hostilities and an agreement on
security and political arrangements as well as humanitarian access for vulnerable
populations.
18. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations, the African
Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) continue to support the implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. However, persistent mistrust between signatories of the
Framework, lack of progress in neutralizing the Democratic Forces for the Liberation
of Rwanda (FDLR), and the slow repatriation of elements of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M23) have undermined the effectiveness of the Framework. Efforts are
currently under way to strengthen the governance structures of the Framework. My
Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region will remain closely engaged with the team
of Special Envoys in coordinating international support for this process.
19. In the period under review, terrorism and violent extremism remained a serious
threat to peace and security on the continent. Chad, Egypt, Libya, the Niger, Nigeria,
Somalia and Tunisia experienced terrorist attacks. In East Africa, Al -Shabaab
perpetrated attacks in Kenya, including an attack on Garissa University College in

15-11180

5/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

April 2015 that killed over 140 students. In Tunisia, the terrorist attack on the tourist
hotel near Sousse in June 2015 killed over 30 persons. In Egypt, there were several
attacks, including the bombing that killed the Egyptian Prosecutor General.
20. In Libya, the continuing armed violence, political deadlock, impunity and
rising criminal and terrorist activities following the emergence of the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant have exacerbated the dire security, human rights and
humanitarian situation. Other adverse impacts of the crisis include the continued
proliferation and trafficking of arms and influx of foreign terrorist fighters. My
Special Representative for Libya, together with the International Cont act Group for
Libya, the African Union and other partners, remains fully engaged in supporting
efforts to end the political deadlock and establish an inclusive government of
national accord.
21. In Nigeria, Boko Haram continued to conduct deadly attacks on civilians, as
well as carry out forced recruitment, abductions and systematic violations against
women and children, including the increased use of girls as “human bombs”. Boko
Haram also expanded its attacks into Cameroon, Chad and the Niger, affecting
thousands of innocent civilians and impacting the security, human rights and
humanitarian situation throughout the region. In response, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission countries launched a multinational joint task force, which has been
conducting military operations against Boko Haram. The Task Force has recovered
territory held by Boko Haram and rescued a number of abducted women and
children. The States members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Benin are
working with the African Union, the United Nations and other international partners
to fully operationalize the Force. While welcoming those vital efforts, the United
Nations is also engaging with the concerned countries to address allegations of
serious violations of human rights and international huma nitarian law during some
counter-insurgency operations.
22. In addition, the United Nations is in the process of scaling up its huma nitarian
presence in Boko Haram-affected areas. Persistent insecurity, logistics challenges,
lack of access and funding gaps remain major challenges, however. My Special
Representatives for Central Africa and West Africa and the Coordinator of the
United Nations Response on the Regional Impact of Boko Haram will continue to
support national and regional efforts aimed at preventing the expansion of Boko
Haram and assisting affected communities.
23. A major setback in the review period was the outbreak of the Ebola virus
disease in West Africa that led to extreme human suffering and claimed over 11,000
lives. In the most-affected countries — Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone — the
disease crippled health-care capacities and threatened to reverse hard-won political
and socioeconomic gains. Its impact was felt globally and was classified as a threat
to international peace and security. A number of public and private actors, including
the African Union Support to the Ebola Outbreak in West Africa and the United
Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER) provided both health
and non-health support to the affected countries to stop, treat and prevent the spread
of the disease. To help affected countries to fully recover from its impact, I convened
the International Ebola Recovery Conference on 10 July 2015 at United Nations
Headquarters in New York to ensure sustained international engagement as well as
mobilize financial and non-financial resources for longer-term recovery efforts in the
affected countries.

6/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

Enhanced focus on the nexus between peace, security and development
24. As highlighted in my report on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(A/70/175), Africa recorded strong growth performance in the review period, with
an average economic growth rate of 4.6 per cent. However, Africa ’s growth has, for
the most part, not been inclusive and neither created sufficient jobs nor increased
income opportunities for the vast majority of the poor, particularly minorities,
women and youth. Rather, inequality, poverty and unemployment persist, with
potentials to undermine social cohesion, weaken State-society relations and trigger
violent conflicts. That underscores the growing need for integrated approaches that
address the peace, security, human rights and economic development nexus.
25. I emphasized the importance of such a holistic approach during my visit to the
Horn of Africa with the Presidents of the World Bank and the Islamic Development
Bank Group (IDBG) in October 2014, accompanied by senior representatives of the
African Union Commission, the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European
Union and IGAD. We pledged collective political support and a major financial
assistance package to countries of the region, totalling over $8 billion. The World
Bank committed $1.8 billion to, inter alia, boost economic growth and reduce poverty,
while the European Union, AfDB and IDBG committed $3.7 billion, $1.8 billion
and $1 billion, respectively, in support of peace, stability and economic development.
26. Recognizing the strong nexus between peace, security and development, the
General Assembly, in resolution 69/291, welcomed the adoption of the African
Union Agenda 2063 as the continent’s overarching strategy for future structural
transformation in Africa and reaffirmed the importance of supporting Agenda 2063.

III. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the
review report
27. The present section highlights recent actions undertaken by the United Nations
system to implement the recommendations contained in the 2010 review report of
the Secretary-General (A/65/152-S/2010/526).

A.

Institutional cooperation
28. Within the context of the Regional Coordination Mechanism, the joint United
Nations-African Union Technical Working Group developed the framework for a
renewed United Nations/African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and
Development Agenda (PAIDA). PAIDA, which was adopted by the twenty-fifth
African Union summit in June 2015, is envisaged to succeed the Ten -Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union that expires in 2016. PAIDA is anchored
in the Union’s Agenda 2063 and highlights Africa’s priorities that the United
Nations is called upon to support in the period from 2017 to 2027. Building on the
successes of the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme, which was initiated by my
predecessor, the United Nations will continue to utilize the Regional Coordination
Mechanism cluster system to better support Africa in the implementation of Agenda
2063 and other global development frameworks, including through PAIDA.
29. Progress was made in implementing the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. The Security Council

15-11180

7/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

and the African Union Peace and Security Council held their ninth joint consultative
meeting in March 2015, which discussed, inter alia, means of enhancing joint
cooperation in conflict prevention and crisis management in Africa. At the working
level, the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU) and the African
Union Peace and Security Department established joint teams to conduct horizon
scanning and develop common positions on existing and emerging conflicts. UNOAU
and the African Union Department of Political Affairs also developed a joint workplan
to enhance cooperation on elections, constitutionalism and political analysis.

B.

Conflict prevention and management and peacekeeping
30. On peacekeeping, the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security undertook, in September 2014, a lessons learned exercise on
transitions from African Union peace support operations to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, based on the cases of the Central African Republic and
Mali. The exercise highlighted the need for joint action and close collaboration
between both organizations throughout the planning stages of a peace operation.
31. In October 2014, I appointed a High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations to carry out a comprehensive assessment of the state of United Nations
peace operations in the light of emerging needs. The African Union contributed to
this process based on its common African position on the United Nations Review of
Peace Operations. In the light of the centrality of Africa for United Nations peace
operations, the Panel called for a stronger United Nations-African Union strategic
partnership guided by a division of labour that is based on comparative advantages.
32. The United Nations Office to the African Union continued to work closely
with the African Union on the operationalization of the African Standby Force
(ASF). Exercise Amani Africa II, the main instrument for evaluating the operational
readiness of ASF and its rapid deployment capability, is progressing and three of the
five regional standby forces are expected to declare their operational readiness
before the end of 2015. The Eastern Africa Standby Force has already declared
operational readiness.
33. On conflict prevention and management, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the African Union Commission collaborated with
ECOWAS and SADC to organize regional consultations that adopted the Accra and
Maseru Declarations on the establishment of national infrastructures for peace. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO) and
the African Union Commission launched the youth network for a culture of peace in
Africa in December 2014. Along with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNESCO also participated in the “Children ,
Not Soldiers” campaign to end the recruitment of child soldiers in South Sudan.

C.

Post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery
34. Given that peacebuilding continues to be at the core of the United Nations
efforts to assist post-conflict countries in Africa, African countries and regional
organizations were actively engaged in the review of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Architecture. Africa’s active involvement in this process was
particularly significant, as all six countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding

8/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

Commission are in Africa and many other African countries benefit from the funds
provided by the Peacebuilding Fund.
35. The African Union also developed an African position on the review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture that was pre sented to the Advisory
Group of Experts, containing concrete recommendations for strengthening the
performance and impact of the Architecture in Africa. I intend to use the report to
further strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to assist post -conflict
countries, including African countries, from relapsing back into conflict.

D.

Sustained economic growth and sustainable development
36. In line with its Common African Position on the Post-2015 Development
Agenda, Agenda 2063 and its first 10-Year Implementation Plan, Africa remained
engaged in the ongoing process to formulate the post-2015 development agenda. 2
African States have consistently emphasized the need to ensure complementarity
and synergies between Agenda 2063 and the post-2015 development agenda,
including the sustainable development goals.
37. The 2015 integration segment of the Economic and Social Council on the theme
“Employment creation and decent work for all”, which was organized by the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa and the International Labour Organization, devoted a
session to address the unemployment challenge in Africa that highlighted the
implications of youth unemployment, notably its impact on regional and international
peace and security. The session further underscored the relevance of infrastructure
development and industrialization as critical pillars for economic growth and job
creation.
38. In view of the challenges of land disputes in driving resource-based conflicts in
Africa, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) continued to
support the African Land Policy Initiative, which is a joint programme of the African
Union, the Economic Commission for Africa and the African Development Bank.

E.

Human rights and humanitarian affairs
39. Given the interdependence between peace, security, development and human
rights, the United Nations intensified its human rights capacity development support
to African Governments and institutions. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) provided secretariat support to the
International Commission of Inquiry on the Central African Republic and the
Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in Eritrea. Support was also provided in
the Central African Republic, where the transitional authorities promulgated
legislation on 3 June 2015 establishing a special criminal court for grave violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law. In Burundi, OHCHR sustained a
human rights presence even after the expiration of the mandate of the United Nations
Office in Burundi in December 2014 and opened its country office in January 2015.

__________________
2

15-11180

See the report of the Secretary-General on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(A/69/161).

9/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

40. On humanitarian issues, Africa received about 73.5 per cent of the total
funding from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Central
Emergency Response Fund in 2014. That is the largest proportion the region has
ever received in a single year. This trend was driven mainly by humanitarian
demands related to the crises in the Central African Republic and South Sudan, the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa and low funding for humanitarian operations in
countries in the Sahel and Horn of Africa regions.

F.

Governance, rule of law and the administration of justice
41. As the situations in Burkina Faso and Burundi have demonstrated, challenges
of constitutional reforms to extend presidential term limits, political exclusion and
marginalization and electoral violence, which I discussed in my 2013 report
(A/68/220-S/2013/475), continue to persist, with implications for peace and security.
In response, the United Nations continued to support national and regional efforts to
promote good governance, rule of law and the administration of justice.
42. For instance, in view of the importance of youth participation in economic,
social and political life for good governance, conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
the 2015 Economic and Social Council Youth Forum demonstrated the aspirations
of Africa’s youth to participate in regional, national and local governance processes,
and be part of the implementation and monitoring of the post -2015 development
agenda. At national levels, the United Nations Democracy Fund continued to
strengthen the voice and participation of civil society groups, including women and
youth, in democratic governance in Africa. At the global level, the Office of the
Special Adviser on Africa, in collaboration with the Department of Public
Information and the Economic Commission for Africa, continued to undertake
advocacy in support of the African Peer Review Mechanism during the Africa Week
that was held in October 2014.
43. In Somalia, under the Global Focal Point arrangement for Police, Justice and
Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in Post-Conflict and other Crisis Situations, the
United Nations supported national authorities in developing the Somalia Joint Rule of
Law Programme, aimed at establishing unified, capable, accountable and rights -based
federal police and justice institutions. In Mali, UNDP and MINUSMA supported
national efforts to strengthen the capacity of State and judicial institutions, including
the drafting of a new five-year strategy for justice sector reform.

G.

Women’s empowerment and gender equality in peace and security
44. The United Nations continued to support continental efforts to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. The United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) provided technical and
human resource support to the Office of the Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security, appointed by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, including
in co-organizing the African regional consultative meeting in January 2015 on the
Global Study on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
ahead of the Security Council’s high-level review in October 2015.
45. On the margins of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on the Status of
Women in March 2015, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa, in collaboration

10/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

with the Department of Public Information, UN-Women and the African Union,
organized two high-level events under the themes “Continental results framework
on women, peace and security in Africa” and “Emerging leadership of Africa’s young
women and girls towards 2063”. A number of African Ministers of Gender and
Women’s Affairs, parliamentarians, private sector representatives and civil society
organizations participated in both events. They highlighted some of the priorities of
African women and girls on key forthcoming continental and global frameworks.
These were further discussed at the 16th meeting of the Regional Coordination
Mechanism, held on 28 and 29 March 2015, on the theme “United Nations system
support to the African Union 2015 Year of Women’s Empowerment and
Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063”.

H.

Security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration
46. Security sector reform has become a core component of the United Nations
engagement across peacekeeping and special political missions in Africa. For
instance, in Somalia, UNSOM supported the Federal Government in developing a
national security architecture, undertaking civil service reform of the Ministry of
Defence, establishing a weapons and ammunition management system and enhancing
public financial management of the security sector, in cooperation with the World
Bank. In Mali, MINUSMA supported the development of an international security
sector reform coordination mechanism. In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations provided assistance to the process of regrouping, cantoning, auditing and
vetting of the country’s armed forces.
47. UNSOM also facilitated the inaugural meeting of the Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Working Group chaired by the Somali Federal
Ministry of National Security, to strategize on the National Programme for the
Treatment and Handling of Disengaged Combatants. Subsequently, in January 2015,
human rights monitors were deployed to all rehabilitation centres for disengaged
combatants, marking an important milestone in ensuring compliance with
international standards.

I.

Countering terrorism and violent extremism
48. Owing to growing terrorist and extremist activities and threats during the review
period, the United Nations accelerated its engagements with African Member States
and regional and subregional organizations in developing measures to prevent and
combat terrorism, under the framework of its Global Counter -Terrorism Strategy.
49. In April 2015, I jointly organized with the President of the General Assembly
and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations a thematic debate on “Promoting
Tolerance and Reconciliation: Fostering Peaceful, Inclusive Societies and Countering
Violent Extremism” that brought together faith leaders and other stakeholders to
discuss practical strategies to counter growing intolerance and violent extremism. The
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its member
entities, as well as the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, have been
supporting African efforts to counter terrorism and address conditions conducive to
the spread of violent extremism, including through the Integrated Assistance for

15-11180

11/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

Countering Terrorism Initiative. Furthermore, the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism that I will present to the General Assembly later this year will address
drivers of violent extremism and propose recommendations for Member States, the
United Nations and other multilateral organizations.
50. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continued to support
efforts to promote the ratification and implementation of 19 international legal
instruments on the prevention and combating of terrorism in Africa. In March 2015,
UNODC and the International Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law launched a
global project to strengthen the legal regime against emerging terrorist threats, to
assist Member States in criminalizing foreign terrorist fighters in areas such as
terrorist recruitment, incitement to terrorism and terrorism financing, among others.
Nonetheless, the continued lack of agreement on the proposed comprehensive
convention on international terrorism is hampering our efforts in this regard.

IV. Persistent and emerging challenges for Africa: the role of
regional and subregional organizations in democratic
governance in Africa
51. Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 69/291, the present section highlights
persistent and emerging challenges for Africa, focusing on the role of regional and
subregional organizations in promoting democratic governance in Africa. It
celebrates the momentum of progress that Africa has made towards entrenching
democratic governance through the support of regional and subregional
organizations. It also identifies remaining challenges and makes recommendations
on the type of support required from the United Nations to further strengthen the
role of African regional and subregional organizations in advancing democratic
governance on the continent.
52. Democratic governance is an essential component and objective of the work of
the United Nations. It represents a set of values, principles and mechanisms that
provide the basis for the free expression of individuals under the protection of the
rule of law and is at the heart of advancing human dignity, freedom and prosperity.
While the nature of democratic governance may differ from one context to the other,
depending on a country’s political history, culture and societal ideals, its
fundamental principles are universal.
53. Periodic elections, discussed in my 2013 report (A/68/220-S/2013/475), are a
key feature of democratic governance. Other essential building blocks for
democratic governance include effective and accountable institutions, human rights
and the rule of law, and a vibrant and engaged civil society. Agenda 2063 calls for
further investments in these areas, which are critical enablers for people -centred
development in particular, and for Africa’s structural transformation in general.

A.

Regional and subregional organizations and democratic governance
in Africa
54. Over the past two decades, and especially since the inception of the African
Union in 2002, Africa has made considerable progress in strengthening democratic
governance. African regional and subregional organizations, notably the African

12/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

Union, including its NEPAD and the African Peer Review Mechanism programmes,
and the regional economic communities, have adopted and are implemen ting various
normative and institutional frameworks on democracy, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law. The Constitutive Act of the African Union highlights a
determination to consolidate democratic governance principles, institutions and
culture, as a basis for preventing and responding to conflicts and promoting inclusive
and sustainable development. The African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance has become pivotal for strengthening democratic governance, especially
as it informs the practice of the African Union and the regional economic
communities of condemning military coups and other modes of unconstitutional
changes of governments, including by repudiating such regimes and suspending their
membership in the African Union and the relevant regional economic community.
55. Currently, most of Africa’s regional efforts on democratic governance are
organized under the aegis of the African Governance Architecture, which was
established in 2010 as the overarching political and institutional framework for
promoting democratic governance in Africa and became operational in 2012. The
Architecture has been instrumental in enhancing collaboration and synergy between
the African Union, the regional economic communities, the United Nations an d
other stakeholders across five interrelated areas: democracy and elections, human
rights and transitional justice, governance and anti-corruption, constitutionalism and
the rule of law, and humanitarian affairs. Additionally, the African Governance
Architecture promotes gender equality, women and youth empowerment and
citizen’s participation, among other cross-cutting issues.
56. I wish to highlight three examples to illustrate how the African Governance
Architecture enhances coordination and collaboration at the regional level. First, its
work on democracy and political, corporate and economic governance is largely
driven by the African Peer Review Mechanism. In particular, the Mechanism’s
National Programme of Action provides useful entry points for imp lementing the
African Governance Architecture at national levels, although effective
implementation of the African Peer Review Mechanism programmes of action
remains severely constrained by a lack of resources.
57. Second, the African Governance Architecture also enhances cooperation in
electoral support, elections observation and monitoring. In this context, the African
Union and the regional economic communities have developed guidance manuals
and codes of conduct to increase professionalism and standard ize procedures and
methodologies for electoral management. They are also increasingly deploying
observers to observe high-risk elections, thus contributing to enhancing the
credibility of elections on the continent.
58. Third, in underscoring the nexus between democratic governance, peace and
security, the African Governance Architecture complements the African Peace and
Security Architecture. These linkages, however, need to be further strengthened at
the operational level, especially between the African Governance Architecture and
the conflict prevention organs of the African Peace and Security Architecture, such
as the African Union Peace and Security Council and the Panel of the Wise. The
Agenda 2063 flagship project on “Silencing the guns by 2020”, dis cussed in my
2014 report (A/69/162-S/2014/542), provides a promising opportunity for action in
this regard. The support of the Security Council for this initiative, as expressed in its

15-11180

13/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/27), provides a basis for additional United
Nations assistance to these African Union organs.
59. At subregional levels, the regional economic communities are the implementing
pillars of the African Governance Architecture. In addition, the communities have
equally adopted and are implementing their region-specific policies aimed at
promoting democratic governance in their member States. For instance, the East
African Community is implementing its Protocol on Good Governance, ECOWAS its
Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance, IGAD its Protocol on Democracy,
Governance and Elections, and SADC its Principles and Guidelines Governing
Democratic Elections.
60. As a result, many African countries have constitutions with presidential term
limits and constraints on unlimited power. Also, Africa has seen an increase in the
conduct of periodic multiparty free and fair elections. Most African countries have
acceded to various international and regional instr uments on democratic governance
and are undertaking various reforms to establish strong democratic institutions.
There is a growing enabling environment for private sector development to enhance
productivity and growth. A growing number of governments are increasingly
recognizing the importance of civil society and have also institutionalized measures
to promote civil society participation in politics and governance.

B.

Persisting challenges in promoting democratic governance in Africa
61. While these efforts have contributed to enhancing democratic governance,
challenges remain, as the situations in Burkina Faso and Burundi have shown.
Persisting challenges to democratic governance in Africa include continued human
rights violations, weak State institutions, crises of State legitimacy arising from an
inability to deliver basic services, militarization of societies including through the
resurgence of military coups as well as rebel and terrorist activities, mismanagement
and politicization of diversity, social and economic exclusion and inequalities, and
poor coordination and harmonization of regional and subregional approaches. The
political landscape in the majority of countries continues to be dominated by de
facto one-party systems, and a winner-takes-all approach to elections. As illustrated
in Burkina Faso, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi, incumbents
hoping to prolong their time in power increasingly face significant public resistance,
often undermining efforts to promote democratic governance. In addition, the
participation of women in political processes is marginal.
62. These critical challenges are broadly organized in six categories in this report:
preventing and mitigating electoral violence; human rights and the protection of
vulnerable populations; growing insecurity and militarization of societies; limited
capacity of the judiciary and anti-corruption institutions; strained State-civil society
relations; and challenge of coordination and harmonization.

1.

Preventing and mitigating electoral violence
63. In spite of progress being made in the conduct and management of periodic
elections, a key challenge remains how to effectively prevent and mitigate election related violence, especially in the light of a pervasive winner -takes-all approach to
elections. Experience gained over the past decade confirms that prospect s for
prevention and mitigation are best when efforts combine both political and technical

14/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

elements, address root causes of conflicts, and are sustained over the long term and
conceived within a broader strategic framework that supports and builds upon
regional capacities and frameworks in Africa.
64. In this respect, the African Union and the regional economic communities are
increasingly utilizing their institutional mechanisms for preventing, managing and
resolving election-related conflicts, such as the Pan African Network of the Wise,
special envoys and representatives, to support and complement the efforts of the
African Union Peace and Security Council. The United Nations has supported
regional and subregional organizations in this effort and has its elf employed
mediation and good offices in support of peaceful elections. This political approach
has proven successful, including recently in Nigeria, where the country had its first
peaceful transition of power to the opposition since moving to civilian rule in 1999.
However, effective early warning and response to electoral violence, and capacities
to ensure non-violent electoral processes, are still limited.
2.

Human rights and the protection of vulnerable populations
65. Most African countries have signed and ratified a wide range of international
and regional human rights instruments, including on the rights of women and
children. They have also established measures and institutions to enforce and
monitor implementation. The fulfilment of human rig hts obligations is inextricably
linked to the promotion of democratic governance, and regional organizations have
a key role to play in this regard.
66. For instance, the African Union adopted an approach of non -indifference,
building on a collective responsibility to protect citizens from grave harm, such as
human rights abuses, genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
unconstitutional changes of government. In practice, however, legitimate concerns
about the actual state of human rights protection in Africa remain, which is
particularly alarming in conflict situations and in countries experiencing terrorist
threats, as is evident in Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad,
Libya, Nigeria and South Sudan, among other countries. As go vernments have the
primary responsibility to protect human rights, regional and subregional
organizations sometimes find it challenging to effectively mobilize the necessary
political will and resources to ensure compliance with existing human rights
instruments at the national level.

3.

Insecurity and continued militarization of societies
67. The African Union policy framework on security sector reform outlines a set
of principles and measures for promoting democratic governance and oversight of
the security sector, civil-military relations and reforming the armed forces. The
security sector reform support of the United Nations to the African Union and
regional economic communities focuses, inter alia, on strengthening the civilian
oversight roles of the security sector, including by relevant ministries and
parliaments, and facilitating dialogue aimed at ensuring a common national vision
of security and of security sector reforms.
68. Despite these efforts, there are still significant security challenges. Years of
autocratic and military rule in most African countries engendered a culture of
militarization and regime protection that is antithetical to the norms and values
of democratic governance. This militarized culture has proven relatively resistant to

15-11180

15/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

change in some countries. The emergence of new rebel, militia, extremist and terrorist
groups and their growing ability to undermine the role of governments has further
complicated the security situation and is fast eroding democratic gains in some
countries.
4.

Limited capacity of critical democratic institutions
69. Transparent and accountable public institutions are critical for enhancing
democratic governance. There have been concerted efforts to strengthen the
capacities of State institutions, including the judiciary, to enhance social justice and
social cohesion, ensure the peaceful resolution of conflicts, and combat corruption,
among others. Yet, the capacities — financial, technological and human — of these
institutions, in most African countries, are still limited and inadequate, in a manner
that affects their independence.
70. African regional and subregional organizations themselves have their own
internal and institutional challenges that hinder their ability to foster democratic
norms and to help build effective institutions at the national level. For instance, they
remain reliant on external financial support to effectively implement their respective
democratic governance programmes. To ensure predictable and sustainable
programming, African Governments need to ensure the provision of adequate
resources at both the national and regional levels.

5.

Relations between civil society and governments
71. The role of a vibrant civil society, including an independent media, is the
bedrock of democratic governance. As the events in North Africa and Burkina Faso
showed, popular uprisings and mass demonstrations in defence of democracy are a
vivid reminder that beyond norms and policy instruments, it is ordinary citizens
who are the custodians of democracy.
72. Despite an increasingly active civil society, however, there is need for
continued capacity-building for civil society organizations, including on enhanced
understanding of their relations with the State, policy research and advocacy to
strengthen their contributions to democratic governance. Governments also need to
do more to systematically engage civil society as important partners rather than
adversaries in advancing democratic governance. The continued suppression of civil
society, and political and economic exclusion, especially of youths and women, will
only exacerbate human rights violations, trigger violent conflicts and slow down
progress on democratic governance, economic development and sustainable peace.
73. The African Union, NEPAD, the African Peer Review Mechanism and the
regional economic communities have developed a range of policies and instruments
to facilitate the engagement of civil society and the private sector in democratic
governance. Significant gaps remain, however, between norm-setting and norm
implementation, which should be addressed, especially at national levels, to promote
African civil society participation in democratic governance across the continent.

6.

Challenge of coordination and harmonization
74. African regional and subregional organizations are developing at different
paces, and this is reflected in the level of progress attained in developing and
implementing their respective democratic governance instruments. Consequently,

16/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

there is a need to accelerate efforts to harmonize those instruments and enhance
coordination at operational levels between the African Union, regional economic
communities and the United Nations, taking into consideration the principles of
subsidiarity and comparative advantages. In the absence of a coordinated and
coherent approach, norms and instruments could likely be inconsistently applied,
undermining the credibility of regional and subregional interventions and creating
opportunities for national actors to exploit the situation.
75. The positive outcome of a coordinated approach was evident in Burkina Faso,
where swift joint action by the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS
was instrumental in preventing a further deterioration of the situatio n and bringing
about a national consensus on the way forward. Against this backdrop, the situation
in Burundi would also benefit from enhanced collaboration between the East
African Community, the African Union and the United Nations towards finding a
consensual political solution to the current crisis.

C.

Enhanced United Nations support to regional and subregional
organizations in democratic governance in Africa
76. The United Nations has been a longstanding and committed partner to African
countries, the African Union, NEPAD, the African Peer Review Mechanism, the
regional economic communities and civil society organizations in ongoing efforts to
promote democratic governance. Given the new impetus provided by Agenda 2063,
the United Nations will continue to enhance its support to Africa in promoting
democratic governance within the context of the implementation of the first 10 -Year
Implementation Plan of Agenda 2063. The proposals under consideration in the
intergovernmental negotiation process on the post-2015 development agenda further
give credence to the need for this support, as it includes some of the aspirations on
democratic governance enshrined in Agenda 2063.
77. The United Nations, including through the UNDP Democratic Governance
Group, will further enhance support to African regional and subregional
organizations in fostering democratic governance through, inter alia, institutional
and human capacity development, policy advice, technical support and strategic
partnerships. The United Nations support to the African Union and the regional
economic communities will also be channelled through the Regional Coordination
Mechanism. In this respect, additional efforts will be made to strengthen the
efficacy of the Mechanism’s cluster system, as well as of the Interdepartmental Task
Force on African Affairs, to better deliver coherent and coordinated United Nations
support to Africa, in the context of the implementation of Agenda 2063 and its first
10-Year Implementation Plan.
78. Building on our joint framework for enhanced partnership with the African
Union and the regional economic communities in peace and security, the United
Nations will also support efforts to strengthen the institutional and operational
linkages between the African Governance Architecture and the African Peace and
Security Architecture. Similarly, efforts will be made to enhance collaboration, in
particular between the African Union, the regional economic communities and United
Nations peacekeeping operations, special political missions and regional offices in the
area of democratic governance.

15-11180

17/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

79. The United Nations will also, in the context of the Human Rights Up Front
initiative of the Secretary-General, continue to strengthen collaboration with the
African Union and the regional economic communities to support African efforts in
preventing and responding to serious human rights violations. Further, the United
Nations will support implementation of the African Union Human Rights Strategy
for Africa, including through increased support to the Pan African Parliament, the
African Court and the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and
national human rights institutions. The United Nations will also continue to leverage
civil society participation in democratic governance in Africa, including through the
United Nations Democracy Fund. Efforts in this regard will particularly focus on
women and youth.
80. The United Nations will further engage African regional and subregional
organizations in utilizing its Monitoring Mechanism, established by the General
Assembly in resolution 66/293, to review commitments made by all relevant parties
to democratic governance in Africa.

V. Conclusion and recommendations
81. The year 2015 marks the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations and
will witness the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda and the financing
for development outcomes. At the same time, 2015 witnessed the adoption of two
new policy frameworks for Africa’s transformation and renaissance, notably
Agenda 2063 and its first 10-Year Implementation Plan. These international and
regional frameworks are complementary in their aspiration to enhance inclusive
people-centred development in Africa. It is important that the international
community and the United Nations ensure coherence and synergy between the
global and continental frameworks and fully support their implementation in
Africa. For instance, the international community and the United Nations should
continue to support the African Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Architecture to address new issues and challenges in peace
operations and post-conflict peacebuilding, in ways that address the concerns
and aspirations contained in the African positions on these issues.
82. To further enhance the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union, Member States should extend support for the
implementation of PAIDA, which is anchored in Agenda 2063 and will succeed
the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union. In the light
of their role as implementing agencies for Agenda 2063 and its first 10-Year
Implementation Plan, the international community and the United Nations
should strengthen their cooperation and support for the regional economic
communities, including through PAIDA.
83. The role of African regional and subregional organizations, notably the
African Union, NEPAD, the African Peer Review Mechanism and the regional
economic communities, remains critical for complementing the efforts of
African Governments to promote and consolidate democratic governance. The
international community and the United Nations should increase their support
to the African Union in strengthening the institutional capacities of all organs
and instruments of the African Governance Architecture, including the African
Peer Review Mechanism, the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights and

18/20

15-11180

A/70/176
S/2015/560

the Pan African Parliament, as well as of the regional economic communities in
addressing structural challenges to democratic governance.
84. An enhanced role of the Regional Coordination Mechanism and the
Interdepartmental Task Force on African Affairs is essential for fostering
system-wide collaboration in monitoring international commitments to
democracy, good governance, human rights and the rule of law, within the
context of the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism, Agenda 2063 and PAIDA.
In this regard, the United Nations should further strengthen the role of the
Regional Coordination Mechanism and the Interdepartmental Task Force on
African Affairs so as to enhance coherence and coordination between the United
Nations, the African Union, NEPAD, the African Peer Review Mechanism, the
regional economic communities and other relevant organs in consolidating
peace and security, democratic governance, and development in Africa.
85. The African Peer Review Mechanism remains the key Africa-led
voluntary process for the promotion of economic, political and corporate
governance on the continent. It is vital for providing timely remedial measures
for addressing deficits in democratic governance. The international community
and the United Nations should assist the Mechanism in addressing challenges it
faces to conduct national reviews and implement its national programmes of
action, including on institutional reforms.
86. The importance of civil society, particularly women and youth, for
Africa’s future is reflected in the decision of the African Union to designate
2015 the Year of Women’s Empowerment and Development towards Africa’s
Agenda 2063, and 2016 as the Year of Human Rights, focusing on the human
rights of women. The United Nations should strengthen support to African
Member States and regional and subregional organizations to enhance the
active participation of civil society, including women and youth, in processes to
promote democracy, good governance, human rights and the rule of law.
87. Agenda 2063 underscores the need for well-functioning, accountable,
inclusive and participatory political and economic systems and institutions that
are also capable of effectively ensuring checks and balances. African Member
States, with the support of the United Nations, should further strengthen the
capacities of critical democratic institutions to enhance public service delivery
and accountability. These include national human rights institutions, elections
management bodies, parliaments, media, civil service, anti-corruption bodies,
judiciaries, law enforcement and security institutions, among others.
88. In the light of the critical linkages between democratic governance, hu man
rights, durable peace and sustainable development, the United Nations should
continue to increase synergies between the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture in preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction, within the context
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. In particular, the United Nations should
enhance joint field-based actions with African regional and subregional
organizations in strengthening early warning and democratic security oversight
capacities, preventing election-related violence and addressing conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism and violent extremism. The United Nations
should also enhance cooperation with the regional economic communities in

15-11180

19/20

A/70/176
S/2015/560

supporting democratic governance through its regional offices, special political
missions and peacekeeping missions.
89. It is critical that the United Nations accelerate action to support African
regional and subregional organizations in the implementation of the “Silencing
the guns” flagship project, in accordance with the Security Council’s
presidential statement of 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27), in which the
Council “expresses its readiness to contribute and calls on all, in particular
relevant United Nations entities, to help achieve this goal including by
considering defining a concrete five-year actionable plan in support of the goal
of achieving a conflict-free Africa by 2020”.
90. In the light of the reviews of United Nations peace operations, the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture and Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security, there is an urgent need for the United
Nations to identify practical and effective frameworks and mechanisms to help
to integrate the perspectives, interests and concerns of African regional actors
in the planning and implementation of security and development strategies for
African countries in conflict and post-conflict situations more systematically
and consistently, so as to better articulate the regional dimension of conflict
and post-conflict challenges.
91. In the light of the impact of the Ebola virus disease, the international
community, including the United Nations, should continue to support response
efforts led by national governments to get to zero cases and address the
profound socioeconomic impact of the outbreak. Stakeholders must pursue
partnerships that help the affected countries to become resilient and selfsufficient by strengthening national capacity, including of the public health
systems across the region and Africa as a whole.

20/20

15-11180
