Resolulions adopted wilhoul reference to a Main Commiltee

continue to withhold assistance of any kind from the
Governments of Portugal and South Africa and fro!Il
the illegal racist minori,ty regime in Southern Rhodesia
until they renounce their policy of colonial domination
and racial discrimination;
9. Calls upon the colonial Powers to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally their military bases
and installations from colonial Territories and to refrain from establishing new ones;
10. Requests all Gove~nm~nts an_d ~he special~ed
agencies ,and other orgaru~tions. within the ~m~ed
Nations system, in consultation with the O~gamzation
of African Unity, to ensure the repres~ntat10:n of ~e
colonial Territories in Africa by the national hberration
movements concerned, in an appropriate capacity, when
dealing with matters pertaining to those Territories;
11. Requests the Special _Com~ttee to conti~me to
seek suitable means for the unmediate and full implementation of General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 2621 (XXV) in all Territories which have not yet
attained independence and, _in. pa1;1icular, to form~l~te
specific proposals for the ehmmat1on of the remammg
manifestations of colonialism and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
12. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter with regard to developments in colonial Territories that are likely to threaten international peace and
security, and recommends that the Council take such
suggestions fully into consideration;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on
decolonization, particularly those relating to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia and
Southern Rhodesia;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay particular attention to the small Territories and to
recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods and also the steps to be taken to enable
the populations of these Territories to exercise fully
and without further delay their right to self-determination and independence;
15. Calls upon those administering Powers which
have not done so to co-operate fully with the Special
Committee in the discharge of its mandate and, in particular, to participate in the work of the Committee
relating to the Territories under their aJministration
and to permit the access of visiting missions to the Territories in order to secure first-hand information and
ascertain the wishes and aspirations of their inhabitants;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
enlist the support of national and international organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization in the achievement of the objectives of
the Declaration and in the implementation of -the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, and in particular
to assist the Economic and Social Council in its consideration of ithe related items on its agenda;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the increased level of activities of the Special Committee, to provide the Committee with ,the facilities and
personnel necessary for the implementation of the present resolution as well as the various resolutions on de-

1

colonization adopted by the General Assembly and the
Special Committee.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3164 (XXVIII). Dissemination of information
on decolonization

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the question of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization, 16
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its resolution 2909 (XXVII) of
2 November 1972 concerning the dissemination of information on decolonization,
Bearing in mind the programme of action adopted
by the International Conference of Experts for the
Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid in
Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, 17
Stressing the urgent need to arouse world public
opinion on a continuous basis with a view to assisting
effectively the peoples of the colonial Territories to
achieve self-determination, freedom and independence
and, in particular, to intensify the widespread and continuous dissemination of information on the struggle
for liberation being waged by the peoples in the colonial
Territories in Africa guided by their national liberation
movements,
Taking into account the related suggestions of the
Special Committee as well as the views expressed in that
regard by representatives of the national liberation
movements who participated as observers in the work
of the Special Committee and the Fourth Committee,
Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the aims and purposes of the Declaration and mindful of the pressing need for the Office
of Public Information of the Secretariat to intensify i,ts
efforts to acquaint world public opinion with all aspects
of the problems of decolonization,
Bearing in mind the increasingly important role be-ing played in <the widespread dissemination of relevant
information by a number of non-gov<!inmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization,
Noting with satisfaction the arrangements made by
the Special Committee wi,th a view to assisting the Office
of Public Information in the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Special
Committee relating to the dissemination of information
on decolonization,
1. Approves the cliapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
10 Ibid.,

chap. I, pams. 137-155, and chap. II.
annex, sect. IV.

11 A/9061,

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Se11eion

8

Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the quesll:ion of publicity for the work of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization;
2. Reaffirms the vital importance of urgently effecting the widest possible dissemination of information
on ,the evils and dangers of colonialism, in particular
the continuing struggle for liberation being waged by
the peoples in the colonial Territories in Africa, as well
as the efforts being made by the international community to assist in the elimination of the remaining
vestiges of colonialism in all its forms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to co1;1tinue to take concrete measures ,through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories
and to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
by the colonial peoples and, inter alia:
(a) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in western Europe,
and also to establish additional information centres
where appropriate, especially in southern Africa;
(b) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
( c) To enlist, from the non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council and from those non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, support in the dissemination of the relevant information;
(d) To publish, in consultation with the Special
Committee, the periodical Objective: Justice and the
bulletin "United Nations and Southern Africa" in other
languages besides English and French, as appropriate;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, having
regard to the relevant provisions of the programme of
action adopted by the International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism and
Apartheid in Southern Africa, 18 to establish a Unit on
Decolonization within the Department of Political AffaiTS, Trusteeship and Decolonization which will, in
consultation with the Special Committee and with the
Office of Public Information, collect, prepare and disseminate, on a continuous basis, basic material, studies
and articles relating to the problems of decolonization,
and, to that end, to make provision for the necessary
personnel and facilities;
5. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, ,to co-operate full~, w:th the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraphs 3 and 4 above;
6. Invites all States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;
18/bid., para. 49 (86).

7. Welcomes the decision of rthe non-governmental
organizations concerned with decolonization and apartheid to hold at Geneva, in 1974, a conference on
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa and to
invite the participation of the United Nations organs
concerned, and requests the Secretary-General to provide conference facilities for that purpose;
8. Requests the Secretary-General ,to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and, in particular, to hold
consultations, as appropriate, with the Organization of
African Unity and the national liberation movements
concerned, as well as with the non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization;
10. Further requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and
report thereon to the General Assembly at its twentyninth session.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3165 (XXVIII). International Conference of Experts for the Support of Victims of Colonialism ancl Apartheid in Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2910 (XXVII) of 2 November 1972,
Recognizing the need for concerted international
efforts to hasten the eradication of the scourge of colonialism and apartheid, thereby promoting international peace and se·curity,
1. Again reiterates the firm intention of the United
Nations, acting in co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the present grave situation in southern Africa;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General19 on the International Conference of Experts for
the Support of Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid
in Southern Africa, held at Oslo from 9 to 14 April
1973, in pursuance of resolution 2910 (XXVII);
3. Commends the proposals for a programme of
action highlighted by the Conference 17 to the attention
of United Nations organs, the organizations within the
United Nations system and the Organization of African
Unity, as well as to the attention of Governments, non-governmental organizations and the public.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3181 (XXVIII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-eighth session of the General
Assemhly 20

The General Assembly

I
Approves the credentials of the representatives of
Portugal, on the clear understanding that they represent
111 A/9061.
20 See also

"Other decisions", p. 10.
