A/61/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

50

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 8 November 2006, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 18
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/61/132)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.10)
Amendment (A/61/L.19)
Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): On this important
occasion, the Chairman of the Group of 77 and China,
Ambassador Kumalo, would have preferred to deliver
this statement himself. However, due to the fact that he
is traveling, I, as Chargé, have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The heads of State and Government of the Group
of 77 and China at the Second South Summit, held in
Qatar in June 2005, condemned the use of economic
coercive measures designed to prevent countries from
exercising their right to decide their own political,
economic and social systems, and called on all
countries not to recognize unilateral extraterritorial
laws which impose sanctions on other States and
foreign companies. The heads of State and Government
also recognized that the embargo has caused a high
degree of economic and financial damage that has
negatively impacted on the welfare and well-being of
the people of Cuba.

At the thirtieth annual ministerial meeting of the
Group of 77 and China, the ministers once again firmly
rejected the imposition of laws and regulations with
extraterritorial impact and all other forms of coercive
economic measures, including unilateral sanctions
against developing countries, and reiterated the urgent
need to eliminate them immediately. They emphasized
that such actions not only undermine the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, but also severely threaten the
freedom of trade and investment. They therefore called
on the international community neither to recognize
those measures nor to apply them.
The Group of 77 and China is guided by the basic
norms of international law and conduct in its principled
support for the need to eliminate coercive economic
measures as a means of political and economic
coercion. The Group of 77 and China believes that
constructive dialogue can foster mutual trust and
understanding, as well as engender harmony and
peaceful coexistence between nations.
The Group of 77 and China has therefore
consistently opposed all aspects of the embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba.
The Group of 77 and China views the continued
imposition of an economic, commercial and financial
embargo as a violation of the principles of the
sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention
and non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs.
The Group of 77 and China is committed to
working towards a better world for all in which

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-60788 (E)

*0660788*

A/61/PV.50

nations, no matter how large or small, coexist
peacefully. The achievement of such peaceful
coexistence among nations requires adherence by all
nations to the rule of law, including international law.
The action by the United States of America
against the Republic of Cuba has lasted for 49 years,
with 70 per cent of Cubans having been born under the
embargo. Yet, that long-standing economic, commercial
and financial embargo has been consistently rejected by
a growing number of Member States to the point at
which the opposition has become almost unanimous.
Thus, the need to respect international law in the
conduct of international relations has been recognized
by most members of this body, as has been evidenced
by the growing support for the draft resolution that we
are to adopt today. The States Members of the United
Nations have been considering this item and support
has grown steadily from 59 Member States opposing
the United States embargo of Cuba in 1992 to 182 last
year.
I believe that the presence of such a large number
of Member States in this Hall today and their
participation in these deliberations are indications of
their opposition to unilateral extraterritorial measures.
They express their firm opposition to unilateral
measures as a means of exerting pressure on
developing countries, as such measures are contrary to
international law, international humanitarian law, the
United Nations Charter and the norms and principles
governing peaceful relations among States.
The Group of 77 and China, in accordance with
international laws and norms, will again support the
draft resolution before us today. We do so because that
relentless and unilateral action has caused untold
suffering to the people of Cuba. Considering the
impact that this embargo has had on the every day lives
of the Cuban people, it is therefore no surprise to see
that the overwhelming majority of Member States are
here today to join in the support for the Cuban people.
Mr. Severin (Saint Lucia): I am honoured to
address this Assembly on behalf of the States members
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The Caribbean Community aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of South Africa
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The situation affecting Cuba is of significant
importance to countries of the wider Caribbean and

2

remains a source of continuing concern and disquiet.
The United Nations Charter is very clear regarding
such matters as respect for the sovereign equality of
States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
the self-determination of peoples, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and the maintenance of friendly
relations between States. For States members of the
Caribbean Community, those principles constitute core
elements in the conduct of our international relations,
and our adherence to them is paramount. We take note
of the report of the Secretary-General in document
A/61/132, which contains an impressive catalogue of
replies from Member States and from United Nations
bodies on the matter of the embargo against Cuba.
CARICOM member States have been consistent
over the years in their opposition to the embargo,
which has caused untold hardship to the people of
Cuba. The introduction of new legislative and
administrative arrangements in the last few years, with
the expressed intent of strengthening the embargo, has
only served to intensify that hardship. We continue to
oppose this imposition of unilateral punitive measures,
in particular the extraterritorial application of national
legislation.
CARICOM States reaffirm the positions of the
Group of 77 and China and the Movement of NonAligned Countries in opposing such unilateral actions.
We maintain the position that constructive engagement
and peaceful negotiations remain the only acceptable
means for advancing long-term peace and stability.
Cuba is the most populous State of the Caribbean
region and an integral part of the Pan-Caribbean
process. Caribbean ties with Cuba have historical
significance, cemented by years of active cooperation
at various levels. The member States of the Caribbean
Community continue to maintain close relations with
Cuba through a wide range of programmes of
cooperation in areas including trade, health care, the
global fight against HIV-AIDS, and human resources
development.
The
CARICOM-Cuba
Joint
Commission,
established to foster mutual cooperation, remains
committed to widening and deepening those
collaborative efforts. CARICOM continues to engage
Cuba in a constructive and mutually beneficial
partnership that has yielded concrete benefits for the
people of the Caribbean.

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

Cuba’s assistance to CARICOM States and
others, through the assignment of health-care personnel
and the provision of medical care, continues to be an
important sign of its commitment to regional
cooperation. As a small State whose economy has been
subjected to a crippling embargo over the past four
decades, Cuba continues to impress the world with its
boundless capacity for providing assistance in the areas
of health care and education to other countries that are
disadvantaged.
CARICOM States have been beneficiaries of that
assistance. Within the past year, thousands of
CARICOM nationals benefited from the Cuban eye
care programme aptly called the Miracle Programme.
Thousands more have continued to benefit from
scholarships in tertiary and professional-level
education.
Cuba is an integral part of the Caribbean region
and threatens no one. It should not be isolated or
excluded from participation in regional and
hemispheric processes. That country’s commitment to
the social and economic development of the Caribbean
continues to be well demonstrated.
CARICOM reiterates its unwavering support for
the right of the Cuban people to self-determination in a
manner beneficial to their social and economic
development. The embargo imposed against Cuba is an
anachronism and serves no useful purpose in the
twenty-first century. It has served only to preserve a
state of tension between two neighbouring countries
and to generate concern, disquiet and discomfort
throughout the Caribbean Basin.
The Caribbean Community enjoys friendly
relations with the United States of America. In that
spirit, we urge its Government to bring an end to the
embargo and to engage in constructive dialogue with
the intention of normalizing relations with Cuba. Such
an initiative would remove a source of tension and
conflict, and significantly enhance the prospects for
peace,
poverty
alleviation,
development
and
cooperation within the hemisphere of the Americas.
It is in that context that CARICOM States support
the contents of the draft resolution presently before the
General Assembly and will vote in support of its
adoption. We will strongly resist any and all efforts
being promoted to amend it.

06-60788

Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of Mexico is taking the floor to reaffirm
its rejection of the application of unilateral economic
embargo measures. That opposition proceeds from the
legal principle, recognized in this and other
multilateral forums, that discourages the use of
coercive measures without prior authorization in
accordance with the provisions established in that
regard by the Charter of the United Nations.
Mexico reaffirms that any kind of political,
economic or military sanctions imposed against States
can emanate only from decisions or recommendations
formulated by the Security Council or the General
Assembly. Likewise, our country regrets the serious
humanitarian consequences of such sanctions —
sanctions that are contrary to international law and
must not stand in the way of diplomacy and dialogue,
which are the ideal ways to resolve disputes between
States.
The Government of Mexico has maintained that
position in various agencies of the United Nations
system on the basis of the fact that the United States
embargo against Cuba is a unilateral policy hampering
economic and social cooperation with that State. The
report submitted by the Secretary-General to the
General Assembly (A/61/132) on the implementation
of resolution 60/12 cites many considerations arguing
against the United States embargo and confirming the
existence of an overwhelming consensus regarding the
need to end that hostile practice.
The damage caused by the embargo is well
known and well documented; we need only refer to the
findings of various United Nations entities and organs.
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean has noted that the embargo imposed against
Cuba for more than four decades has had a negative
impact on that country’s economic, political and social
life. UNICEF specifically cites the harmful effects of
the United States embargo on Cuba’s ability to acquire
the cytostatic therapies so needed by children suffering
from cancer.
The United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development stresses that the extraterritorial effects of
the embargo imposed by Washington have significant
consequences for Cuba because of the influence of
United States interests in transnational corporations.
According to the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme, the embargo imposed against Cuba limits

3

A/61/PV.50

the country’s access to low-cost water-treatment
chemicals and equipment, which has a negative impact
on the environment and jeopardizes public health.
For its part, the United Nations Development
Programme emphasizes that the United Nations system
has encountered difficulties and restraints in carrying
out technical cooperation projects in Cuba because it is
impossible to acquire equipment and other products
manufactured in the United States or protected by that
country’s patents.
The Government of Mexico bases its bilateral and
multilateral relations on the general principles of
international law, which regulate peaceful and civilized
coexistence among sovereign States. That is why those
principles have remained fully valid over time with
regard to the item before us. They have been
consistently reiterated since 1992, when the
Government of the Republic of Cuba submitted to the
General Assembly for its consideration a draft
resolution aimed at ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo. Since then, Mexico has voted in
favour of the resolutions adopted by the Assembly in
that regard. This embargo must end.
Likewise, the Government of Mexico has been
emphatic in opposing unilateral laws that jeopardize
the progress made towards greater cooperation,
integration and free trade. Thus, through different
mechanisms, it has conveyed to the international
community its position against national laws with
extraterritorial effects on third countries, in violation of
international law.
Mexico emphatically rejects the amendment
proposed by Australia last night, since it not only
ignores the thrust of agenda item 18 but also appears to
be a dangerous attempt to justify an economic embargo
that clearly and flagrantly contravenes international
law and the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
At this session of the General Assembly, Mexico,
for the fifteenth time, reiterates its support for the draft
resolution on the lifting of the United States embargo
against Cuba. It is time for that resolution, which has
received near-unanimous support from the Assembly,
to be translated into reality.
The President: I should like to propose that the
list of speakers in the debate on this item be closed.
I hear no objection.

4

It was so decided.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the implementation of resolution 60/12, entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba” (A/61/132). My delegation
warmly welcomes the presence of Mr. Felipe Pérez
Roque, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba, at this plenary meeting of the General Assembly.
In that connection, we align ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of South Africa
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
For over four decades, the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba has been severely hindering
Cuba’s economic and social development, causing
numerous hardships and difficulties for the Cuban
people. According to information provided by the
Government of Cuba, direct economic damages caused
by the embargo to the Cuban people exceed $86.1
billion. Last year alone, damages exceeded $4.108
billion. Those figures are indeed appalling.
Because of its adverse effects on the livelihood of
the Cuban people and of its extraterritorial character,
this embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba has since 1992 been repeatedly rejected
by the international community through 14 identical
resolutions, adopted every year by the Assembly by an
absolute majority.
The General Assembly has over the past 14 years
urged the United States to put an end to this embargo,
reaffirming the sovereign equality of States, the
principles of non-intervention and non-interference in
their internal affairs and freedom of international trade
and navigation, and expressing concern at the
continued promulgation and application by Member
States of laws and regulations, the effects of which
affect the sovereignty of other States and the legitimate
interests of persons under their jurisdiction.
However, despite the urging of the General
Assembly and of many intergovernmental forums and
bodies, the embargo has not only remained intact but
has in fact been tightened through the enforcement of
laws and provisions of a distinctly extraterritorial
character. The embargo, which runs counter to the
fundamental principles of international law, the United
Nations Charter and the World Trade Organization

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

(WTO), has become the longest-ever in history. Its
prolongation will only cause further tension in the
context of the bilateral relations between the United
States and Cuba and result in further hardships and
difficulties for the Cuban people, especially those most
vulnerable, such as women and children. This situation
requires an urgent solution.
It remains the fundamental position of the
Vietnamese Government that every State has the
inalienable right to determine its own political system
and path of development suitable to its own specific
conditions. Viet Nam believes that the differences
between the United States and Cuba can and should be
settled through dialogue and negotiations, on the basis
of mutual respect, respect for each other’s
independence and sovereignty, and non-interference in
each other’s internal affairs. We believe that the
normalization and development of friendly relations
between these two geographically close neighbours can
only serve the interests of their peoples and those of
regional and international peace and security.
We encourage steps in that direction, and, acting
in the spirit of the 14 General Assembly resolutions
mentioned earlier — most recently resolution 60/12,
adopted last year — we join others in calling upon the
United States of America to end its economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba.
Let me conclude by affirming that the Vietnamese
people’s sentiments of friendship and solidarity with
the Cuban people will be further strengthened. The
Vietnamese Government and people, together with
other countries and peoples, will continue to do their
utmost to assist the Government and the people of
Cuba in overcoming the effects of the embargo.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation associates itself with the
statement made by South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Each year for 15 consecutive years, the General
Assembly has adopted a resolution urging all countries,
in compliance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of international law, to repeal or
invalidate all laws and measures with extraterritorial
effects that compromise the sovereignty of other States,
undermine the legitimate rights and interests of entities
and persons under the jurisdiction of those States and
affect their freedom of trade and navigation.

06-60788

Regrettably, today, the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba is still in place.
In this age of globalization, exchanges and
cooperation among countries, on an equal footing,
represent the trend of our time. Normal economic,
commercial and financial ties among countries are in
the interest of all countries and are by no means a
favour bestowed by any one country on others.
Dialogue on an equal footing is the best way to resolve
differences.
For more than 40 years, an embargo and
sanctions have been imposed against Cuba under the
pretext of promoting democracy, freedom and human
rights in Cuba. But what is the reality? First, the
practice of attempting to force another country to give
up its independently chosen path of development, even
to overthrow its Government, through an embargo and
sanctions constitutes a violation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
the basic norms governing contemporary international
relations. Such practices have nothing to do with
promoting democracy and freedom.
Secondly, the embargo and sanctions imposed on
Cuba are extraterritorial in nature and are therefore in
violation of international law and the principles,
objectives and rules of international trade. They also
run counter to the principle of trade liberalization.
Thirdly, the embargo and sanctions against Cuba
have seriously obstructed and constrained the efforts of
the Cuban people to eradicate poverty, improve their
living standards and achieve economic and social
development. The embargo and sanctions pose a grave
threat to the enjoyment by the Cuban people of the
rights to life and to development.
The facts show that some 40 years of embargo
and sanctions against Cuba have not only harmed the
interests of that country and others, thus seriously
hampering development efforts at the international
level, but also contradict the principles of democracy,
freedom, the rule of law and human rights, thus
completely defeating the policy goals claimed by the
country concerned. While harming others, they do not
benefit the imposer itself either.
The Chinese Government always adheres to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
advocates the sovereign equality of States and noninterference in each other’s internal affairs, and

5

A/61/PV.50

endeavours to promote democracy and the rule of law
in international relations. We believe that countries
should, in the light of their specific national conditions,
choose their own political, economic, and social
systems and mode of development. We are of the view
that differences and disputes between States should be
solved through dialogue and cooperation on the basis
of equality and mutual respect.
In view of all that, the Chinese Government
resolutely opposes the economic, commercial and
financial embargo and sanctions imposed on Cuba. It is
our hope that the country concerned will take concrete
actions, engage in dialogue instead of confrontation,
carry out contacts and exchanges instead of embargo
and sanctions, and implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions without delay. China therefore
supports the draft resolution submitted by Cuba under
the current agenda item.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): The
United States trade embargo is a bilateral issue and as
such should not come before the General Assembly. We
maintain the embargo to demonstrate our continuing
call for economic and political freedom for all Cubans.
We maintain the embargo so that the benefits of United
States food and medical sales go to the Cuban people,
not to privileged leaders.
Cuba has introduced the draft resolution claiming
that the embargo adversely affects the Cuban people,
cynically asking everyone to ignore the truth that the
Cuban Government’s policy of systematically denying
the human, economic, labour and political rights of its
people over 47 years is the real source of the adverse
affects on the Cuban people. Yet the Cuban
Government asks that members vote to blame the
United States for its failures.
The draft resolution inaccurately blames the
United States trade embargo for the hardships of the
Cuban people, while exonerating the Cuban
Government’s own policies, which deny the right of
the Cuban people to a fair wage, to own and operate a
business, to buy and sell property, to freely associate
and to freely express their opinions. The United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean has concluded that Cuba must promote
small business opportunities to bring life to the Cuban
economy, but the Cuban Government has refused to
accept the need for the kind of free market reforms that
would bring opportunities to the Cuban people.

6

Today’s draft resolution also inaccurately claims
that the United States embargo is a violation of
freedom of navigation. In fact, the United States
embargo does not prevent the rest of the world from
trading with Cuba or providing Cuba with access to
food or medicine. In fact, since 1992, the United States
has licensed over $1.5 billion in the sale and donation
of medicine and medical equipment for the Cuban
people, and over $8 billion worth of agricultural
commodities in the past years. In November 2005, the
head of Cuba’s food importing agency confirmed that
the United States was Cuba’s biggest food supplier.
If the Cuban Government wants the United States
to end the embargo, it knows what is needed: reforms
that will benefit the Cuban people, such as free and fair
elections, an open economy, independent trade unions
and a free press, to name a few. In 2002, President
Bush made clear that his response to such concrete
reforms would be an effort with the United States
Congress to ease restrictions on trade and travel
between the United States and Cuba. However, four
years have passed and the Cuban Government has
answered the challenge for freedom only with
imprisonment for human rights leaders and trade
unionists.
The draft resolution blames the United States
embargo for the adverse impact on the Cuban people,
but does not refer to the Cuban Government’s own
embargo against its people — an embargo that even
prevents United Nations and international human rights
investigators from traveling to Cuba and meeting freely
with the Cuban people. The draft resolution does not
condemn that embargo.
The United States supports the right of the Cuban
people to determine their own future freely through a
genuine transition to political and economic liberty. We
recall the words of José Martí, “El Apostol”, as he is
known, who said that “only oppression should fear the
full exercise of freedom”.
We will vote against the draft resolution and we
encourage all delegations that support the rights of and
a transition to freedom for the Cuban people to do the
same. We should send a clear message to the Cuban
Government that it is not the embargo, but rather its
own denial of the basic human rights of its people, that
is the cause of their suffering.
Mr. Atiyanto (Indonesia): Time and again, we
have had to address the issue of ending the economic,

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

commercial and financial embargo imposed on Cuba.
In reflecting on this matter, Indonesia associates itself
with the views expressed by the representative of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Let me thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report as contained in document
A/61/132. The report presents opinions of Member
States, expressing unanimously, their disagreement and
opposition to the application of the unilateral and
extraterritorial economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba.
Indonesia’s long-standing position on this issue is
well known. It is based on the principle that the
application of unilateral and extraterritorial economic
and trade measures runs counter to the Charter of the
United Nations and contravenes international law. The
principles of non-intervention in countries’ internal
affairs and the freedom of international trade and
navigation must also be respected and upheld.
The application of an economic and trade
embargo has produced negative effects in the economic
and social lives of innocent people, especially women
and children. These measures also constitute a major
impediment to the full enjoyment of the right to
development by a sovereign State and its people. They
violate human rights, considering the right to
development is a basic human right, and they also
undermine civil and political rights, as well as
economic, social and cultural rights.
This situation is not in line with the spirit of the
global partnership for development as set out in the
Millennium Declaration, the Monterrey Consensus and
the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. In fact, at
the 2005 World Summit, our leaders strongly reiterated
their determination to ensure the timely and full
realization of the development goals and objectives,
including the Millennium Development Goals to
eradicate poverty. Indonesia’s position is in keeping
with those expressions of global solidarity.
Based on those principles, Indonesia will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/61/L.10 on the necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America on
Cuba. In this regard, we want, once again, to
emphasize the fact that the continuation of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo on Cuba
will only serve to maintain high tensions between the
two neighbouring countries. This certainly will not

06-60788

bring us very far in our commitment to and respect for
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. Both of these are
indispensable foundations for a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world. In such situations,
democracy has limited space within which to develop.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Felipe Pérez Roque, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft resolution
A/61/L.10.
Mr. Pérez Roque (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
This is the fifteenth consecutive occasion that Cuba is
submitting to the General Assembly the draft
resolution, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. We do so in
defence of the rights of the Cuban people, but also in
defence of the rights of the American people and the
rights of the peoples represented in this Assembly.
The economic war unleashed by the United States
against Cuba, the longest and most ruthless ever
known, qualifies as an act of genocide and constitutes a
flagrant violation of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. Throughout the past 48 years,
the United States blockade has caused economic
damage to Cuba of over $86 billion. Seven in every ten
Cubans have, from the time of their birth, lived,
suffered from and endured the effects of the blockade,
which attempts to defeat us through hunger and
disease.
The blockade prevents Cuba from trading with
and receiving tourism from the United States. It
prevents Cuba from using the United States dollar in its
external transactions and from receiving credits or
engaging in operations with United States banks or
their subsidiaries in other countries. The blockade does
not allow the World Bank or the Inter-American
Development Bank to give even a modest loan to
Cuba.
But more serious than all that is that the Untied
States blockade imposes its criminal provisions on
Cuba’s relations with other countries that make up this
General Assembly.
We have seen how the representatives of the
United States Government have again repeated the
same fallacious arguments — the same lies as in
previous years. It is a lie when they say that this is a

7

A/61/PV.50

bilateral matter, when they say that Cuba can trade and
purchase in other countries what it cannot buy in the
United States, when they say that the United States
does not pursue the vessels of other countries that
attempt to come to Cuba and when they say that Cuba
uses the embargo as a pretext. I repeat to the delegate
of the United States what has been said in past years: if
the United States Government is of the view that Cuba
uses this as a pretext, then why do they not remove this
pretext by lifting the embargo? Why do they not
remove the embargo against Cuba if the United States’
opinion is that Cuba is using it as a pretext to justify its
failure?
The blockade prevents Cuba from trading with
companies based in Member States, not just United
States enterprises, but enterprises of Member States
that are subsidiaries of United States corporations.
Vessels with flags from Members countries cannot call
at United States ports if they have previously carried
goods from or to Cuba. That is the Torricelli Act,
signed by President Bush, senior, in 1992.
The United States blockade also prevents
companies from the rest of the world — those of your
countries, fellow members — from exporting to the
United States products containing Cuban raw materials,
and it prevents those companies from exporting to
Cuba products or equipment containing more than 10
per cent American components. That is the truth of the
matter. The blockade pursues the businesses of other
countries, not just those of the United States. Others —
your compatriots, fellow members — who seek to
make investments in Cuba, along with their families,
are threatened with refusal of entry into the United
States and they can even be brought to trial in United
States courts. That is the Helms-Burton Act of 1996.
I am not going to give endless examples that
prove what I have said. The Secretary-General has
issued an extensive report (A/61/132), with the
feedback of 96 countries and 20 international agencies
and organizations, which unequivocally reveals the
hardships and shortages that the blockade imposes on
the lives and development of the Cuban people.
We consider it important to inform the General
Assembly about the plan for the reconquest of Cuba
approved by President Bush in May 2004 and updated
in July 2006. In it, we can clearly see what the United
States Government would do in our country if it ever
had it under its control. According to the President of

8

the United States, what is most important is to return
all of the properties in Cuba to their former owners.
That would include, for example, taking the land away
from the hundreds of thousands of farmers in Cuba
who now own their own land, either individually or in
cooperatives, in order to reinstate the system of big
landowners. That would also mean evicting millions of
Cuban landowners from their homes in order to return
their properties or plots of land to their former
claimants.
President Bush describes this as an accelerated
process that would be under the complete control of the
United States Government — which, for those
purposes, would set up a so-called commission for the
restitution of property rights.
Another structure would also be established — a
United States Government standing committee for the
economic reconstruction of Cuba, which would run the
process of implementing in Cuba an extremely harsh
neoliberal adjustment programme that would include
the unbridled privatization of education and health
services and the elimination of social security and
welfare. Retirement benefits and pensions would be
removed and retirees would be offered the chance to do
construction work as part of a so-called corps of Cuban
retirees.
President Bush recognizes in the plan that it will
not be easy to apply the plan in Cuba. Therefore, he
instructs the State Department to create a repressive
apparatus as an immediate priority, which we imagine
will be trained in the brutal techniques of asphyxiation
that Vice-President Cheney does not consider to be
torture, in order to stifle the unrelenting resistance of
the Cuban people. It is even recognized that there will
be a long list of Cubans to be persecuted, tortured and
massacred.
The plan even contemplates a central child
adoption centre to hand over to families in the United
States and in other countries the children of those
parents who lay down their lives fighting or become
victims of repression. That entire cynical and brutal
programme to recolonize a country after destroying
and invading it, would be run by a character who has
already been appointed and whose ridiculous post,
reminiscent of that of Paul Bremer, is entitled Cuba
Transition Coordinator: a man named Caleb McCarry,
whose only record of note is his close friendship with
the terrorist groups of Cuban origin that are still

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

masterminding and executing from Miami, with
complete impunity, new assassination plots and acts of
sabotage against Cuba.
Those are the same groups that are asking
President Bush to release the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, the brains behind the explosion of a Cuban
passenger aeroplane, while five courageous Cuban
anti-terrorist fighters have been subjected to a cruel
and prolonged imprisonment in the United States since
1998.
Two years after its enactment, most of the plan
has already been implemented. Thus, new and greater
restrictions were imposed on family visits to Cuba by
Cubans resident in the United States. Americans who
travelled to Cuba were viciously persecuted. In the
course of the last two years, more than 800 people
accused of travelling to our country have been fined.
Additional constraints were imposed on the sending of
remittances to Cuba. Academic, cultural, scientific and
sporting exchanges have been virtually eliminated.
Since 2004, 85 companies have been penalized for
allegedly violating the blockade against Cuba.
The fierce persecution against our country’s
financial transactions and trade has been further
intensified. There are also tangible results from the
demented worldwide tracking conducted by the socalled Group for the Identification of Cuban Assets on
everything that appears to be a payment from or to
Cuba.
Along with the strengthening of the blockade, in
May 2004 President Bush approved another $59
million to pay his scarce and disheartened mercenaries
in Cuba with a view to fabricating a non-existent
internal opposition and to pay for propaganda
campaigns and illegal radio and television broadcasts
against Cuba. But it was all in vain. President Bush
realized that time was running out and he could not
keep his promise to the extremist Cuban groups in
Florida. His domestic and foreign woes were growing
and continue to grow, and socialist Cuba was and still
remains upright and unrelenting. Then, on 10 July
2006, President Bush added new measures to his plan.
A significant aspect of the new 93-page
concoction is that it contains a secret annex, with
actions against Cuba that have not been made public
and which, as they explain, would not be revealed in
order to achieve their effective realization and for
national security reasons.

06-60788

Will these include new assassination plots against
Cuban leaders, more terrorist acts or a military
aggression? From this rostrum, today, before the
General Assembly, we challenge President George W.
Bush to publicly disclose the content of that document,
which he has not to date had the courage to reveal. The
plan, of course, includes the allocation of additional
money. This time around, it is $80 million over two
years and no less than $20 million per year until the
Cuban revolution is defeated — in other words,
forever. There is also an increase in the radio and
television broadcasts against Cuba, overtly violating
International Telecommunication Union standards.
In addition, renewed efforts are being made to
create a so-called coalition of countries to support socalled regime change in Cuba. The Bush plan is
particularly emphatic on the extraterritorial application
of the economic war against Cuba. Thus, new
mechanisms are being established to improve the
machinery that enforces the blockade regulations and
new sanctions are being adopted.
One that stands out for its novelty is the criminal
prosecution of violators. Title III of the Helms-Burton
Act authorizes the filing of lawsuits in United States
courts against foreign investors in Cuba, particularly
those from countries supporting the continuance of the
Cuban revolution.
More stringent enforcement of title IV is also
envisaged. This would deny entry into the United
States of investors in Cuba and their families; the
persecution is aimed in particular at those investing in
oil prospecting and extraction, tourism, nickel, rum and
tobacco. As a tool to track down sales of Cuban nickel
to other markets — not just to the United States
market, but to businesses in other countries represented
here as well — a so-called inter-agency Cuban nickel
task force was created.
The siege is being tightened on exchanges
between American and Cuban churches, and there is a
ban on humanitarian donations to Cuban religious
organizations.
But one new blockade measure approved by
President Bush deserves particular comment. The
document states that the United States will deny all
exports of medical equipment that can be used in
health-care programmes for foreign patients. That is,
the United States Government, which has always gone
out of its way to cause the failure of Cuba’s

9

A/61/PV.50

international medical cooperation programmes, now
admits that its persecution may even reach the point of
trying to block Cuba’s purchase of necessary
equipment from other parts of the world.
I must emphasize again that the embargo has
reached the point of prohibiting exchanges between
United States churches and Cuban churches. Churches
in the United States are being forbidden from sending
donations, medicines or other supplies for
humanitarian use to their counterpart churches in Cuba.
President Bush’s blockade against Cuba has thus even
declared war on United States and Cuban churches,
trying to thwart the will of God. Secondly, it seeks to
prevent Cuba from buying medical equipment for
international medical cooperation programmes.
Some background information is essential here.
Since 1962, the year in which Cuban doctors rendered
assistance abroad for the first time, in Algeria, nearly
132,000 Cuban doctors, nurses and health technicians
have provided services in 102 countries. At present,
31,000 Cuban health workers are rendering services in
69 countries; of those, 20,000 are physicians. Yes,
31,000 health workers are providing care in 69
countries; in many of the countries represented here.
A medical brigade specializing in catastrophes and
emergency situations was established on 19 September
2005, in the midst of the scourge visited upon 2 million
poor people and black people in the southern United
States by the combined force of Hurricane Katrina and
of the Government’s irresponsibility and insensitivity.
The brigade is composed of 10,000 members who are
appropriately trained and equipped, and it bears the
name of a young American, Henry Reeve, who
gloriously laid down his life in 1873 in the Cuban
countryside as a general in our liberation army. At the
founding of the brigade, more than 1,500 Cuban
doctors were ready to leave for the most ravaged areas
and save who knows how many lives — lives which
were lost after President Bush’s refusal to receive
them.
A total of 2,564 members of this brigade worked
for eight months in Pakistan in the wake of the
earthquake there. They set up 32 field hospitals that
were later on donated to that brother nation. They
cared for 1.8 million patients and saved 2,086 lives.
Subsequently, a further 135 Cuban healers rendered
assistance in Indonesia and set up two field hospitals,
which were also donated. They treated 91,000 patients

10

and performed 1,900 surgeries. Cuban doctors had
previously worked in disaster areas, such as Peru in
1970, Venezuela in 1999, Sri Lanka and Indonesia in
2004 and Guatemala in 2005, to give but a few
examples.
If President Bush were to succeed in his cynical
plan, Cuba would be prevented from offering its
modest and generous effort to other peoples, many of
whom are represented here, in a field where nobody
questions our development and experience.
Since 2004, Cuba has been implementing
Operation Miracle, through which nearly 400,000
patients from 28 countries, not including some 100,000
Cubans, have been operated on, free of charge, and
have recovered their eyesight. Our country alone could
not defray all of the relevant expenses, but Cuban
doctors, technicians, technology and equipment have
laid the groundwork to operate on 1 million Latin
American and Caribbean people every year.
If the American offensive were to succeed in
curtailing this endeavour, an equivalent number of
people suffering from more than 20 eye diseases would
lose their eyesight. The United States Government
knows this, but it does not give up on its gruesome
plan to stifle Cuba. And here I am speaking only of
those treated for their eyesight, and not the hundreds of
millions of people benefiting from the comprehensive
health-care programmes conducted by the Cuban
internationalist doctors.
Cuba is not only providing medical services. It is
currently providing training to more than 46,000 young
medical students from 82 nations of the third world,
either in Cuba or in their own countries.
Cuba will not surrender. Nor will it falter in
advancing these humane endeavours, which signify
that a world of peace, justice and cooperation is
possible. Cuba’s commitment to the rights of all the
world’s dispossessed is stronger than the hatred of the
executioners.
Millions of Cubans are now awaiting the decision
that this Assembly will take. We ask you, delegates of
Member States, today to support respect for Cuba’s
rights, which is also respect for the rights of the
peoples that you represent.
We ask you to vote in favour of the draft
resolution entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

United States of America against Cuba”. We do so with
our heads held high, with optimism and confidence,
and with the hope of repeating the verses sung by a
poet of our generation, Silvio Rodriguez, because in
Cuba
“Nobody is going to die,
“Our whole life is our good-luck talisman,
“It is our cloak.
“Nobody is going to die,
“Certainly not now when the anthem of the
Homeland is our song.” [excerpt from Preludio
de Girón]
And if they impose a war on us, there will not be
enough soldiers in the United States to cover the
casualties that they would endure in a country that has
resisted and has been preparing its defence for over 45
years.
This is the statement I had prepared in submitting
our draft resolution. However, an unprecedented
incident in this Assembly compels me to add a few
remarks. For the first time since 1992, when the
Assembly began considering the issue of the blockade
against Cuba, the United States Government is trying
to sabotage this vote through an amendment. After
several weeks of exerting brutal pressure, the United
States realized that it could not reverse the
overwhelming support generated by this draft
resolution. It then attempted to talk a large number of
delegations into abstaining, and it failed. Then, it
threatened and blackmailed others to reject it, and it
failed again. It finally decided to boycott this vote in
order to divert attention from the main issue, which is
its embargo against Cuba, which is a flagrant violation
of international law, and it decided that the Australian
delegation would submit the draft amendment prepared
in Washington.
I have here the talking points distributed by the
United States on Monday, 6 November, seeking
support for an amendment that Australia only presented
as its own yesterday, Tuesday, 7 November, in the
afternoon. It is curious that the delegation of the
United States requests support in this paper for an
amendment that Australia had not even decided as yet
to submit. The United States tried to get one of the
European Union countries to present it, but it did not
succeed. It sought support in other countries, but it
could not muster support there either. Finally, a very
high-level call from Washington to the Minister for

06-60788

Foreign Affairs of Australia determined that Australia
would serve as the lackey to submit the United States
amendment.
Is this amendment an expression of genuine
concern by Australia? No, it is not. It is merely
indicative of its abject submission to the United States
Government. Besides, Australia does not have the
moral authority to refer to the human rights situation in
Cuba. The Australian Government is an accomplice to
United States imperialism. It is some sort of “pocket
imperialism”, always ready in the Pacific to follow its
Washington mentors. Thus, not only did it cooperate
with and send troops, along with the United States
Army, to the war in Viet Nam, in which 4 million
Vietnamese lost their lives, but it also participated
enthusiastically with over 2,000 soldiers in the
invasion of Iraq, an absolutely illegal preventive war.
Still today, some 1,300 Australian soldiers remain in
Iraq on the ground, even though a mere 22 per cent of
the Australian population supports this venture.
The Australian Government, which subjects the
country’s aboriginal population to a real apartheid
regime, does not have the moral authority to criticize
Cuba. The Australian Government, which supports the
torture centre of the United States in Guantánamo and
which supported the summary trials in military
tribunals against the prisoners that were harassed and
tortured there, including Australian prisoners, does not
have the moral authority to criticize Cuba. Much less
so does the United States. We all saw the appalling
images from the Abu Ghraib prison and the heinous
images from Guantánamo. We know that they have
organized and still maintain clandestine prisons and
secret flights on which they have carried drugged and
handcuffed prisoners. We saw the horrendous images
of hurricane Katrina, when human beings were doomed
to die because they were black, because they were
poor. After everything we now know, this Assembly
cannot be deceived or manipulated.
Therefore, on behalf of Cuba, we ask you, ladies
and gentlemen, to vote first in favour of the no action
motion that we will present in order to oppose the
amendment proposed by Australia and, later, to vote in
favour of draft resolution A/61/L.10 submitted by
Cuba.
The United States representative has raised in his
speech before this Assembly the sacred name of José
Martí, the apostle of Cuban independence, and, in

11

A/61/PV.50

doing so, he stained this glorious name of a man who
said that the war waged in Cuba for independence was
to prevent the imposition of United States control over
the islands of the Caribbean. Our delegation takes
offence at the use of the name of José Martí to justify
the embargo. I would remind the General Assembly,
and in particular the delegation of the United States,
that José Martí also said that trenches of ideas are more
valuable than trenches made of stone. It is trenches of
ideas that have made the noble, generous and heroic
people I represent here invincible.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like at the outset to associate my
country, the Syrian Arab Republic, with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of South
Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter underscore the right of States to
exercise sovereignty over their own territory and the
rule of non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States. All United Nations Member States, especially
the major Powers that contributed to the drafting of the
Charter and who themselves suffered the bitterness of
Nazi and fascist interference in their affairs and
encroachment on their sovereignty during the Second
World War, are expected to respect the Charter more
than other States, because the Charter is the
constitution of this Organization and its ultimate frame
of reference.
The unilateral embargo imposed by the United
States against Cuba and the new measures aimed at
tightening this embargo are in contradiction with the
Charter and the principles of international law, in
particular the principles of equal sovereignty among
States, non-interference in their internal affairs and free
international trade and navigation. Thus, the embargo
inevitably becomes illegal and contradicts the criteria
agreed on by the international community regarding
relations among States.
The embargo imposed against Cuba some 48
years ago set a precedent for unilateral behaviour by
Member States outside the framework of international
law. The embargo has subjected Cuba to economic,
political and social losses of every kind; it has
entrenched the suffering of the Cuban people,
especially children and the elderly; and it has had an
impact on the Cuban people’s intensive efforts to
achieve well-being and prosperity. The embargo

12

continues to harm the Cuban economy, which has
directly lost some $86 billion, in addition to tens of
billions of dollars in indirect losses. Moreover, the
embargo continues to harm the social and cultural
development of the Cuban people. It has also deprived
the Cuban people of the opportunities and benefits of
trade. The embargo directly violates the basic freedoms
and human rights of the Cuban people, including the
right to live in dignity and the right to development.
My delegation commends Cuba’s continued
efforts to conduct a constructive dialogue with the
United States of America in order to settle all issues
under dispute between the two countries on the basis of
equal sovereignty, mutual respect, non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, and respect for the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter
and for the principle of good-neighbourliness. My
delegation believes that normalization of relations
between the United States and Cuba would be in the
interest of the peoples of the two countries.
Syria underscores the right of peoples freely to
select their own political, economic, social and cultural
systems, in accordance with international law. The
support of 182 States for resolution 60/12 at the
previous session is a clear indication of the
determination of the overwhelming majority of the
international community to end the unjust embargo
imposed against Cuba and to emphasize the need to
respect the national political, economic and social
systems that every country selects of its own free will
in accordance with its own national interests.
In that regard, we would like to recall the Final
Document of the recent Conference of heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in
Havana. Heads of State or Government again called
upon the United States of America to put an end to the
unilateral economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba. It also expressed the concern of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement over the
widening of the embargo against Cuba and the
continuous new legislative measures aimed at
intensifying the embargo.
We would also like to recall the Doha
Declaration, adopted by the developing countries at the
Group of 77 and China’s Second South Summit, held
in Qatar in 2005, in which the Summit categorically
rejected laws and regulations with extraterritorial
impact and all other forms of coercive economic

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

measures. The Summit expressed grave concern over
the negative impact of economic sanctions on the
development capacity of targeted countries. It made a
special appeal in the name of all the leaders of the
developing countries for the immediate lifting of the
embargo against Cuba.
The international community has repeatedly
expressed its rejection of the unilateral sanctions against
Cuba and their extension by the so-called Helms-Burton
Act adopted by the United States. That act extends the
jurisdiction of United States national legislation and
encroaches on the sovereignty of other States that deal
with Cuba. This is incompatible with the principle of
the sovereign equality of States and with international
law. Syria also condemns the recent expansion of
aggressive United States policies against Cuba,
including through the threat of use of military force, in
clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
Despite all the previous appeals by the General
Assembly over the past 15 years, the United States
Government has not yet taken any steps to respond to
the will of the international community. Moreover, the
United States intentionally and stubbornly continues its
incorrect disregard for the legitimate requests of the
international community.
Furthermore, the United States has imposed new
measures to tighten the embargo on independent,
sovereign Cuba. The behaviour of the United States of
America and the measures it takes pose a clear threat to
the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Cuba; this directly threatens stability in the
region and constitutes a blatant threat to international
peace and security.
The Security Council and the General Assembly,
in accordance with their mandates, are called upon to
take all necessary measures to put an end to the
embargo, the economic sanctions and the hostile
policies and measures of the United States both against
its neighbouring countries and against other Member
States geographically distant from the United States. In
that regard, my delegation hopes that all elements of
the embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba will be lifted and that the international
community’s voice, as expressed by the General
Assembly and other bodies, will be heeded and
complied with by the United States. My country, Syria,
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.

06-60788

Mr. Raghavan (India): We associate ourselves
with the statement made by South Africa on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China. The embargo and sanctions
imposed by the United States against Cuba have been
in place for over four decades and have been a subject
of discussion in the General Assembly for 15
successive sessions.
The embargo has had an impact on Cuban efforts
to eradicate poverty, improve livelihoods and promote
socio-economic development. It has also hindered the
full enjoyment of human rights, such as the right to
development, and the right to food, medical care and
social services which, despite these constraints, are of
a high order.
The American Association for World Health
concluded that with regard to its impact on the Cuban
health system, the embargo caused a significant rise in
suffering, with patients going without essential drugs,
or doctors performing medical procedures without
adequate equipment. The embargo also continued to
have an impact on food aid deliveries. The negative
impact of the embargo in the educational sector is
linked to trade restrictions that prevent the purchase of
needed imports at more competitive prices.
The embargo and sanctions have limited Cuba’s
access to markets, capital, technology and investment
and are not in conformity with multilateral trading
regimes and cannot be justified even under the
“essential security interests” exception clause of the
World Trade Organization’s General Agreement on
Trade in Services.
Under normal conditions, Cuba and the United
States would be natural economic partners, benefiting
mutually from trade. It is our understanding that a
considerable part of United States businesses would
like to take advantage of the Cuban market. Imports of
United States food and agricultural products, which
account for 13 per cent of total Cuban imports of food
and agricultural products, reflects the impact of the
United States legislation enacted in 2000 that eased
food and medical sanctions against Cuba. According to
some estimates, the potential loss to United States
business ranges between $1 billion to $15 billion.
The General Assembly has rejected laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other
forms of economic coercion. The Assembly has
adopted resolutions urging all countries to comply with
the Charter and principles enshrined in legal

13

A/61/PV.50

instruments and to repeal or invalidate all laws and
measures that carry extraterritorial effects, bearing on
the sovereignty of other States, the legitimate rights
and interest of peoples or entities under their
jurisdiction, and the freedom of trade and navigation.
Sanctions, irrespective of their purpose, have to
comply with the international legal principles of nonintervention and proportionality.
We share the view expressed by the countries
which have reiterated their opposition to the
extraterritorial aspect of the economic embargo that
was implemented in accordance with the 1992 Cuban
Democracy Act (the so-called “Torricelli Law”), and
the 1996 Helms-Burton Act, through which the
extraterritorial reach of the embargo encompasses
foreign companies as well as foreign subsidiaries of
United States companies doing business with Cuba.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
India, one of the largest democracies in the
world, has consistently opposed any unilateral
measures by countries which impinge on the
sovereignty of another country, including any attempt
to extend the application of a country’s laws
extraterritorially to other sovereign nations. India
believes that efforts to consolidate endeavours in
creating and strengthening an economic environment
capable of providing equal opportunities to all
countries are required and that the international
community needs to redouble its efforts to have an
environment free from sanctions and embargoes.
Mr. Gharibi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, my delegation would like to fully associate
itself with the statement made by the representative of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
There is no doubt that the blockade is in violation
of the internationally agreed principles governing
relations among States, such as the sovereign equality
of States, non-intervention in their internal affairs, and
freedom of international trade and navigation. As my
delegation has reiterated in previous statements,
unilateral coercive economic policies and measures
should be regarded as major impediments to the
international community in pursuing its common
causes and interests. Such measures run counter to the
promotion of cooperation and partnerships which is
required for the creation of a favourable environment
for the benefit of all at the international level.

14

The reports of the Cuban Government on the
impact of the embargo clearly indicate that such
unilateral measures have been conducive to further
disparities in the areas of health, economy, education
and training, trade, tourism, civil aviation, and even
cultural activities. The adoption of 14 consecutive
resolutions up to 2005 by the United Nations General
Assembly is the reaction of the international
community to such measures.
These resolutions call upon all States to refrain
from applying laws and measures of this kind and take
necessary steps to repeal or invalidate them as soon as
possible. The reason is crystal clear. Resorting to
embargo as a tool to achieve political objectives
undermines the collective efforts of Member States for
achieving
economic
growth
and
sustainable
development at national, regional and international
levels.
I would also like to recall that the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation called upon States to refrain
from any unilateral measure as contravening
international law and the United Nations Charter, and
as impeding the full achievement of economic and
social development by the population of the affected
countries, in particular women and children.
The Johannesburg Plan also indicates that such
unilateral measures hinder the well-being of the
affected people and create obstacles to the full
enjoyment of their human rights, including the right of
everyone to a standard of living adequate for their
health and well-being, a right to food, medical care and
necessary social services.
The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation also
stipulates that States should cooperate to promote a
supportive and open international economic system
that would lead to economic growth and sustainable
development in all countries. It adds that trade policy
measures for environmental purposes should not
constitute a means of arbitrary unjustifiable
discrimination in international trade.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution
60/1) reaffirmed the commitment of all countries to
ensure that developing countries participate fully in the
world trading system in order to meet the needs of their
economic development. The Summit of the NonAligned Movement, held in September 2006 in
Havana, Cuba, reiterated its position on this issue. The
Summit called upon the Government of the United

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

States of America to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba,
which, in addition to being unilateral and contrary to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, international law and the principle of goodneighbourliness, is causing huge material losses and
economic damage to the people of Cuba.
My delegation believes that resorting to
unjustifiable economic coercive measures against other
States on the basis of political criteria is not acceptable
to the international community. The extraterritorial
application of internal laws creates an antagonistic
environment in international relations and adversely
affects world peace and security. Such political acts
with economic implications continue to restrict
investment, trade, employment, technology transfer
and the prospects for economic growth not only of the
targeted countries but also of other countries.
We hope that those Member States which
continue to apply unilateral coercive economic laws
and measures will take the necessary steps to repeal or
invalidate them at the earliest opportunity.
Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of South
Africa on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We
would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report (A/61/132) on this
subject.
Since the initiation of resolutions on this item 15
years ago, the international community has
continuously demonstrated that it rejects the use of
unilateral measures by one Member of this
Organization to effect political change in another. The
fact that last year 182 countries supported resolution
60/12, as compared to the 179 that supported resolution
59/11 in 2004, may be taken to be an indication of the
unwavering, and indeed strengthening, position of the
international community in this regard.
Laws, particularly extraterritorial legislation,
such as the Torricelli and the Helms-Burton Acts, have
been formulated by the United States with the sole
purpose of hurting Cuba and its people, including the
most vulnerable segments of the population. It is clear
that, by limiting Cuba’s access to markets, capital,
technology and investment, these laws exert pressure
on Cuba to change its political and economic

06-60788

orientation, which, the United States hopes, will in turn
bring about regime change in Cuba.
It is also clear that these laws, by virtue of their
extraterritorial and unilateral nature, clearly contravene
universally accepted principles of international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations.
Furthermore, the embargo is also inconsistent with the
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation Among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. Given the illegal nature of these laws and the
embargo, Malaysia is fundamentally opposed to them.
This unilateral embargo clearly has had serious
consequences for the Cuban people and their economy.
It has been estimated that, for last year alone, direct
economic damage caused by the unilateral embargo
was to the tune of $4.2 billion. Cumulative damages to
the Cuban economy have been estimated to be in the
region of $86.1 billion. In addition, the unilateral
embargo is a serious obstacle to the full enjoyment of
the rights of the Cuban people to life, health, food and
education, to name but a few.
But the damage is not confined to Cuba alone.
The embargo is detrimental to the interests of other
countries, such as Malaysia, which adheres to the
principle of friendly relations among countries.
Certainly, efforts to exploit fully the potential benefits
arising from stronger and deeper bilateral relations
between Malaysia and Cuba have been stymied by the
imposition of this measure.
Ironically, the imposition of these laws is also
detrimental to the way in which the international
community at large views the United States. It gives
the impression that the United States is willing to
continuously act in contravention of international law
and global public opinion against a country that poses
no direct threat to it. It reduces the United States’
moral clout on issues that are important to them and to
many other countries, including Malaysia. These issues
include free and fair trade, as well as the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
As a country that enjoys excellent bilateral
relations with both the United States and Cuba, we
would like to urge the former to look beyond the
confines of vested interests, rethink its overall
approach towards Cuba and evolve its policy from one

15

A/61/PV.50

of isolating its smaller neighbour to one of dialogue
and accommodation.
Malaysia once again reaffirms its strongest
commitment to respect fully the principles of
international law. For this reason, and for the practical
reasons outlined earlier, Malaysia will continue to
reaffirm its solidarity with the Cuban people by
supporting and, once again, voting in favour of the
draft resolution (A/61/L.10) on this subject.
Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): My delegation
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
My delegation has come here again for what has,
over the past 15 years, become virtually an annual
judicial pilgrimage to vote in favour of draft resolution
A/61/L.10, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba” — or rather to
pass a verdict on the Torricelli and Helms-Burton Acts.
These Acts have been sentenced to judicial death many
times in the past. Why have they not been executed or
scrapped from the law books? Experts are unanimous
in their belief that those Acts not only contradict
international law but also cannot stand the test of time
in terms of the United States of America’s own legal
tradition.
There is a striking consensus among the
developed and developing countries. Many countries
went out of their way to enact laws that would militate
against the impact of the Helms-Burton Act. In
democratic societies, if a law is as unpopular as the
ones that gave rise to the draft resolution that we are
debating today, it is common practice to either repeal
or amend it. The irony of those Acts is that they keep
on coming back, with a vengeance, extending their
provisions to new areas. But that does not make them
acceptable.
Namibia will today vote in favour of this draft
resolution — not only as an expression of solidarity
with the people of Cuba but above all in defence of the
sovereignty of so many nations on which the terms of
the embargo encroaches.
Namibia is committed to the principle of freer
trade and the movement of the factors of production
internationally. The world order we are working
towards is underpinned by the greater participation of

16

all countries, in particular developing countries, in the
global economy, by increasing their share of world
trade and access to capital flows. We cannot associate
ourselves with a law or initiative that goes against that
trend.
Namibia believes in the autonomy of market
forces to do business anywhere, on the basis of
commercial viability. We do not believe in undue
political interference in the market place. In fact, the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba represents unjustifiable interference, having
raised the cost of doing business not only with Cuba,
but also in third countries. This is a threat to a healthy
business environment. How many countries did not
have to incur costs to pass domestic legislation to
prevent the application of the Helms-Burton Act?
Namibia is equally concerned with the impact of
the embargo against Cuba on the plight of the poor.
Any hardship imposed on a people, whether by natural
calamities or politics, affects the poor and vulnerable
groups in any society. That is certainly true of Cuba.
However, the embargo is a blow not only to the poor in
Cuba, but also in Africa and Latin America.
Let us put ourselves in the position in the poor in
many African villages where the only doctor is from
Cuba. I cannot help but go back some 30 years to the
small town of Arusha, in Tanzania, where I needed
dental attention and where the only dentist was from
Cuba. Did anybody ask himself or herself what the
impact would be of the withdrawal of Cuban doctors
from many African countries? Cuba, notwithstanding
its own challenges, has been and continues to be an
important partner of many African countries in the
struggle against poverty. The embargo has had much
further-reaching implications than one would imagine.
It is important that the embargo be brought to an
end, because it is politically unjustifiable,
commercially costly and antidevelopment. It is against
that background that my delegation urges the United
States Government to heed the international call and to
implement the General Assembly resolutions. It is in
the interests of all of us, including the Governments of
the United States and Cuba, that measures be taken to
normalize relations between the two countries.
Mr. Mombo (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of South Africa on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

Today marks the fifteenth year since this item
was introduced into the General Assembly agenda for
deliberation. The economic embargo imposed on the
Government and people of Cuba is in its forty-eighth
year — one of the longest in contemporary times.
As in the past, the Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania takes the floor to join other
Member States in calling for the lifting of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo
unilaterally imposed against Cuba. The country has
endured the embargo valiantly but at a forbidding cost.
The embargo, as we all know, has been
particularly damaging to the Cuban population,
particularly the most vulnerable category: women,
children and the elderly. It need not be so. The
embargo needs to be terminated.
Like many other countries, we are concerned that
the sanctions imposed under the Helms-Burton Act
exceed the jurisdiction of national legislation and
encroach on the sovereignty of other States that deal
with Cuba. We therefore deem the Act to be
incompatible with the principle of the sovereign
equality of States. The embargo is a systematic
collective punishment in violation of human rights and
international law. It runs counter to all prevailing moral
and ethical values, as innocent people suffer. The
extraterritorial nature of the embargo continues to
cause considerable damage to Cuba as well as to third
countries, which are prevented from taking full
advantage of the opportunities offered by the Cuban
economy.
Tanzania reaffirms its continued support to and
cooperation and solidarity with the people of Cuba and
supports the draft resolution being submitted for
adoption by this Assembly.
In view of the fact that the embargo has caused
significant suffering to the people of Cuba, we call on
the United States Government to end it and normalize
relations with Cuba in the interests of all the people of
Cuba and of the United States of America. That may
prove to be the most constructive way of reconciling
decades old differences and promote a positive spin-off
for the region and the world.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Australia to introduce the
amendment to draft resolution A/61/L.10, contained in
document A/61/L.19.

06-60788

Mr. Hill (Australia): In every session since 1982,
the Assembly has consistently adopted resolutions on
the necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. Australia, in common with the
overwhelming majority of Member States, has
supported those resolutions for many years. Australia
believes that the trade embargo of Cuba is wrong and
should be lifted immediately for the benefit of the
people of Cuba and of the rules-based international
trading system, which we strongly support.
Having said that, we recognize the reasons that
motivated the embargo — concerns valid then and still
valid today — about the lack of political freedom and a
failure to meet internal human rights obligations by the
Government of Cuba. In the past, we, as well as others,
have made explanations of vote detailing our concerns
about such human rights situations, but to no avail.
Year after year, there have been those who have made
such statements, but it has not led to change.
There is simply no point in repeating the same
practice year after year. Therefore, this year we
propose a different approach — that the General
Assembly adopt an amended resolution that, on the one
hand, calls for an end to the embargo but, on the other
hand calls upon Cuba to improve its human rights
performance. This can be done through the adoption of
an amendment that we circulated yesterday and that is
now being distributed as draft amendment A/61/L.19.
It would insert a new operative paragraph after
operative paragraph 3.
It reads:
“Noting that such laws and measures were
motivated by valid concerns about the continued
lack of democracy and political freedom in Cuba,
calls upon the Cuban Government to release
unconditionally all political prisoners, cooperate
fully with international human rights bodies and
mechanisms, respect the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and comply fully with its
obligations and all human rights treaties to which
it is a State party.”
The advantage is that the General Assembly has
the opportunity for a win-win outcome, saying that we
want to see an end to the embargo but also saying that
the people of Cuba, who do not have the opportunity of
free political expression, deserve better.

17

A/61/PV.50

The price of speaking up and asking for nothing
more than is reasonable is to be abused by the Cuban
Minister with false allegations and offensive language.
It is no wonder others are not prepared to take such
actions, but it does underline the necessity for an
amendment of this type.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of Cuba, who wishes to
speak on a point of order.
Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
As the Foreign Minister of Cuba has already stated, we
would like to put forward a no-action motion regarding
the amendment contained in document A/61/L.19
under rule 74 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
The amendment to draft resolution A/61/L.10,
drafted by the United States and submitted by
Australia, is contrary to the letter and the spirit of the
successive resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly that have demanded the lifting of the unjust
and illegal embargo against the people of Cuba. The
draft amendment, far from facilitating compliance with
the rightful demand by the international community
that an end be put to such an extraterritorial policy,
which clearly contravenes the norms and principles of
international law, is but a pretext to continue and
intensify the unilateral embargo by the United States
against the people of Cuba.
If the Bush Administration and Governments
subordinate to its imperialist policy against the Cuba
nation had any genuine concern regarding human rights
in our country, they should have addressed it in the
Third Committee or the Human Rights Council. But
they do not dare to hold a face-to-face debate on this
subject. What is being attempted today is to legitimize
a supposed right of the powerful to impose unilateral
coercive measures that contravene international law,
using any pretext available.
What is at stake today is the defence of the norms
and principles of international law and the protection
of multilateralism against the dominance of force and
injustice.
Guided by our firm conviction that even to
consider the amendment put forward by Australia at the
urging of the United States would be to go against the
very basis of international relations, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, Cuba reiterates that it

18

has decided to put forward a no-action motion on the
proposed amendment contained in document
A/61/L.19, under rule 74 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Cuba requests that the Assembly consider this noaction motion and requests all States to support it.
Cuba further requests a recorded vote in this respect.
The Acting President: The representative of
Cuba has moved, within the terms of rule 74 of the
rules of procedure, that no action be taken on the
amendment contained in document A/61/L.19.
Rule 74 reads as follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
Mr. Godard (United States of America): The
annual General Assembly resolution condemning the
United States bilateral embargo against Cuba
inaccurately attributes the suffering of the Cuban
people to the embargo. The resolution does not speak
at all to the adverse impact on the Cuban people of the
Cuban Government’s own policies, which deny them
basic human, labour, political and economic rights.
This year we believe it is especially important for
the international community to speak up on behalf of
the Cuban people and recognize that the best hope for
improving the lives of the Cuban people is for the
regime to pursue a transition to democracy and allow
the Cuban people full enjoyment of their human,
economic, labour and political rights.
We oppose this no-action motion in order to help
preserve the General Assembly as a meaningful forum
in which to address human rights issues. No-action
motions, which encourage the United Nations to turn a
blind eye to even the most egregious violators of
human rights, undermine the effectiveness of this body.
It is not in our collective interest for the General
Assembly to be seen as the protector and apologist of
regimes that abuse human rights.
We will vote against this motion and urge other
delegations to do the same.

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): The delegation of
Cuba has put forward a no-action motion. Let me
reiterate that, when South Africa spoke on behalf of the
Group of 77, we stated that, at the thirtieth annual
Group of 77 and China ministerial meeting, the G-77
ministers firmly rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other
forms of coercive economic measures, including
unilateral sanctions against developing countries, and
reiterated the urgent need to eliminate them
immediately. They emphasized the fact that such
actions not only undermine the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
but also severely threaten freedom of trade and of
investment. They therefore called on the international
community to neither recognize those measures nor to
apply them.
The amendment proposed by the delegation of
Australia is not acceptable to the South African
delegation, because it asks of us to abdicate our
responsibility of defining our own democracy and what
constitutes political freedom. The amendment notes
that such laws and measures were motivated by valid
concerns about the continued lack of democracy and
political freedom in Cuba. Surely, if we are to abdicate
our responsibility to define what constitutes democracy
and what constitutes political freedom vested in one
State and also to vest any State with the right to pass
extraterritorial laws, that will certainly not be a winwin situation for the Assembly, but a lose-lose
situation. For that reason, South Africa will vote in
favour of a no action motion.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The contents of Australia’s amendment are not new to
us. It distorts the purpose of draft resolution A/61/L.10.
Since 1992 the General Assembly has been adopting
consecutive resolutions urging countries concerned to
end the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba. That fully reflects the preponderant view
of the international community on the issue.
We believe the General Assembly should reject
the amendment. Therefore, the Chinese delegation is in
favour of Cuba’s motion to take no action on the
Australian amendment.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Not surprisingly, I am
opposed to the motion of no action, and I respectfully
suggest that there is a confusion between the merits of

06-60788

the amendment I have moved and the right to have it
debated.
The representative of South Africa has just
argued that each of us has the right to define our own
democracy. That might be so, but each of us is also
obliged to comply with the terms of the Charter, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the major
conventions to which we are party. The amendment I
am seeking to have debated in effect calls upon Cuba
to do just that.
I would suggest that a failure to appreciate the
linkage between the embargo as it is now in place and
Cuba’s failure to meet its international obligations
under the Human Rights Convention is a failure to
accept reality. There is, in fact, a clear linkage. We are
prepared to put the case forward for our amendment if
we are given the opportunity. But to not be permitted
that opportunity in this Hall of debate, I would
respectfully argue, is not to be given the opportunity to
look at the totality of the issue. The totality of the issue
is clearly whether there is merit in the embargo. That
calls into play the issue of Cuba’s human rights record,
and therefore a debate upon that would determine how
nation States might be prepared to vote on the
embargo.
We would argue that there is a linkage, that the
issue of Cuba’s human rights record is important and
that it could be debated in the Third Committee, as was
suggested by the representative of Cuba. We take that
suggestion on board. But it is also possible to seek to
amend other relevant motions to give the Assembly the
opportunity to debate an issue of such importance. We
are taking that opportunity today.
I remind the Assembly that all we are asking is
that it call upon the Cuban Government to release
unconditionally all political prisoners, to cooperate
fully with international human rights bodies and
mechanisms and to respect the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and to comply fully with its
obligations under all human rights treaties to which it
is a State party.
We are not calling upon Cuba to in any other way
to meet an obligation for which it might have
discretion. We are simply calling upon it to meet the
obligations that we all accept, and on that basis to
justify the removal of the embargo and to give all of us
greater comfort in supporting the removal of the

19

A/61/PV.50

embargo as addressed in the draft resolution before us
today.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
heard two delegations speaking in favour and two
delegations speaking against the motion put forward by
Cuba.
In accordance with the rules of procedure I shall
now put to the vote the motion submitted by the
representative of Cuba to take no action on the
amendment thereto contained in document A/61/L.19.
In submitting its motion, the representative of Cuba
also requested that a recorded vote be taken.
The Assembly will now vote on the motion put
forward by Cuba not to take action on the amendment
contained in document A/61/L.19.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad
and
Tobago,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United

20

Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Moldova,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Kiribati,
Tonga

Liechtenstein,

Samoa,

Switzerland,

The motion for no action was adopted by 126
votes to 51, with 5 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Benin informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Since the motion for no
action has been adopted, no action will be taken on the
amendment contained in document A/61/L.19. We will
therefore proceed to consider draft resolution
A/61/L.10.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the vote, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Iceland,
Moldova, Montenegro, Norway, Romania, Serbia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and
Ukraine align themselves with this explanation of vote.
Regarding the no-action motion, the European
Union voted against, on the basis of the EU’s long-

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

standing opposition to the use of no-action motions,
which it considers contrary to the spirit of dialogue.
As for the substance of this issue, the European
Union believes that the United States trade policy
towards Cuba is fundamentally a bilateral issue.
Nevertheless, the EU and its member States have
clearly expressed their opposition to the extraterritorial
extension of the United States embargo, such as that
provided for in the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and
the Helms-Burton Act of 1996.
The European Union cannot accept the fact that
unilateral measures imposed by the United States on
specific countries limit the Union’s economic and
commercial relations with third countries — in this
case, Cuba. Therefore, in November 1996, the Council
of Ministers of the European Union adopted a
regulation and joint action to protect the interests of
natural or legal persons resident in the EU against the
extraterritorial effects of the Helms-Burton legislation,
prohibiting compliance with that legislation.
Moreover, on 18 May 1998, at the European
Union-United States Summit in London, a package was
agreed upon that included waivers to Titles III and IV
of the Helms-Burton Act, a commitment by the United
States Administration to resist future extraterritorial
legislation of that kind, and an Understanding with
Respect to Disciplines for the Strengthening of
Investment Protection. The EU continues to urge the
United States to implement its side of the 18 May 1998
Understanding.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba is
clear and was set out in a Common Position in 1996.
The objective of the EU in its relations with Cuba is to
encourage a pacific process of transition, led by the
Cuban people, to pluralist democracy and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as to
sustainable economic recovery and improvement in the
living standards of the Cuban people. The European
Union underlines that it is willing to cooperate with
Cuba in those fields on the basis of a dialogue with the
Cuban Government and Cuban civil society as soon as
the Government shows the political will to engage in a
dialogue aimed at tangible results, especially in the
field of human rights. Member States most recently
reaffirmed their commitment to that Common Position
on 12 June 2006.
The European Union believes that critical
engagement with the Cuban Government, alongside

06-60788

dialogue with wider Cuban civil society, is the most
effective way to promote peaceful change in Cuba.
However, the EU considers that full cooperation with
Cuba will depend upon improvements in the areas of
human rights and political freedom in that country. The
EU remains deeply concerned about the human rights
situation in Cuba.
The EU also remains deeply concerned about
cases in which representatives of the peaceful
opposition and of civil society have been intimidated
and harassed in order to repress critical voices. In
addition, family members of political prisoners have
been victims of so-called acts of repudiation. There
remain prisoners who have been neither charged nor
tried, and people suspected of sympathizing with the
banned political opposition have been detained and
sentenced under the provisions of the Penal Code on
“pre-delictive dangerousness”. The EU urges the
Cuban Government to unconditionally release all
political prisoners and to refrain from carrying out acts
against members of their families. We appeal to the
Cuban authorities to cooperate fully with international
human rights bodies and mechanisms — especially the
Personal Representative of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in
Cuba.
The Cuban Government’s achievements in health
care and education are undermined by its restrictions
on civil, political and economic rights. The domestic
Cuban economic policy and the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
seriously hamper the economic development of Cuba,
negatively affecting the standards of living of the
Cuban people.
With regard to the United States of America, we
express our rejection of all unilateral measures against
Cuba that are contrary to commonly accepted rules of
international trade, and reiterate our view that the
lifting of the United States trade embargo would open
Cuba’s economy, to the benefit of the Cuban people.
With regard to Cuba, the European Union urges the
Cuban authorities to bring about real improvements in
all the fields that I have mentioned.
For all of those reasons, and despite its serious
criticism of Cuba’s human rights record, the European
Union will unanimously vote in favour of draft
resolution A/61/L.10.

21

A/61/PV.50

Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the position that it is inadmissible to carry
out unilateral measures of an extraterritorial nature in
international relations. We believe that in today’s
world, any attempt to isolate individual countries is
counterproductive. Russia, like the absolute majority of
United Nations Member States, decisively condemns
the United States embargo against Cuba and favours a
swift lifting of that embargo.
At every session of the General Assembly since
1994, Russia has supported resolutions entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. We are convinced that ending
the embargo and normalizing the relations between the
United States and Cuba would generally help to
improve the situation in Cuba and further integrate the
country into global economic processes.
Guided by those considerations, and expressing
solidarity with the will repeatedly expressed by the
overwhelming majority of Member States, Russia
believes it is essential to support the draft resolution
requiring a lifting of the embargo and normalization of
the relations between the United States and Cuba,
which would serve the interests of the peoples of Cuba
and the United States and have a positive effect on the
overall situation in the region of Central America and
the Caribbean and the world as a whole. Therefore, we
will once again vote in favour of the draft resolution at
the present session of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
The Assembly will now proceed to take action on
draft resolution A/61/L.10. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,

22

Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan,
Kenya,
Kiribati,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Moldova,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution A/61/L.10 was adopted by 183
votes to 4, with 1 abstention (resolution 61/11).

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
I would like to remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tarrago (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the countries members
of MERCOSUR — Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay,
Venezuela and Brazil — and the associated States
Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
As has been our practice in previous years, the
countries members of MERCOSUR and the associated
States voted in favour of the resolution that has just
been adopted. The General Assembly reaffirms the
need to end the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed against Cuba. The international
community reaffirms its support for multilateralism
and its rejection of unilateral coercive measures.
The message is clear. The embargo against Cuba
is contrary to the principles of international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter, to which we are
all committed. Nor is it in conformity with the
multilateral rules of trade or the legal obligations of the
members of the World Trade Organization.
The extraterritorial application of domestic laws
does not contribute to the promotion of democratic
values or to dialogue among sovereign States. On the
contrary, it can lead to increased polarization and
confrontation. The embargo has been rejected by the
General Assembly, as well as by other international
forums and bodies, including the Organization of
American States, the Latin American Economic
System, the Ibero-American Summit and the Rio
Group.
The countries of MERCOSUR and the associated
States joined in the rejection by the international
community of the promulgation and implementation of
such unilateral coercive and extraterritorial measures.
Our countries have demonstrated once more their
support for multilateralism as the only just and
effective way of resolving disputes among States and
promoting understanding, security, human rights and
cooperation.
Mr. Abdalhaleem (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the

06-60788

representative of South Africa, who spoke on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
For more than four decades, the Cuban people
have been suffering as a result of the devastating
effects of the embargo imposed unilaterally by the
United States against their country. That is a flagrant
violation of the principles of the Charter, which calls
for anchoring the values of cooperation, equality,
fraternity, justice and solidarity, as well as respect for
peoples’ freedom of choice. Consolidation of the
principles of the rule of law, rejection of oppression
and hegemony, respect for human rights, in particular
the right to development, are all at the very heart of our
Organization’s mission, and all Member States should
seek to strengthen them.
For the fifteenth consecutive year, the General
Assembly has considered the item entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”. Today, 183 countries voted in favour of
the draft resolution, which seeks to end the embargo,
thus making absolutely clear how serious it is when a
country arrogates to itself the right to impose unilateral
sanctions. The embargo against Cuba is unjust and
constitutes a violation of the fundamental principles of
the Charter, as well as of the rules of international law
and the principles that govern and organize economic,
trade and financial relations among countries.
The continuation of the embargo runs counter to
the reform effort that is now under way in the United
Nations, and represents a denial of the unanimity of the
Member States regarding the need to promote and to
translate into reality the principles underlying that
effort to replace confrontation with cooperation and
respect for the right of peoples to choose their own
political, economic and social systems.
Despite the fact that the international community
has constantly reaffirmed the need to end the embargo,
the Cuban people are continuing to suffer greatly.
Indeed, their suffering increased last year as a result of
the tightening of the embargo, which is now
extraterritorial in nature. Restrictions against financial
transactions of Cuban citizens and of their moneys
have been further tightened in a draconian manner.
Attempts are now being made to deter foreign
investors, banks and corporations from establishing
commercial and financial relations with Cuba. All of
that is happening in blatant disregard of the will of the

23

A/61/PV.50

international
resolutions.

community

and

General

Assembly

positive response to the will of the majority here
represented.

Since 1997, my country too has been suffering
because of unilateral economic sanctions as a result of
such unjustifiable policies, as have other countries. In
the Sudan, we know full well the seriousness of such
measures and their terrible and cruel consequences. We
very much understand the losses suffered by Cuba and
the magnitude of suffering inflicted on the Cuban
people because of the embargo. We would like to take
this opportunity to reaffirm our solidarity with the
friendly people and Government of Cuba. We reaffirm
our rejection of those measures and call upon the
Cuban people to continue to resist them, as well as to
continue their remarkable achievements in all areas
through the multilateral system, which we have all
chosen as the framework for joint action.

The embargo and the sanctions imposed by the
United States on Cuba, which have been in place for
over 40 years, have an impact, on the one hand, on the
legitimate endeavours of the Cuban people to find their
own course and their own mechanisms to achieve
development and yet seek paradoxically, on the other
hand, through such coercive measures of a unilateral
nature, to promote democracy, freedom and human
rights in Cuba.

The Sudan’s position regarding these policies is
based on firm principle. We are resolute in standing
against any policies of embargo and against exclusion
and hegemonic policies. We therefore voted in favour
of draft resolution A/61/L.10, submitted by Cuba,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”. We would like
to thank the States that voted in favour of the draft
resolution for having expressed their strong rejection
of unilateral measures that violate the principles of the
Charter and of international law.
Mr. Loayza Barea (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
As we have done for more than 10 years, we in the
General Assembly continue to discuss the need to bring
to an end the financial and trade embargo against the
fraternal people and Government of Cuba, but without
success. As a result of this continuous action at the
level of multilateral diplomacy, a series of resolutions
have been adopted, urging all States to adhere to the
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
principles embodied in international legal instruments
and to repeal all laws and other extraterritorial
measures impacting on the sovereignty of other States
and their legitimate interests, as well as the freedom of
trade and navigation.
Unfortunately, we see that the decision taken by
the international community has come up against a
unilateral decision in favour of the embargo, which is
contrary to democratic principles and fails to offer a

24

We feel strongly that this attitude fails to meet
either the principles or the sentiments of the majority
of countries within the United Nations system. These
actions are contrary to the principles of freedom and
democracy and in addition impact the human rights of
the people of Cuba. The way in which these principles
are being used demonstrates a distortion of their goals
and purpose.
Bolivia constantly seeks, from a sovereign and
dignified position, to maintain relations of friendship
and cooperation with the United States. We urge the
United States Government to review and end this
policy, which has met the condemnation and opposition
of the international community and gives rise to
constant concern in Latin America as a result of the
negative impacts on Cuba, on its people and on the
region.
We firmly believe that the international
community has made clear its concern regarding the
embargo in that it is contrary to the principles of the
United Nations Charter and because of the negative
impact on the Cuban people, depriving them of their
right to goods and to free movement and of access to
medicines and components for manufacturing
medicines among other things. We identify with the
will of the international community in this demand that
an immediate end be brought to the embargo against
Cuba. We are of the view that the mechanisms of a fair
international system based on international law and on
treaties allow for a coexistence that accommodates
contradictions and differences but rejects hostile
confrontations.
The differences in systems and views of States
should be resolved through cooperation and dialogue
on a basis of equality and mutual respect. Moreover,
Bolivia has had personal experience with the
significant difficulties that developing countries daily

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

face in implementing policies intended to achieve and
promote the welfare of our populations. Therefore, we
understand and express our solidarity with the people
of Cuba and its Government, which are suffering as the
result of a policy that hampers the development to
which all nations are entitled.
We urge the United States Government to replace
confrontation
with
dialogue,
sanctions
with
communication and effectively implement the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations in this regard.
Bolivia firmly opposes these sanctions and the
economic and financial embargo. We support the
Cubans in seeking to protect their national
independence and their sovereignty and we echo the
words of Brazil on behalf of the Rio Group. For those
reasons, we have voted for the draft resolution.
Mr. Swe (Myanmar): The international
community has consistently expressed its unequivocal
support for the call to end the economic, commercial
and financial embargo by the United States against
Cuba, since the General Assembly adopted resolution
47/19 by a clear majority 15 years ago. The Summit
Conference of the Heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement held in Havana last September
also reiterated its call to the Government of the United
States of America to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba.
Myanmar strongly believes that the promulgation
and application by Member States of laws and
regulations, the extraterritorial effects of which effect
the sovereignty of other States and the legitimate
interests of entities and persons under their
jurisdiction, as well as the freedom of trade and the
freedom of navigation, violate both the spirit and letter
of the United Nations Charter and the universally
accepted principles of international law. Accordingly,
Myanmar opposes all forms of unilateral, economic
and financial coercive measures, as well as sanctions
and embargos that are contrary to international law.
Myanmar, as one of the initiators of the five principles
of peaceful coexistence, scrupulously respects the
principle of sovereign equality of all States, nonintervention and non-interference in the internal affairs
of countries.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States on Cuba has not only
negatively impacted the economy of the country, but
also adversely affected the well-being of the people.

06-60788

The embargo is aimed at destroying the political,
economic and social system of the Cuban people. The
blockage imposed on the health centre in particular is
causing undue suffering and hardship to the Cuban
people, particularly the most vulnerable segment
among the population — women and children. We
regard this as inhumane and strongly oppose such
measures.
These measures can in no way promote peace and
stability in the region. These measures are against
international law. Myanmar wholeheartedly associates
itself with the call by the international community on
the United States to bring an end to the embargo and
sanctions on Cuba. My delegation, therefore, voted in
favour of the draft resolution to reaffirm our opposition
to laws and regulations that have extraterritorial effect
and to demonstrate our friendship with the Government
and people of Cuba.
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): The fact that the
General Assembly continues to debate and pass
resolutions year after year on the same issue, calling
for similar action, without being heeded, is ample
testimony to the shortcomings of the dispute settlement
mechanisms of the United Nations system. The
resolution on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial blockade on Cuba has
enjoyed overwhelming support over the years. It is
now time for the United States Government to take
bold and positive steps to open up to the people of
Cuba, restore the confidence of millions of people
around the world in the United Nations system and
rekindle that hope that was sparked by the adoption of
the Charter of the United Nations many decades ago.
My country, Zimbabwe, understands only too
well the negative impact of such ill-conceived,
illegitimate and immoral measures on the lives of
ordinary people, as it is also a victim of such illegal
measures.
The majority of States Members of the United
Nations, including Zimbabwe, have consistently
rejected the adoption of national laws and regulations
with extraterritorial impact, and all other coercive
economic measures, including unilateral sanctions,
which are targeted mainly against developing countries
that seek to reassert their sovereignty.
The destiny of Cuba lies with the Cuban people,
whose right it is to choose an economic and social
system of their own choice that best suits their

25

A/61/PV.50

circumstances. Is it not ironic that the leading
advocates of free trade have become, at the same time,
champions of blockades in a vile game of double
standards? The persistence of the United States
Government in that practice, which harms the
livelihoods of innocent people, also undermines all
development efforts aimed at achieving the Millennium
Development Goals and all other internationally agreed
development goals.
Not only is the embargo imposed by the United
States Government on Cuba a violation of international
law and the principles of the United Nations Charter; it
also runs contrary to the letter and spirit of the
principles of the World Trade Organization (WTO)
aimed at achieving freer trade. The United States and
Cuba are both members of the WTO.
The Secretary-General’s report makes it clear that
the United States embargo on Cuba has denied that
country access to markets, development credit granted
by international financial institutions, and technology,
and that it has further restricted freedom of navigation,
trade and remittances to beneficiaries in that country.
My delegation therefore voted, in solidarity with
the Government and people of Cuba, in favour of the
resolution.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): For
the fifteenth year in a row, the General Assembly has
called almost unanimously for an immediate end to the
embargo on Cuba. Each year, we have seen an increase
in the number of countries in favour of that goal. The
international community has long understood that
economic wars, like any other action undertaken on a
false pretext, do not yield positive results. They lead
only to destruction.

to focus on real, rather than spurious international
problems, the sooner order will reign in the world and
people will come to believe in the future.
Belarus is proud once again to take this
opportunity to add its voice to the demands to end the
embargo on the Cuban people. We are happy to stand
with Cuba, our friend and tried and true partner.
Mr. Maema (Lesotho): My delegation fully
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
Lesotho rejects the unilateral imposition of all
forms of economic, commercial and financial
embargoes, as well as the unilateral application of
other coercive measures by one State against another.
Indeed, my delegation regards all coercive measures —
be they economic, political or other — by one State
against another as dangerous and thus inadmissible. In
our view, such measures can never enhance
international peace and stability, but must compromise
them.
My delegation therefore insists on respect by all
of the rule of law and on strict compliance with
international law, particularly the noble principles of
the sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention
and non-interference in their internal affairs, as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

It is difficult to understand the reasons behind the
flouting of the international community’s appeal to end
the embargo on Cuba. It is impossible to justify
attempts to further tighten economic sanctions, as
occurred this year.

My delegation is therefore disheartened that,
despite its adverse effects on the Cuban people over the
years, and despite the fact that it has been condemned
by an overwhelming majority of this Assembly since
1991, the embargo on Cuba has to date not been lifted.
Ironically, the adoption over the years of further
coercive measures that seek to isolate Cuba from
international trade and further hurt the Cuban people
have constantly been accompanied by claims that the
blockade has been and is aimed at enhancing
democracy, freedom and human rights in Cuba. Indeed,
we have heard similar claims today.

At the summit of the Non-Aligned Movement
held in Havana, Movement heads of State and
Government agreed that only a sober and realistic
vision of the contemporary world will allow calm and
stability to be established. We call on those who
continue to favour sanctions and the isolation of Cuba
to be realistic. The Cubans should be allowed to live
and work in peace. The sooner the need is recognized

My delegation wishes to reiterate its well-known
position that it is the sovereign right of the people of
any country, including Cuba, to determine the system
of Government and the model of development most
appropriate for their country. We also reiterate our
strong conviction that, in order to exercise those rights,
millions of people in Cuba need not have endured, for
over four decades, the untold hardship, suffering and

26

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

misery caused by the blockade, as they have and still
do.

the two principles of equal sovereignty among States
and non-interference in their internal affairs.

The support that has just been expressed by the
Member States that intervened on this agenda item and
by the overwhelming majority that voted in favour of
the resolution today truly reflects the fact that the
unilateral embargo and measures aimed at tightening
the blockade of Cuba are contrary to the principles of
international law, particularly those enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

The application of such measures would only
deepen human suffering and further exacerbate
differences and hatred among peoples of interrelated
interests, which necessitates compliance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Proper
and civilized solutions to problems should be found,
solutions that would ensure that basic human rights
such as the right to development, food, medical care
and essential social services would not be interrupted.

The Government of the Kingdom of Lesotho
therefore strongly opposes the unilateral economic,
commercial and financial embargo on Cuba and urges
its lifting. For that reason, my delegation voted in
favour of resolution 61/11.
Mr. Aburawi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of resolution
61/11 because we believe that the imposition of
sanctions and embargoes is not and never can be the
right way to resolve disputes among States. The United
Nations Charter provides proper avenues to resolve
bilateral differences, including by negotiation,
investigation, mediation, reconciliation, adjudication or
resort to regional agencies and organizations. All such
action should be conducted on the basis of full
equality, mutual respect and non-interference in the
internal affairs of countries.
That approach has been repeatedly stressed by
States Members of the United Nations through the
resolutions of the General Assembly, which must be
complied with without delay, as they embody justice
and common sense and consecrate the norms of
international law. Such resolutions also send the clear
message that no progress can be made towards
establishing general peace, developing friendly
relations among States and achieving higher levels of
development
without
international
cooperation
anchored in mutual respect for the sovereignty of
States regardless of their size or population, or the
nature of their political and economic system.
The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya once again reaffirms
its strong opposition to unilateral measures that are
enforced against States for political reasons. We would
like to express our deep concern over the maintenance
by some States of unilateral coercive economic
extraterritorial measures because they are in explicit
contravention of norms of international law, especially

06-60788

The people of Cuba have been suffering from an
unfair embargo for over four decades, an embargo that
has caused severe, untold damage and that has affected
the entire Cuban population, including children,
women and the elderly. The embargo has also
hamstrung the ability of the Cuban administration to
import necessary foodstuffs, agricultural supplies,
medical equipment and drugs needed for health care.
We hope that the resolution just adopted will
contribute to the elimination of the suffering and
hardship endured by the Cuban people through a
favourable response from the country concerned to its
provisions. We call on the United States to resolve its
differences with Cuba by peaceful means and to set
aside unilateral coercive measures that violate the
Charter and human rights and attempt to hinder
development efforts, which constitute a noble objective
of the United Nations system.
Mr. Kapoma (Zambia): Zambia reiterates its
support for the call to lift the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba. My delegation is disappointed
to note that the embargo has lasted for more than four
decades, and it is our earnest desire that it be lifted
without further delay.
The Resident Coordinator findings clearly
demonstrate that the embargo has negative implications
for Cuba’s balance of trade, foreign exchange earnings
and volume of production. Additionally, the embargo
has had a negative impact on Cuba’s commercial
activities in the areas of food, agriculture, health,
education, science and technology. This state of affairs
has been demonstrated in the various accounts outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Al-Murad (Kuwait), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

27

A/61/PV.50

The Zambian Government continues to express
concern at the persistent imposition of restrictions by
the United States of America against the people of
Cuba. A violation of this nature must be discouraged to
the greatest extent possible. Therefore, my delegation
appeals to all States Members of the United Nations to
support the immediate lifting of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba.
For 15 consecutive years, the General Assembly
has adopted resolutions under the agenda item entitled
“Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. Last year, the resolution was
adopted by 182 votes in favour and only 4 against. The
support of the resolution shows the overwhelming
rejection by the international community of the
embargo, which should therefore be lifted.
We acknowledge the resilience of the Cuban
people in the face of the difficulties arising from the
sanctions. The embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba demonstrates by all accounts
a failed policy and should therefore be abandoned.
Let me conclude by stating that the measures
taken under the Helms-Burton Act continue to violate
Cuba’s rights to free trade and navigation. Based on the
information provided by the United Nations system on
the embargo’s negative impact on the United Nations
Development Programmes in Cuba, my delegation
voted, as it has done in the past, in favour of the
resolution. We will continue to do so for as long as the
embargo continues.
Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (spoke in French): More than four decades
have gone by and the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed on Cuba by the United
States of America is still with us. This has been a long,
painful and tough period for the innocent Cuban
people. The embargo has benefited neither side; quite
the contrary, it has created additional tension between
two neighbouring countries.
In today’s world, with its multifaceted
cooperation among States, it is disappointing that there
are still unilateral, discriminatory commercial
practices. In our view, the extraterritorial application of
the domestic laws of one country clearly violates the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. In keeping with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, no Member shall promulgate or

28

apply laws, regulations or measures whose
extraterritorial effects undermine the sovereignty of
other Member States as well as freedom of trade. Each
nation has the sovereign right to participate freely in
the international commercial and financial system. In
the light of the universal principal of sovereignty, no
country has the right to interfere in the internal affairs
of another country, despite the existence of different
social and political systems.
As a sovereign, independent nation, the Republic
of Cuba has the right to choose its own political system
as well as its own development model. In order to
reduce poverty and attain sustainable development,
Cuba should be free to maintain and promote economic
and commercial relations with all countries of our
planet.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, together
with the majority of United Nations Member States,
will continue to work to end the economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba. This decidedly
obsolete policy runs counter to international law and it
has already caused so much suffering to the Cuban
people. The Republic of Cuba is a member of the
United Nations and as Members ourselves we must do
everything to help that country fully to recover its
legitimate right to integration in the globalized world
economy.
Accordingly, my Government voted in favour of
the draft resolution A/61/L.10.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): The delegation of Egypt
voted in favour of the motion not to take action on the
amendment proposed by Australia in document
A/61/L.19 because Egypt believes firmly that the
human rights situation in Member States of the United
Nations should be addressed without selectivity, double
standards or politicization, and with full respect for the
competence of the Human Rights Council and the
Third Committee, using cooperative and nonconfrontational methods as clearly stipulated in the
2005 outcome document and Assembly resolution
60/251, establishing the Human Rights Council.
For us, the proposed amendment falls outside the
institutional framework of our consideration of the
item before us today. It would have been better for the
sponsor of the amendment and his supporters to submit
separate draft resolutions to the General Assembly and
to the Security Council on the consistent and
systematic violations that are committed on a daily

06-60788

A/61/PV.50

basis against the human rights of the Palestinian
people. At this very moment, the Palestinian people are
under fierce attacks from Israeli military forces,
resulting in a massacre this morning, with 18 persons
killed and 50 persons injured today alone in Beit
Hanoun, raising the number of casualties in the latest
military operation by Israel to more than 100 persons
killed and hundreds of others wounded over a period of
five days. This is an issue that requires priority in our
consideration of how to effectively address human
rights violations and human rights violators if we are
truly serious in our commitment to avoid selectivity,
double standards and politicization.
Finally, our vote in favour of the resolution
contained in document A/61/L.10 is in full
implementation of the provisions of the Final
Document of September’s Summit Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Havana, which stipulates, in its
paragraph 234.6:
“The Heads of State or Government reemphasized that the exploitation of human rights
for political purposes, including selective
targeting of individual countries for extraneous
considerations, which is contrary to the founding
principles of the Movement and the United
Nations Charter, should be prohibited. They
urged that, in the discussion on human rights,
adequate attention be given to the issues of
poverty, underdevelopment, marginalization,
instability and foreign occupation that engender
social and economic exclusion and violation of
human dignity and human rights, which cannot be
divorced from any meaningful discussion relating
to human rights”.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote.
I now call on the representative of Cuba, who
wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply. May I
remind delegations that, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 34/401, statements in exercise of
the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and to five minutes for the second and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The demented intensification of the
genocidal policy of hostility, aggression and embargo
carried out by the United States against the Cuban

06-60788

people reflects the frustration of the current
Government of the United States and its inability to
reverse the firm decision of Cubans to defend their
independence and sovereignty to the last breath.
Those who claim the supposed right to unleash
wars of conquest, massively bombard defenceless
civilian populations in the name of freedom and the
non-proliferation of weapons and institutionalize
torture in the name of democracy have no moral
authority to judge the Cuban revolution, which is a
symbol of resistance and dignity for the peoples of the
world. Nothing demonstrates the anti-Cuban nature of
the policies and actions of the current United States
Administration as clearly as the successive versions of
the annexation plan prepared by the so-called
Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba, established
by President Bush.
Putting an end to the freedom and independence
enjoyed today by Cuban men and women and
destroying the society that they have freely chosen
have become obsessions of the centres of power of the
United States. Attempting to justify the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba on the
basis of a false concern about a non-existent situation
of human rights violations is unsustainable and
fallacious. Those who have been responsible for
practices of torture and the most brutal harassment of
persons detained at Guantánamo and Abu Ghraib
cannot give lessons on human rights. The United States
does not qualify as a judge and does not have the moral
authority to evaluate any country.
We will not dwell on the matter of Australia.
Cuba’s Minister for Foreign Affairs was clear, and I
will merely repeat what he said. Australia’s submission
of an amendment at the behest of the United States is a
demonstration of its abject submission to and
complicity with the Government of the United States. A
Government such as that of Australia, which nearly
exterminated its aboriginal peoples and which today
subjects them to apartheid, does not have the moral
authority to condemn Cuba.
Permit me to address the European Union and its
members. What stood out in the Union’s explanation of
vote regarding the draft resolution against the embargo
was hypocrisy and subordination to the anti-Cuban
policy of its major ally.
The European Union does not have the moral
authority to refer to the human rights situation in Cuba.

29

A/61/PV.50

In its countries, there is growing racism and
xenophobia and an upsurge in reprisals and
discrimination against those who emigrate to Europe to
escape poverty caused by centuries of colonial
exploitation and an unjust international order that
enables the Union to reap profits from sweat and from
pillaging the resources of the South. What credibility
should we give to the human rights concerns of
Governments that have not had the courage to condemn
the human rights violations carried out by the United
States in its arbitrary detention and torture centre at
Guantánamo, or of Governments that provided their
territory for secret CIA flights carried out for the
purpose of torturing prisoners?
The Cuban revolution, having resisted half a
century of brutal aggression, embargo and hostility
from the most powerful super-Power that has ever
existed, moves inexorably forward. It is a genuinely

popular and indigenous revolution that has enabled us
to build a participative democracy and an ever more
human and just society that places the human person at
the centre of its activities. That is why we will continue
to fight and are prepared to give up our own lives, if
necessary.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I
take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to inform members that the General Assembly, in
the morning of Friday 10 November, will consider
agenda item 68, “Report of the Human Rights
Council”.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.

30

06-60788
