UNITED NATIONS

SMXJIZITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH’YEAR

ME’TING:

NEW

30 JANUARY

1985

YORK

CONTENTS

Page
Provisional

agenda

(S/Agenda/2567)

. . . . . . . . . . . . ..a......................

Opening

statement

by the President

. ... .. ... ... .. .. .. ... ... . ... . .... .. .. .

Expression

of welcome

to the new members

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

Adoption

of the agenda

and thanks to the outgoing

President

members

. .

..I..............,............

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............

Letter dated 28 January 1985 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Chad to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (WI691 I) . . ..*...........*...........................

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
docu;iicnt.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the c)fficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, humbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

ZWtb

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 30 January 1985, at 3 p.m.
Yresidenr: Mr. Claude de KEMOULARIA

(France).

4. Also on behalf of the Council, I should like to express
my gratitude to the outgoing members for their important
contribution to our work. The represenatives oi Malta,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua. Pakistan i
;r.lbabwe have
won our esteem and our friendship, and 1 am sure we nhall
continue to work with them fruitfully.

Presen/; me representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. United States of America.

I.

Adoption

2.

Letter dated 28 January 1985 from the Charge
d’atfairus a.i. of the Permanei.1 Mission of Chad to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (s/16911)

&tre&enofthattkstotbemtlrhtgPresident
5. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretution from French): On
behalf of the Council 1 should like to pay a special tribute
to my predecessor, Mr. Ahmed Tawtik Khalil, representative of Egypt, who conducted the Council’s work in
I&ember
with great talent and etfectiveness.

of the agenda

l7te meeting was called .to or&r

A&ptiat

at 3.40 p.m

TRe agenab was adopted

OpenbtgstateatentbytbePreddd

Letter dated 28 January 1985 from the Char&
MkwhlnofchadtotheUn
fdresaLoftbePennanmt
NPUorrP~totbePreddeatoftheSedtyCoue
dl (Wl6911)

1. The PRESIDENT: (Interpretutfo~pOm Iteneh): Members will note that the chamber has been equipped so that
they can view documents on video tapea. I owe them an
explanation. I have been informed by the re~ntative
of
Chad that he intends during his statement to show certain
documents on video tapes. In keeping with paat practice,
as President of the Council I have decided to authoritc the
presentation of those documents, and I have given the
necessary instructions for the technical arrangements to be
made.

d’af-

6. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretatton from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Chad and the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya requesting that they be permitted
to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose. with the
consent of the Council, to invite those repmsentatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

2. The PRESIDENT:
(tnterpretution from Fke#&): As
this is the first time the Council has met this year in a
public meeting, I should like to extend my kst wishes to
all the members here. I hope that we will all pursue our
work in a spirit of mperetion
and thus contribute to the
strengthening of international peace and security.

At the inviratiun of the Frestakwt, Mr. Lassou (CM) and
(Libyan Arab Jamahirtya) took places at the
Cound table.

Mr. Azmouk

7. The PRESIDENT:

(interpretation from French): This
meeting
has been convened
at the request of the representative of Chad in a letter dated Zs January
to the President
of the Council
[Wl69fI].
following
another
letter he had
addressed
to the Presideni daicci 25 janwry ~S~‘iGi?i$

3. It is with special pleasure that I extend a welcome to
the new non-permanent members of the Council that have
been elected for a ~wc+vear term. namely, Austratta, Denmark, Madagascar. Thailand and Trinidad and Tobago. I
am sure I express the views of all the members of the
Council
when I say that we welcome their participation in
our work. We have no doubt that they will make a useful
contribution
problems
important

of the agenda

E. I should also like to draw the attention
of the members
of the Council
to document
S/16912.
containing
the text of
a letter dated 28 January,
addressed
to the Resident
of the
Council
by the representative
of the Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya.

to our search for solutions
to the complex
facing the Council
within
the framework
of its
responsibilities.
I

9. The first speaker on my list is the Minister for Foreign
AtTairs and Co-operation of Chad, Mr. Gouara Lassou, to
whom I wish to extend a welcome. I invite him to make his
statement.

further expanded later. Libya, which occupied I l4,ooO
square kilometres in 1973, now occupies 550,000, in other
words, the entire prefecture of Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti.
17. Qaddali’s secret dream is the occupation and subjugation of all Chad and the Chadian people, in order thereafter to destabrlize the rest of Africa. From the very
beginning, the Chadian authorities have tried, in vain, to
negotiate with Libya.

IO. Mr. LASSOU (Chad) (i, vpretotion from French):
Before deali:.: with the item before the Council, I should
like on behalf of my delegation sincerely to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for January
and also to thank you for having kindly convened the
Council so promptly. My delegation is pleased to see the
representative of France. a country with which Chad
enjoys fruitful and cordial relations, presiding over the
Council at this important time of year. We are sure that
under your wise and dedicated leadership, and thanks to
your outstanding ability as a veteran statesman and diplomat, the Council will be able to discharge properly its
heavy responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations.

18. Qaddaffr’s Libya has committed aggression against
Chad, occupied it and interfered in its internal affairs. The
Libyan screen for the occupation of part of Chadian territory was the stillborn Laval-Mussolini
treaty of 1935.
called “Treaty of Rome on the settlement of the interests
of Italy and France in Africa” [S/0649, amex VIIJ. That
treaty never had any legal validity, since there was never
any exchange of instruments of ratification between
France and Italy. Moreover, when France and Libya later
signed, on IO August 1955. the Treaty of Friendship and
Good-Neighbourliness
between the French Republic and
the United Kingdom of Libya [ibid, annex XJ, they saw tit
not to mention the abortive Laval-Mussolini
treaty on the
list of international instruments recognized by the two parties concerning, among other frontiers, that frontier sepprating the territories of French Equatorial Africa, that is,
Chad. which was still under colonial administration, and
indspendent Libya.

I I. I take this opportunity also to pay a well-deserved
tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Egypt, a
fraternal and friendly country, for his competence and
dynamism.
12. I should like also to extend a cordial welcome to the
newly elected members of the Council. namrly, Australia,
Denmark, Madagascar, Thailand
and Trinidad
and
Tobago, and to wish them all success I~I the important
work awaiting them in the Council,

19. Qaddafi’s tigime tried to improve its image by claiming that between 1951 and 1969 Libya was not truly free
and that, accordingly, all decisions were dictated to it by
imperialism; that the 1955 agreement was, in Qaddati’s
eyes, replete with hypocrisy, its articles ambiguous and.
consequently, Libya did not recognizc it because it had
caused Libya too much harm; that the conventions prior
lo 1955 did not respond to the aspirations of the Libyan
people and that, if one were to take history into account,
Libyan territory would extend well beyond its current
limits.

13. Lastly, I wish to express the profound gratitude of
the Chadiatr people as a whole and of its Government to
all the members of the Council for responding so promptly
to the appeal which my country, Chad, addressed to them,
and thus authorizing me to address the Council.
14. On 27 September l9M, a plot aimed at physically
eliminating President H&in
Habre and all the members
of the Government was foiled at N’Djamena. That plot
was part of a process that Qaddafi has been engaging in
for nearly 20 years now in order to fulfil his annexationist
goals concerning Chad. A White Paper has been issued on
that plot. So as to facilitate understanding of the main
purpose of this White Paper. which I have made available
in order to have it distributed as an official document of
the Security Council, it may be helpful to draw briefly on
the background of the ChaCLibya dispute. We have
already discussed it at length in the Council in 1983, but it
is fitting to recall its main features.

20.

most

unusual

manner

in which

Qaddati

inter-

21. Why is it that the Laval-Mussolini
treaty-which
we
have described
as stillborn-never
entered into force? It is
because, as I have already said, the exchange
of the instruments of ratification
never took place nor was ever to take
place because of the wars in Ethiopia
and Spain. Indeed,
the first article of the title of that stillborn
treaty made its
entry into force conditional
upon the conclusion
ol’a convention
concerning
Tunisia,

15. Everything began in 1970, only several months after
the coup b&~r against King Idris. Indeed. Qaddati
published an of’icial road map of Libya whose legend indicated that the international
frontiers
contained
therein
should not be considered
as definitive
because thev could
be changed.
1 would
point
out that that map already
included
as part of Libyan
territory
the area which the
press was later to call the “Aouzou
Strip”.
16. In 1971. Libya’s
territory
was dctecled.

This

prets international law should be a source of grave concern
to all States Members of the Organization.

22.

Count

Ciano.

then

Italy.

&clad

nn

17 &ccc&r

Rome “was neither
ratified
overtaken
by history”.
23.
Taking
Ambassador
1938:

actual military
presence in Chadian
It was to be intensified
in 1973. and

2

Minister

for

Foreign

10~
I,-.”

*I.-*
.I.“.

nor completed

note of’ this statement.
Mr.
of France
to Italy. said.

Affairs

of

IL- T---A*.
.11&
..b”b,

vi-I-

and

has been

Francois
Poncet.
on 23 Dccembcr

“While the instruments of ratification could not bc
exchanged, owing to a postponement of the Tunisian
Convention which was to precede that exchange, France
is not responsible for appraisal of the circumstances
which have led Italy itself to desire that postponement.”

the war imposed by Libya and drought. An army without
a leader cannot win any battle; a people without a guiding
hand cannot undertake any large-scale enterprise. If the
Chadian people is resisting, as I have said before, it is
thanks to the inherent qualities of its President, Hissein
Habrb. Qaddafi knows this, and he realizes that it is to his
disadvantage-and
that is what he tinds unbearable. For
Qaddali, President Hissein Habrh is the main obstacle to
his r&ime’s expansionist designs on Chad; for Qaddali.
President Hissein Habr& is the man to eliminate by every
means.

24. Moreover, if there was a dispute, it was definitively
settled in due course between France and Libya, on the
recommendation of the General Assembly on IS December
1950 by its resolution 392 (V). Pursuant to this resolution,
France and Libya concluded the Treaty of Friendship and
Good-Neighbourliness
of 10 August 1955 to which 1 have
referred. Article 3 of that Treaty provides that:

30. Faced with numerous failures and setbacks in the
war in Chad, the international terrorist thought he would
succeed t\r using his favourite weapon: international
terrorism.

“The two High Contracting Parties recognize that the
frontiers between the territory of Libya, on the one
hand, and the territories of Tunisia, Algeria, French
West Africa and French Equatorial Africa, on the other
hand, are those resulting from the international instruments in force on the date of the establishment of the
United Kingdom of Libya as defined in the exchange of
letters as appended hereto (annex I).”

31. Political terrorism, which respects no morality. no
frontiers, no principles and no international norms, should
be a source of deep concern to all States Members of the
United Nations. Each Member State must do its utmost to
oppose, annihilate and render harmless those responsible
for international terrorism. I realize that a great deal of
effbrt has been made by countries which cherish peace and
justice, but much still remains to be done.

25. Annex I specifies that the international instruments
in force were the France-British Convention of 14 June
1898; the Additional Declaration of 21 March 1899 to the
aforementioned Convention; the France-Italian
agreements of I November 1902; the France-British Convention of 8 September 191% and the FranceItalian
Arrangement of 12 September 1919 [i&f. utvrexes 1. II,
III, v and vrj.

32. Often, the victims of political terrorism are caught 00
guard, while the criminals, for their part, hide behind the
mask of anonymity, thus protecting their own identities
and that of their backers. In most cases when the terrorists
are identified it is too late to be of any help to their victims.
However, thanks particularly to the steady improvement
of international cooperation, it has been possible in some
cases to prevent the perpetration of acts of terrorism in
time. Fortunately for Chad, the suspects were caught rcdhanded before they had a chance to strike; and that has
made it possible to find out who was the true criminal.

26. The France-Libyan Treaty cf IO August 1955 was
ratified by the two High Contracting
Parties. The
exchange of the letters of ratification took place on 20
January 1957, and the Treaty entered into force on 26
March 1957. It should be borne in mind that the letters
exchanged on the day of the signing cf the Treaty constituting annexes to it contain detailed and indisputable stipulations concerning the path of the frontier between Chad
and Libya.

33. A long and careful inquiry, conducted with the greatest discretion last September by our security services,
made it possible to foil a plot to assassinate President Hissein Habre and all the members of the Government of
Chad.

27. With regard to the foregoing, it is easy to see and
understand that Libya’s warmongering attitude towards
Chad is dicldted principally by the annexationist aims of
the Tripoli r&me against Chad in particular and the rest
of Africa in general. Consequently, it is Qaddafi who has
been creating frontier problems between Chad and Libya.

34. The testimony of loyal Chadians who pretended to
collaborate with the suspected assassins and a thorough
analysis of the explosive device have enabled the Govemmen1 to establish that Muammar Qaddafi, the leader of
international terrorism, is truly the person behind this
ignominious plot.

28. Chad, which is a poor, land-locked country, hard hit
by famine and drought and battered by war, has priorities
for its economic and social development and the wellbeing of its people. While Chad’s civilian population is
suffering the hardships of drought and dying of hunger,
the Government of the Third Republic has heen obliged to
Use a large part of the meagre resources availab!e to Chad
a,. -.....I. ^ ...^_ :-----.a
-- .-- a

35. What 1 am about to say summa:&
the results of the
inquiry by the Chadian Security Services dealing with the
human and technical methods used by Qaddafi to satisfy
his desire for political hegemony by carrying out a series of
------:--r:--I-188 #-L-J
*uIcII
,,e
,,dJ
-mauum
~uowiiii
k~~~XGiiji
-L'eL
Le
L -proved unable to achieve by military action on the ground.
The Government of Chad hopes that this preliminary
report, which has been made public while inquiries are
actually continuing, will serve as a warning to other potential victims of Qaddafi as he presses on with acts of terrorism in the world.

29. Despite everything, the Chadian people. fiercely
determined and aware of the need to oppose this aggression. under the enlightened guidance of President Hiss&
Habre, coumgeously continues a struggle on two fronts:
3

36. On 26 September 1984, security agents, acting on a
tip provided by Chadian patriots. searched the house of a
Chadian businessman named Ali Hassan Adam. In that
search an attach6 case made of red vinyl material-very
similar to those used by businessmen the world over-was
discovered. However. that particular attach6 case contained an electronic detonating mechanism and enough
explosives to destroy a house. The deposition taken from
Ali Hassan Adam showed that he had received that
booby-trapped device from a Libyan agent at Kousseri. a
town in Cameroon. the other side ofthc Chari River opposite N’Djamcna. The Libyan agent. who called himrelf
Senoussi Abdelsalam. had told Ali that the attache case
contained eavesdropping equipment. Senoussi then asked
Ali to place the attach6 cast in the meeting room of the
Chamber of Commerce-the
room where the Council of
Ministers meets-just before the meeting of the President
of the Republic with the members of his Government. This
‘eavesdropping device “-which
was in fact a bomb-was
to have been kept by Ali at his home in N’Djamena until
Senoussi provided him with further instructions. The
Libyan agent showed Ali another attach6 case and told
him that it contained a radio receiver and a tape-recorder.
Senoussi explained that he was using this set of equipment
to record the debates of the meeting of the Council of
Ministers.

from electronic components. The ignition device itself,
which was a tube of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 29 centimetres long and 4 ct*ntimetres in diameter, was powered by an
ordinary l.S-volt battery. This type of detonator consists
of a switch with two positions. “Test” and “On”. In the
*‘Test*’ position, pressure on the button on the battery side
lights up a red indicator light. In this position no power
(lows from the contacts to the detonator. However. in the
“On” position the same procedure causes the red indicator
to light and causes power to flow from the contacts to the
detonator.
40. The transmitter described by the Libyan Senoussi
Abdelsalam as a “receiver/tape recorder”, and which was
subsequently conficxated by security forces, was to serve as
a remote control system. Roth the transmitter and the
receiver used for the bomb are made of ordinary, commercially available electronic components to be found in any
communications system. However, sophisticated modifications converted these intrinsically harmless components
into instruments of death.
41. In order to achieve detonation, the components of
this bomb were cleverly modified in a laboratory and skilfully assembled. The bomb was made in such a way that it
could be set oft’ from a distance of several kilometres. The
duped Chadian. Ali Hassxn. would certainly have been
blown up along with his so-called “eavesdropping device”.
which he was supposed to have placed in the meeting
room in the Chamber of Commerce. thr.rby also wiping
out the chief witness against the terrorist Colonel.

37. After considering the results of the analysis of the
bomb to which I have referred, President Hissein HabrO
and the members of his Government decided to keep that
information secret in the hope of luring the Libyan agent
Senoussi to N’Djamena, where he and his accomplices
could be arrested.

42. The provenance of the operational parts of the
Libyan device has been traced to a commercial source in
Western Europe that has over the past six years supplied
several such parts to the Libyan Government at Benghazi.
From the ongoing investigations. it appears that IS or
more sets of such components have been delivered to the
Ot7i1 of Military Security, Post Ot&e Box 724, Benghazi,
Libya. The M-or
more-missing
sets or components
could therefore still be assembled for bombs already
planted on the African continent, or elsewhere, by the
arch-international
terrorist Qaddafi.

38. Meanwhile, the security forces were instructed to
press ahead with their inquiries, which made it absolutely
clear that this murderous conspiracy had been fomented
by the Libyan Government and its leader, Muammar Qaddafi. Moreover, it proved that several Libyans and experienced foreign technicians were accomplices in this
attempted assassination. If successful, that gruesome
endeavour was to have brought them a net return of a
mere CFAF 30 million, or $67,ooO.
39. The contents of the attach6 case. which were to all
appearances so harmless, consisted of six sticks of SemtexH plastic explosives of Czechoslovak manufacture. Each
stick. wrapped in wax paper, contained two and a half
kilograms of poweful explosives. The total power of IS
kilograms of plastic explosives would have been enough to
destroy a truck and any human being within a distance of
seven and a half metres in the open air. Inside a conference
room, however, the power of the same explosive charge
would have been greatly increased. In fact, a IS-kilo
charge
of explosives
is more than enough to destroy a
6.COO-cubic-metre
conference
room and burst thr lungs of
cdy

&i.xu:

hi

iiiai

rtifii.

Tlic

Semtex-H is widely sold .%oughout

ChxiiubbtiaL

43. I would point out that the specific technical details of
the bomb have been deliberately omitted in order not to
facilitate the manufacture of similar devices by other terrorist orga4izitions.
44. Based on the evidence provided by depositions of the
witness and technical analysts, the Government of Chad
accuses the Government of Libya of having fomented this
act of cowardly terrorism in order to assassinate the President of the Republic of Chad and members of the Chadian
Govemmcnt.
AC. .8)).. -a_
a* I_- cii' iiic i'ulcguitiy.
tuc
ctpc
iiir
Guvrlliiiltii
0;
kd
appeals to all the States Members of the Organization resolutely to condemn this criminal plot fomented by
the international terrorist Qaddali.

rrpitiike

the world and is espe-

cially favoured
by terrorist
groups, which use it for boobytrapped
letters.
For example,
Eduardo Mondlane. the
Mozambican
patriot,
was killed by a booby-trapped
package containing
Semtex-H. The detonators for the plastic
explosive
were connected
to an ignition
device put together

46.

I wish

to take

this

opportunity

to alert

all nations

to

the fact that Chad and its leaders are not the only targets
4

pletely destroyed every human being within a I30-metre
radius.

for the agents of Qaddafi’s international terrorism. as we
have already seen elsewhere. We know that there are at
least 14 additional sophisticated explosive devices still in
circulation. That is why we are hopeful that our statement
will assist in identifying, and perhaps even discovering,
additional bombs before they can achieve their gruesome
goals on behalf of the Libyan campaign of terror.

“In a closed r-m such as this room in which the
Security Council is meeting, the effect of the blast would
have been greatly amplified. The explosion would have
destroyed the conference room and blown everyone in
it to bits. Embedded in the dangerous plastic explosive
was a detonator bearing the serial number 13. The test
button on top made it possible to check that the batteries and contacts were in working order.

47. At the request of the Soviet Union and through the
aegis of the First Committee, the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session has just held a very lengthy debate on
State terrorism. The United Nations now finds itself confronted with a concrete case of terrorism. What will the
Security Council decide?

“Here is the detonator in a dismantled state. Its
receiver, cleverly modified thro?rgh equipment that is
easily obtainable from commercial sorrrces, functions
with ordinary batteries. When the position of the test
button is ‘On’ or ‘Testing’, the mechanism picks up a
radio signal which detonates the explosives hidden in
the plastic sticks. The remote control can he situated
several hundred metres away from the target. It is contained in this ordinary attache case, which has been
ingeniously transformed for the purpose. It has been
d&covered that the transmitter in this attache case.
apparently harmless in appearance, was capable of
sending signals to detonate five separate bombs. The
transmitter is powered by a rechargeable battery and
has a collapsible aerial. The Libyan agent Senoussi prcsented the attache case to his presumed accomplice as
containing eavesdropping equipment. All that had to be
done was to press the button on the transmitter and the
signal would have been given to the detonator of the
bomb, thus killing President Hissein Habre and other
high-ranking persons in the Republic of Chad. This is
what would hnve happened: [EXPLOSiOhfj.”

48. For its part, the Chadian Government hopes that by
pr0vidirl.g this data, supported by photcgraphs, it will have
made seine modest contribution to the efforts of the international community to foil acts of international terrorism
in general, anti those of Qaddafi in particular.
49. The disarmed weapon I have described is available
for examination to those having a legitimate interest and
to accredited media representatives. We did not bring the
plastic explosive itself because it would have been dangerous both to us and to the aircraft, but we do have the
detonator with us in the attach6 case I am now placing at
your disposal. But there is no need for alarm-you will not
be blown up. However, before opening the case, 1 would
ask the technicians to start the videotape screens so that we
can all see what this bomb would have done had it gone
off. Of course. this is a simulation, since we are not ourselves terrorists.
SO. This is the attach6 case, which looks like one for a
businessman or a diplomat. apart from the murderous
device it contains.

51. The PRESIDENT: (interpretationfrom
on the representative of Chad.

Rettch): I call

52. Mr. LASSOU (Chad) (interpretation /ton; Rench):
We have here some brochures we have prepared containing various photographs we have taken. We would be glad
if ;ou. Sir. could kindly arrange to have them distributed
as ofkial documents of the Security Council.

T&e following is an interpretation of the ttafratiotk in
French, of the videotapes shown in the &c&y
Cotmd
chamber at the request of the delqation of Chad,
“Last autumn President Habri was to have held a
meeting with members of his Government. senior oflicials and other prominent citizens and foreign diplomats in the meeting hall of the Chamber of Commerce
in downtown N’Djamena. At that time, a Libyan agent
calling himself El Senoussi Abdelsalam contacted a
Chadian businessman who had free access to the building in question.
The Libyan
instructed the businessman
to place this harmless-looking attach6 case inside the
conference
room of the Chamber
of Commerce. He

53. The PRESIDENT: (intetpretation from French): l%e
next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. on whom I now call.
54. Mr. AZZAROUK
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (hterpretation from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am conf&nt
that your diplomatic experience and your widom will
assist the Council in its deliberations.

said that the attach6 case contained
only an eavesdrop
ping and recording
device that would enable the Libyan
to follow these very high-level
discussions.
Instead of an
eavesdropping
device, however,
the attach& case in fact
contained
six sticks of Czechosiovak-made
Semtex-H
plastic explosive.
For some years Semtex-H
has been
the preferred
explosive
of terrorists.
particularly
in the
manufacture
of booby-trapped
letters. Eduardo
Mondlane. the Mozambican
patriot.
was killed by a boobytrapped
package
containing
this type of explosive.
The
I5 kilos of explosives
in this bomb could
have com-

55. I also wish to express my appreciation to your predecessor, our brother the representative 0i Egypt, ior the
exemplary
Council

manner

in which

he conducted

the work

cf the

last month.

56. The position
of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya
with
regard to the situation
in Chad has been made clear in the
brief letter we addressed
to the President
of the Council on

5

28 January [S/16912]. Despite the fact that we have frcm
the outset made it clear that there is no logical justification
for the convening of the Council-and
we are now sure of
that follor~ing the statement made a few moments ago-1
wish to make certain observations to shed light on the
truth of the situation prevailing in Chad.
57. In this connection, I wish to assert that the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya rejects all the allegations included in the
letter of Chad [S/16906]--and
all that has been said by
Mr. Gouara Lassou in the last few minutes. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya does not intetiere in Chad and has no
presence whatsoever on Chadian territory. What is described every now and again by some hostile circles as a
presence of Libyan forces is only the presence of forces of
the legitimate Government of National Unity which are
stationed in the northern part of Chad.
58. Therefore the purpose oi the rebel Habr6 in convening
this meeting of the Council is as follows: first, to slander the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, to depict it as an aggressor and to
cast doubt on its intentions towards Chad; secondly, to
belittle the military importance and power of the Govemment of National Unity, under Oueddei. which controls the
northern part of Chad and whose forces are present
throughout the country; thirdly, to create justification for
the rebel Habre and his clique to obtain more weapons,
foreign forces and mercenaries to use in acts of repression
and mzssacre against the Chadian people and to exploit the
situation by attacking the forces of the Government of
National Unity in the north of the country; fourthly, togive
legitimacy to the rebel r&me in N’Djametla, a legitimacy
which it cannot obtain through the people.
59. His&n Habre and his representatives talk about
security, peace and stability in Chad and try to convince
world public opinion that they are in favour of that
while the facts indicate the opposite. Hissein Habrt has
always been P source.of disturbance and instability in
Chad. and he is primarily responsible for the plight of
the Chadian people over the last seven years, that is to
say. since $he coming of the Chadian National Liberation Front (i%OLINAT)
to N’Djamena.
40. Hissein Hat& history from then on is replete with acts
of insurgency and crimesand massacres committed against
the Chadian people. It is dificult to give an account here of
all the breaches of peaa?and security he has committed. I
will merely refer to the fact that he plunged thecountry into
a period of long civil war by his rebellion against the
Government of F&ix Malloum. after having signed an
agreemen’ through which he was able to enter the Govcrnment and assume the post of Prime Minister on 31 August
1978. He also violated the Kano Agreement of 16 March
1979. He also tried to usurp power, and this led to the
continuation and escalation of the civil war. Finally, he
riolatcd the Lagos Accord on National Reconcilintinn in
Chad. of I8 August 1979 [S/14378, mvlex fJ by rebelling
against the legitimate interim Government of National
Unity headed by Goukouni Oueddei, the result of the Lagos
Accord, after he assumed the position of Defence Minister
in that Government. the only one set up as a result ot
agreement among all factions in Chad and after strrnuous

efforts by the neighbouring countries, including the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. The Lagos Agreemint was signed by the
I I Chadian factions and led to the formation of theGovernment recognized by the Organization of African Unity
(OAti).
61. It has not been enough for Hissein HabrO and his
clique to subvert security and cause instability in Chad
whenever they realize that the country has attained some
kind of stability and embarked on construction. They have
also impeded all efforts by the OAU and African countries
to achieve national reconciliation and restore peace, stability and legitimacy to Chad. a country which has been torn
apart by civil war for two decades. Famine and the crimes
of Hi&n
HcbrC have eliminated many and prompted
some to seek asylum in neighbouring countiies, including
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which hosts tens of thousands of Chadian refugees and gives them all humanitarian
assistance.
62. Hisscin Habr& impeded all efforts at conciliation
between the warring factions in Chad; for example, he
foiled the initiative by President Mengistu, then Chairman
of the OAU, to hold a reconciliation conference at Addis
Ababa. as well as the initiative of the President of Ango!a to
hold a reconciliation conference in Brazaville, by insisting
on his recognition as Head of State by the other Chadian
factions and by the legitimateGovernment
ofChad. headed
by Goukouni Oueddei. That is something that was rejected
by Hisscin Habr& himself previously at theKanoconferena
on national reconciliation, when he insisted on the resignation of F&ix Malloum, then President of Chad, as a condition for the holding of that conference. His insistence on a
condition that he had previously rejected confirms his lack
of desire to achieve peace and confirms that his objective is
to continue the civil war and to eliminate the Chadian
people in order that he may remain in power.
63. The army. headed by Hissein Habre. who has sent a
representative to address us here, represents only one of II
factions that signed the Lagos Accord. Therefore, the
international community should not be deceived and cannot give legitimacy to a Government formed of only one
faction, which came to power through rebellion and force
of arms, with the support of mercenary and foreign force.
64. It is no wonder that such 2 Government, in view of
the way in which it came IO pc-ver, Facessuch resistance by
the Chadian people, under its legitimate Gorrmment. Ir is
no wonder either that there is an attempt on the life of
Hissein Habre and his clique. which had previously
rebelled against legitimacy and usurped power, especially
when that clique does not control the majority of the country. faces armed opposition and continuous military operations in the south and has no influence in the northern pdrt
of the country. which is controlled by the legitimate
Government. This confirms that the allegation that the
1“yJ”..
ihr,ln ,bc=~
*~~o~;.;..- ,--c--r-~
_..^--. L”
.^ rwsQJ----..“” .,“l”“.,l.~J”
.,“I&C”CL~” -“6, cw\LII+A
sinate Hissein Habr; is without foundation. What is more
likely is what was said in the statement issued by the legitimate Chadian Government of National Uniiy. published
at Brussels. that the assassination attempt just mentioned
by HabrC’s representative was made by 3 group in His.sein
Habr& personal guard. The note that was presented a

while ago by the representative of the rebel Habrt! is but a
pack of fabricated allegations and does not require any
response.

69. In conclusion, allow me to say that the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has continuously emphasized its keen interest
in preserving the unity and independence of Ctad. However, we shall likewise preserve the unity of our soil, whatever the price. The reference by the representative of the
army of the north to part of the Libyan territories is something that we cannot accept. I assert here also that the
.so-called Aouzou Strip is an integral part of Libyan territory, which we inherited from Italian colonialism to the
map attached to the report of the United Nations Commissioner in Libya, Adrian Belt, on the basis of which the
decision establishing the independence of Libya was made.
The map appears in the records of the General Assembly’.
The map referred to by the representative of Hissein HabrC
is a copy of the map included in that document. It is before
me now, and anyone who wishes to do so may look at it to
see whether the Strip is Libyan or Chadian.

65. The rebel Hi&n Habre and his clique have no legitimacy and have no support among the Chadian neople.
What is going on in Chad is t. civil war, which ’ 5 been
raging for 20 years, due to elements such as Hissein Hab&
who put their personal aspirations before the interests of
the Chadian people. The attempt to divert the attention of
the international community from what has been going on
in Chad, by levelling allegations against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya at the instigation of the imperialist forces, will
not solve the Chadian prc)blem. The only solution is to
seek national reconciliation In accordance with the Lagos
Accord, under the supervision of the OAU and with the
participation of all the parties that signed the Accord. The
continuation of support for the rebellion headed by Hissein Habr& and the disregard of legitimacy can increase the
tension, bloodletting and destruction in Chad.

70. The PRESIDENT: (interpretution from Frewh): As
President of the Council, I should like to remind the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya that the complaint we are considering comes from the internationally
recognized Government of Chad and that its legitimacy
cannot be challenged in the Council. It was at the request
of that Government that the President of the Council,
speaking on behalf of its members, made known in his
statement of 6 April 1983 [243Oth meeting, puru. 4j the
recommendations of the Security Council regarding the
settlement of the dispute between Chad and the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.

66. The present situation in Chad is shown by the presence of a legitimate Government of National Unity under
Goukouni Oueddei, which controls the majority of the
country and which has its seat in the north, and there is a
Government of rebellion-if
we may call it a Govemmenta-which controls N’Djamena, with the support of
some foreign forces. That should be taken into consideration when a solution to the Chadian problem is sought.

71. The repr.%rtative of Chad ‘&hes to speak in exetcise of Sis right of reply. 1 call upon him.

67. The Libyan people is linked to the brotherly Chadian
people by historical, geographical, cultural and spiritual
ties. The two countries have a common history of struggle
against colonialism. When the two peoples were subjected
to colonialism at the beginning of the present century they
fought together. The Libyans fought against colonialism in
Chad and the Chadians fought in Libya against the Italian
Fascist colonialism and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has
been keen on maintaining this special relationship, which
ties the two peoples together. It has consistently endeavoured :c maintain the unity, security and stability of the
Chadian people. It was the first to strive to achieve
national reconciliation in Chad and put an end to the
plight of the Chadian people since the early 1960s; the first
national reconciliation conference was held in the city of
Sebha in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in February 1978.
The Libyan efforts resulted later in the mutual recognition
of FROLINAT and the Chadian Government at the conference of Sebha and Benghazi in the Libyan Arab Jamahinya, on 27 March 1978. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has also

participated

in all conferences

held

72. Mr. KESSELY (Chad) (interpretatlon*from French):
The delegation of Chad does not wish to exercise its tight
of reply knowing full well that Libya’s response will be just
a pack of lies and contain baseless allegations. However.
we would simply say that the killer never admits his crime
unless one really is dealing with a good loser-but that is
not the case here.
73. The Chadian people has s&red far too much from
Libya’s acts, as the Minister for Foreign AfTairs of my
country has just shown. In tbis particular case, we should
merely like to give the intemationat community an opportunity to judge for itself.
74. The PRESIDENT: (thterpretationfiom
French): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya wishes to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call upon him.
75. Mr. AZZAROUK
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretution from A&/c):
Mr. President.
with all due respect
for the remarks you made a while ago, I should like here to
affirm that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya does not recog-

in Nigeria

since then with the objective of achieving national reconciliation.

which

resulted

in the Lagos

Accord

and the forma-

tion of the Transitional Government
of National
Unity,
which comprises all Chadtan
tactions,
under iioukouni
Oueddei.

and

which

has been

recognized

by th\: OAU.

nize

the

never

will

government
mnoni7e
0

of insurgency

,in ..N’Djamena

and

;..

it

.*

’

i%e meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

68.
The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.
as a sister neighbouring country,
is ready to contribute.
as it has already
done.
to any elrorts made within
the framework
of’ the OAU to
achieve peace and security
in Chad.

NOT I.
’ SCC O/jiciat’ Records 01 the General
pkcment No. IS. document
A/1340.
7

Assembly,

Ff!h

Session.

Sup.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICAI’IONS

Unlted Nations
world. Cauub

plblicuianr
may be obudced
from boohorca
and dktributora
throughout
ti
your bookaWe
or write to; United Nations, Sales Se&m, New York or Gawr.

c(MMENT

SE PMMNl?ER

US

PUULICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Lu pMc~lonr
da Nation8 Unka ION CD vente dana kc libraih
a Iw agegcncee dCporitaim
du monde Ntkf
Idonnu-Vour
ruprh de votw librrirr
ou ndrruct-vow
h : Nations UnieI.
Sctiin
cl0 vents,
New York ou G&w.
KM

tlOJlk”UlTb

H3mHkUI

OPTAHH%UHH

~~~NIIK
OprawIrIauaw
06bedm1eunux
H P~~HTCTMX no ricer paaonax
pupa.
IU~~~MUC UJU IIHUIHTC no &petty:
WOJINI~

HNtWUR,

HbD-h&W

COMO

CONSEGUIR

HauntI
Hamome
Oprur~~uun

OEbeaHHeHHbIX

HAllHf4

MOXHO xynmb
8 ~WIIIMX
HPralHWPX
CHPBOILH 00 mutnu
B @auwM
M~IROM
O&easi~e~~ur
HorucR, Cauwn
no

UJIM #cnesS.

PUUS,XAC1O%..Il

DE LAS NACIONES

WlDAS

hs puMicPcioW8
de Ias Nacionea Unidu, c&n en vema en librerka
y casas dwnbuidoras
en
lodrc porter de1 mundo. Conwlte
a su librero o dirfjasc a: NaAncs
Umdac, Se&h
de Venw.
Nuevr York o Oirtcbm.

P---m---

Lirho

___.

m I’nd

Nalwm.

NW

York

..-...

..-

._.

__

-

.._.___

mum

--..

.

.

._

..-

.__._

_.-

..--

--

---

90114.~Y--Aprll

--

-.-.-

.-...

l~?.M4)

--
