United Nations

S/PV.3536 (Resumption 2)

Security Council

Provisional

Fiftieth Year

3536th Meeting
Tuesday, 16 May 1995, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mérimée . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Czech Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cárdenas
Mr. Legwaila
Mr. Wang Xuexian
Mr. Rovenský
Mr. Graf zu Rantzau
Mr. Rendón Barnica
Mr. Wibisono
Mr. Ferrarin
Mr. Ayewah
Mr. Al-Khussaiby
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Ubalijoro
Sir David Hannay
Mr. Gnehm

Agenda
The situation in the occupied Arab territories
Letter dated 8 May 1995 from the representatives of Morocco and the United Arab Emirates to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1995/366)
Letter dated 8 May 1995 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1995/367)

95-85477 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Section,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
The meeting was resumed on Tuesday, 16 May 1995,
at 10.55 a.m.
The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Mauritania in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ould Ely
(Mauritania) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (interpretation from French): The next
speaker is the representative of Sudan. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Yassin (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address
the Security Council. Allow me at the outset to join those
who have preceded me in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am confident that, with your diplomatic skills,
your experience and wisdom, a just and equitable resolution
will be achieved. I should also like to express our thanks to
Ambassador Kovanda for his efforts in guiding the work of
the Security Council last month.
We have all heard previous speakers express their
condemnation, or at least their dissatisfaction, in respect of
the dangers now facing the city of Jerusalem, a Holy City
to all revealed religions and particularly for Islam, which
considers Al-Quds Al-Sharif the second most important
kiblah for Muslims and the place whence the prophet
Mohammed ascended, upon whom may God’s blessings
fall. Jerusalem is also the cradle of Christianity.
The issue before the Security Council today is
therefore one of the utmost gravity. Any failure to resolve
the issue and arrive at a just solution will inflame the
feelings of the Ummah and lead to fury and the
mobilization of all its resources to deal with the issue.
The Security Council will be put to the test in terms
of its credibility and its will and ability to adopt decisive

2

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995
and just resolutions.
Its resolutions must uphold
international law without double standards and without
exception. The Security Council did adopt resolutions 252
(1968), 271 (1969), 475 (1980) and 478 (1980) and also
672 (1990), all of which relate to the issue of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. They set out Israel’s responsibility — Israel,
the occupying Power in the Arab lands — not to
undermine the legal and demographic status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. They also call on the international community
not to recognize any measures taken by the occupying
Power that contravene the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949. Those resolutions deem such measures by the
occupying Power as illegal, indeed null and void. They
condemn Israel’s attempts to alter the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and call on Israel to put an end to its illegal
settlement policies and measures.
The Council heard the statement by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, Mr. Nasser
Al-Kidwa in which he emphasized that Israel has one
objective: the indefinite annexation of East Jerusalem and
the declaration of a unified Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.
It is attempting to achieve that objective by emptying East
Jerusalem of its Palestinian inhabitants through a policy
of land confiscation and placing obstacles of all kinds in
the way of Palestinians’ building homes.
Furthermore, Israel is continuing to build settlements
and to bring in Jewish immigrants in order to entrench the
policy of fait accompli. Israel is doing this despite the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, without fear of having the clear provisions of
the Charter for such cases applied to it, provisions which
the Security Council has quickly applied in other cases
and without as much justification. The decision by the
Council when it considered the settlements issue on 28
February last not to take any measures against Israel gave
it moral support for its policy of imposing a fait
accompli. These are the facts that must be told.
Israel would not have chosen to confiscate 53
hectares of Palestinian land — bringing the total area of
Palestinian land confiscated by Israel in Al-Quds AlSharif since the 1967 occupation to more than 2,400
hectares — had the Security Council taken firm decisions,
and implemented them, to put an end to such violations.
Israel would not have built 35,000 settler units in and
around Al-Quds Al-Sharif had it expected to suffer the
consequences of flouting international law in general and
the binding resolutions of the Security Council in
particular.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
While we know full well that Israel would not have
defied the international community without the unjust
support and the reprehensible help it received from its
allies, we must ask where is the wisdom in setting aside all
the progress that has been made in the international arena
in the post-cold-war period and the individual contributions
of States towards peace and conciliation? Will the alliance
policy remain unchanged?
The Council of the League of Arab States adopted its
resolution 5487 unanimously on 6 May 1995. That
resolution reaffirms that Al-Quds Al-Sharif is an indivisible
part of the territories occupied by Israel in 1967 and that
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
apply to it. The resolution also stresses the significance of
the status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif for the Arab world, both
Muslim and Christian. It also condemns Israel’s decision to
confiscate the 53 hectares of Palestinian land because it
violates international law, flies in the face of its norms,
contravenes the resolutions of the Security Council and the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
Relative to the Protection of Civilians Persons in Time of
War, and finally because it threatens peace. In addition, the
resolution calls on the international community not to
recognize, under any circumstances whatsoever, any
changes made by Israel — the occupying Power — to the
legal and demographic status of the City of Jerusalem, and
also calls on the international community to reject Israel’s
allegation that Jerusalem is its eternal capital.
My Government strongly condemns the measures
taken by Israel in an attempt to entrench its policy of fait
accompli: the annexation of East Jerusalem, the
confiscation of land, the expulsion of Palestinians from the
City and its closure against them, the construction of
settlements and the continuing excavations that threaten the
safety and foundations of the holy Al-Aqsa mosque.
The Government of Sudan believes that the
Palestinians, by signing the Declaration of Principles, have
taken a position that must be respected. We supported that
position although we knew full well that Israel is not
serious in wanting peace. What Israel wants is surrender,
which would allow it to continue to occupy Arab lands,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Surrender would prevent the
return of Palestinian refugees to the lands from which they
were dispersed by unending war and by settlement policies
that have allowed Israel to seize all Palestinian territories
and turn the legitimate and inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, which are supported by the international
community and include their right to create their own

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, into pipe
dreams.
What Israel wants is the surrender of the Arab States
and the international community’s support for its
expansionist policies. Israel is placing obstacles in the
way of peace by all available means. It refuses to
withdraw from the Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon
under the pretext of security concerns, even though it is
the aggressor State and the occupying Power. What Israel
wants is the international community’s acquiescence to
what it has tried to impose by force.
The peace that we want, a peace based on right,
justice and the rule of law, is a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace. Such a peace will be achieved only if Israel
sets aside its expansionist ambitions and withdraws from
all the occupied Arab territories; will be achieved only if
Israel recognizes the legitimate and indivisible rights of
the Palestinian people, including its right to selfdetermination and to the establishment of its own
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital; such a
peace will be achieved only if Israel fully commits itself
to implementing resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978), and also resolutions 252 (1968), 271 (1969),
476 (1980), 478 (1980) and 672 (1990) relating to the
status of Jerusalem.
The Security Council has a great responsibility: it
must stand rock solid for a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace; it must reaffirm its credibility by
denouncing the measures taken by Israel to confiscate
Palestinian land in and around Jerusalem, in building
settlements and in continuing the excavations which
threaten the foundations and safety of the holy Al-Aqsa
mosque. The Council must call on Israel to rescind these
measures forthwith and not to undertake any such
ventures in the future. The Security Council must also
reaffirm the unlawfulness of such measures. And it must
act to implement the provisions of the Charter in order to
ensure the full implementation of the Council’s
resolutions, without exception.
The international community must make public its
rejection and condemnation of Israel’s policies of fait
accompli, which are in violation of international law, of
resolutions that have the force of international law and of
the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
The Council must convince Israel that peace cannot
be achieved by unilateral decisions based on the principle
of the use of force.

3

Security Council
Fiftieth year
My delegation appeals to the Security Council, and
particularly to its permanent members, to heed the voice of
reason in an issue of great religious sensitivity: it must take
decisive action on the basis of the principles of the Charter
and of international law. We believe that, if the Security
Council derogates from its responsibility on the basis of
unacceptable excuses, there will be an entrenchment of a
serious situation that may well pull the Middle East region
down into a new period of tension, with the concomitant
adverse impact on international and regional peace and
security.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Sudan for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the representative of Djibouti. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Dorani (Djibouti) (interpretation from French):
I should like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. Having worked with you and your
delegation during the last two years in the Council, we
know you to be a skilled and experienced diplomat whose
upstanding nature, loyalty and human warmth will ensure
the Council’s success. I should also like to thank your
predecessor, Ambassador Kovanda, for the outstanding way
in which he guided the work of the Council last month.
I should like to say that my brief statement is intended
to be frank and direct and will in no way try to shock
anyone’s sensibilities. That said, yet again the Council has
before it the question of Palestine, which shows how
serious the matter is. For the peace that is so ardently
desired in that part of the world has unfortunately just been
cast back into the balance by the regrettable behaviour of
one party, namely, Israel, the occupying Power.
Forty-seven years ago, the General Assembly took a
decision through its resolution 181 (II) to establish two
States in Palestine under British mandate: the State of Israel
and the Arab State of Palestine. The Jews living under that
mandate accepted the resolution and established their own
State on 14 May 1948. However, the descendants of the
Canaanites, who had inhabited that land for thousands of
years, namely, the indigenous populations of those
regions — the Palestinians — supported by other Arab
States, rejected the resolution, and rightly so: they felt
wronged and usurped, and therefore refused to be content
with a part of the territory. We know what happened next:

4

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995
destruction and misery for all the peoples of the region,
in particular for the Palestinian people who, with the
signing in Washington of the Declaration of Principles to
some extent went back on their original decision by
accepting the division of their country, which would
beyond doubt enable them, sooner or later, to establish at
last their own independent and democratic State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
It is now Israel’s turn to wake up to existing facts
and realities — facts and realities that can never now be
got around. It is now Israel’s turn to think hard about all
the lessons of the past by formally and unambiguously
accepting the division that it accepted in 1948 — to
accept that same division, in other words, to accept, to the
east of its own 1967 frontiers, its future neighbouring
State, the State of Palestine.
One has the impression that today we are reliving
the same scenario as 47 years ago, but with the important
difference that there has been a kind of switch or role
reversal. On the one hand, we have a people that is
utterly exhausted, that has not yet come to the end of a
long and painful road punctuated with destruction and
massacres such as those of Deir Yassin and Sabra and
Shatila, to cite but two examples; a people that, even
before it had created its own State, had already
recognized the State that was occupying it, and the
principles of peaceful coexistence and goodneighbourliness, by accepting resolution 242 (1967); a
people whose only fault, if I may so describe it, is that it
aspires to live in peace in its own independent State, that
is to be.
On the other hand, we have the Israeli
Government — although we are sometimes told that it is
not the Government but rather a very powerful and
influential part of the Israeli political class — and not the
people of Israel, because, fortunately, certainly not the
whole population of Israel shares the points of view of its
Government on problems such as expropriation and
annexation, and therefore on expansion.
To judge by the facts, it would seem today that the
Government of Israel has gone back on its acceptance of
General Assembly resolution 181 (II), and by so doing it
denies the Palestinian people the right to live in peace
within its future boundaries, implicitly recognized in that
resolution. The historical irony is that this principle,
contained in resolution 242 (1967) and still cherished by
Israel until a short time ago, has recently been rejected by

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995

that country, to the detriment of the Palestinians living in
the West Bank and in Gaza.

leadership, have a burning desire for that peace, as they
have demonstrated on many occasions.

On Sunday the Israeli Cabinet decided not to
confiscate any more Arab land. In this respect I should like
to cite the statement made to the Council by the
Ambassador of Israel, Mr. Yaacobi, on 28 February 1995.
On the subject of settlements, he stated,

To be sure, the people of Palestine is today weak,
but it has held out its hand to the people of Israel, which
is very strong and powerful. To be sure, Mr. Ambassador,
you have won almost all the wars. To be sure, you are a
regional Power. To be sure, you are a great force on the
international stage. But allow me to remind you of what
has become of peoples just as strong and civilizations just
as powerful in the past. We do not know what the future
might hold for us. How many weak peoples later became
powerful — and vice versa?

“Immediately after the present Government of Israel
was formed in July 1992, it substantially changed
Israel’s settlement policy ... The Government stopped
allocating public resources to support the extension of
existing settlements. No land has been or will be
confiscated to establish new settlements.” (S/PV.3505,
p. 8)
I leave it to the Council to judge what happened afterwards.

Israel cannot have it both ways, both peace and land.
The pursuit of the establishment of new settlements and
acts of confiscation and expropriation of Arab land,
especially in East Jerusalem and its environs, can only
serve to block the peace process. Such a policy and such
actions contravene international law, the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, the Fourth
Geneva Convention, of 1949, and the Declaration of
Principles signed in Washington.
Members of the Council are aware that a widespread,
generalized feeling of disenchantment, disapproval and
condemnation has come over the Islamic Arab and
Christian Arab world. The Council must not ignore that
feeling and must respond appropriately. The Council has
before it a moderate and balanced draft resolution that will
no doubt contribute to calming nerves and relaunching
negotiations — but this time in a spirit of sincerity.
Djibouti expects that at the end of this debate the Council
will adopt that draft resolution.
I should like to conclude my statement with the
following very sincere remarks directed to the Ambassador
of Israel.
The sons of Ishmael — one may sometimes lose sight
of the fact that they are your cousins — genuinely want
peace, but not just any kind of peace. They want a just and
lasting peace — the peace of the brave, as General de
Gaulle called it. I am sure that the sons of Isaac also want
peace. To judge by facts, the Palestinian leaders — first
and foremost, Chairman Arafat — unlike the Israeli

In saying this, I should like to be perfectly clear: I
wish no ill to anyone — in this case, the people of Israel.
I should simply like to say that Israel must take advantage
of its enormous power and not put it at the service of a
policy based on expropriation, annexation and
humiliation, but, rather, use it for tolerance, acceptance
and good-neighbourliness. When one is strong and, above
all, when one considers the future, one must comfort,
assist and share with one’s neighbour. The example of
Europe after the Second World War is a good lesson. The
prophets of Israel also taught us that lesson, and let us
recall that they are our own prophets as well.
Finally, the Government of Israel must recognize
one thing: without a just and lasting peace with the
Palestinian people and its leadership, there will never be
peace in the Middle East.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Djibouti for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Allagany (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express to you, Sir,
our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that with your abilities and experience you will
lead the Council to the desired success. I would also like
to express our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador
Karel Kovanda, for his outstanding conduct of the
business of the Council last month.
Once again the Security Council is considering the
question of Holy Jersualem, Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the first

5

Security Council
Fiftieth year
kiblah and the third holiest shrine, within its consideration
of a whole set of questions affecting the Arab States and
the territories occupied since 1967. In recent times — since
the beginning of the Middle East peace process in Madrid
in 1991 — we have entertained some hope for international
unanimity on the basic principles for a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East. These principles include a
full withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories,
including Holy Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights, on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), and Israel’s implementation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), relating to its withdrawal from
southern Lebanon. These resolutions also provide for the
right of all States in the region to live in peace and security
and the right of the Palestinian people to determine their
future and their destiny.
Over the last four years we had hoped and dreamed
that this region could once again enjoy prosperity and
peace. We hoped that all parties would sincerely implement
the commitments they undertook, especially after the
signing of the Declaration of Principles between the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Israeli
Government in Washington on 13 September 1993. We
thought that would be the first step towards the
establishment of a just peace between the Palestinians and
Israel.
With optimism and high hopes, we expected that
agreement to herald peace and prosperity, and the various
stages of the agreement to proceed smoothly. But the Israeli
Government has taken a number of decisions that have
dashed those hopes and marred the atmosphere of the peace
process; these have thwarted the creative thought and
thorough analysis needed to consolidate the principles of
good-neighbourliness.
We deeply regret that the Israeli authorities continue
to take illegal measures to confiscate additional Palestinian
land, and that it is still attempting to annex East Jerusalem
and alter its legal, demographic and geographical status.
These measures all clearly violate the Fourth Geneva
Convention, in particular its articles 47 and 49.
Since Israel took its first steps towards the annexation
of Jerusalem, the Security Council and the General
Assembly have adopted many resolutions denouncing these
Israeli actions and declaring them all null and void.
Foremost among the Security Council resolutions are
resolutions 252 (1968), 271 (1969), 476 (1980), 478 (1980)
and 672 (1990). In that connection we highlight resolution
478 (1980), in which the Council categorically decided not

6

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995
to recognize Israel’s annexation of Jerusalem and called
upon all States not to establish diplomatic missions to
Israel at Holy Jerusalem.
Respect for Security Council resolutions on
Jerusalem is not only required by international law and
international legitimacy; it is a prerequisite for the
continuation and the success of the Middle East peace
process, which began in Madrid. There is no room for
doubt that violation of such resolutions, particularly those
relating to Holy Jerusalem, will cause the untimely end of
that peace process.
Along with its sister Arab States, Saudi Arabia has
supported the peace process in order to bring about its
success and to enable the Palestinian self-rule authorities
to consolidate their footing and move the peace process
forward. The representatives of the international
community, the Security Council and the co-sponsors of
the peace process, the United States of America and the
Russian Federation, must shoulder their responsibility to
convince Israel to rescind its illegal actions with respect
to the confiscation of Arab land in Holy Jerusalem and to
commit itself, completely and sincerely, to the success of
the peace process. Silence by the Security Council and
the international community at large on these actions
would once again raise questions about the Council’s
credibility and about the international criteria on which
values of justice, right and peace are based.
One of the provisions of the Declaration of
Principles signed by the PLO and Israel states that talks
on Holy Jerusalem should begin no later than the third
year of the interim period. The two parties agreed that
four questions would be negotiated next year when the
final status negotiations had begun: Jerusalem;
settlements; refugees; and boundaries. It is our
understanding that the Declaration of Principles commits
both parties to taking no step that could impede those
negotiations. We wonder whether Israel’s understanding
differs from ours.
The Arab and Islamic worlds expect the Security
Council once again to reaffirm Arab and Islamic rights to
Jerusalem. They call upon the Council to declare illegal
these Israeli decisions and actions. They expect it to make
Israel cease its plans and programmes for settlements in
the occupied Arab territories. The Security Council has
the power today to salvage the Middle East peace
process. It has the power to stop Israel from persisting in
these policies and practices.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
We hope that the Council will shoulder its
responsibility to restore legitimate Arab and Islamic rights,
and that the Middle East, along with other regions, will
enjoy prosperity, stability and peace.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Saudi Arabia for the kind words he
addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Azwai (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation
from Arabic): I would like at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am confident that your wide
experience and your wisdom will enable you to steer the
Council towards shouldering its important responsibilities
for maintaining international peace and security.
Nor can I fail to express my deep thanks and
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Kovanda,
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic, for his
wise leadership of the Security Council last month.
The Security Council is meeting to consider an
important issue which has repeatedly been placed before it
in the past: the violation by the Israelis of resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in this instance
by confiscating 53 hectares of Palestinian Arab land in East
Jerusalem in order to build more Israeli settlements, as a
part of their continued attempts to Judaize the Holy City
and to alter its demographic composition. By taking this
step, the Israelis have proved once again that they do not
respect international legality, and never comply with any
United Nations resolutions.
The international community on more than one
occasion has opposed measures taken by the Israelis to
annex the Holy City of Al-Quds and to change its legal
status, geographic features and demographic composition.
The Council itself has adopted several resolutions on this
question, perhaps the most important among them being
resolution 478 (1980), in which the Security Council
expressed its concern over the enactment of the “basic law”
which proclaimed changes in the characteristics and status
of the Holy City, and in the strongest possible terms
censured that law and the refusal by the Israelis to comply
with relevant Security Council resolutions.

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995
In resolution 478 (1980) the Security Council
affirmed that the "basic law" was a violation of
international law, and determined that all the legislative
and administrative measures and actions taken by the
Israeli occupying Power were null and void and should be
rescinded forthwith, because such measures and actions
constituted a serious obstruction to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The Security Council also called on all States that had
established diplomatic missions in Al-Quds to withdraw
them.
What happened following the adoption of that
resolution? The Israelis continued their defiance of
Security Council resolutions and persisted in their actions
aimed at the Judaization of the Holy City. They also
continued their excavations designed to undermine the
Al-Aqsa mosque, having failed to burn it down in 1969.
They also persisted in placing obstacles in the way of
Palestinian Arabs living in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to force
them to leave the city - sometimes by sealing it off from
the rest of the cities of Palestine, and at other times by
inciting fanatic settlers to perpetrate repeated attacks
against Palestinian Arabs.
Even the recent developments, the so-called Peace
Agreements between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
have not prevented the Israelis from continuing their
violations of Security Council resolutions and encroaching
upon the rights of the Palestinian people - rights which
have been confirmed and supported by international
legality. And here we have to ask: Until what point will
the Israelis continue to refuse to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council and the international
community? And do the Israelis really want peace?
The question being considered by the Security
Council today is an extremely important and serious one,
because Al-Quds Al-Sharif is the key to war and peace
now as it was in the past and as it will be in the future.
The question, this time, does not concern only Arab
Governments that Israel’s allies could exert pressure on
and contain. It is a matter that goes beyond Arab
Governments and touches the very sensibilities of all the
peoples of the Arab nation, from the Ocean to the Gulf.
It also is a matter of concern for the peoples of the
Islamic nation as a whole. No attempt to contain the
reaction of angry peoples will ever succeed. Moreover,
this development will fuel more extremism in the region,
the very extremism whose original motivation was the
actions of the Israelis and their allies.

7

Security Council
Fiftieth year

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995

The patience of the Arab people and the peoples of the
Islamic nation is running out, as they witness every day
Israeli arrogance and Israeli persistence in humiliating the
Arabs and Muslims, in defiance of all the resolutions of the
Security Council, because the Israelis are exempt from
implementing those resolutions thanks to the biased position
of the United States of America. This even encourages the
Israelis to continue to perpetrate their violations and their
expansion, by force, at the expense of their neighbours.

and all peoples dedicated to the prevalence of peace and
security in the Middle East are looking to the Council. So
either it can adopt a decisive resolution that would put an
end to illegal Israeli actions which undermine faith in a
lasting, just and comprehensive peace in the region, or it
can push the peoples of the area to choose the road of
confrontation and extremism, which might well draw the
region once again into a bloody conflict that would
threaten international peace and security.

The Israelis are exempt from being subjected to
Chapter VII of the Charter, notwithstanding the fact that all
their terrorist actions against the Palestinian people fall
under Chapter VII of the Charter. Arabs and Muslims ask:
Why has the Security Council been unable to force the
Israelis to comply with its numerous resolutions? And why
does the Security Council avoid the application of Chapter
VII to the Israelis? Furthermore, why does the Security
Council turn a blind eye to the atrocious Israeli massacres
of Palestinian Arabs and then turn around and raise hell
when a Jewish settler in Palestine is slightly injured? Arabs
and Muslims also ask: Why does a super-Power, a
permanent member of the Security Council, encourage and
even incite the Israelis to refuse to abide by the resolutions
of the Security Council? Does this not show a stark
contradiction between its responsibilities as a permanent
member of the Security Council and its actions when it
comes to the Israelis? Would not such a position give
several countries justification for not complying with
Security Council resolutions - including my own country,
which is being subjected to unjust sanctions imposed by the
Security Council, under Chapter VII, on the mere suspicion
of the involvement of two Libyan citizens in the explosion
of an American aircraft? Worse still, it is the United States
that is impeding any settlement of a legal dispute which
should have never been put before the Security Council in
the first place, because it does not constitute any threat to
international peace and security.

Everything will depend on the decisions and
practical measures the Security Council takes regarding
Israeli policies designed to nibble at and ultimately
Judaize Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

The policy of humiliation and double standards in
international issues is very regrettable, because it is being
applied by the Security Council and by a super-Power that
is a permanent member of the Council. This cannot go on;
it cannot be condoned indefinitely because it agitates
peoples and drives them to seek every means possible to rid
themselves of the injustice. It might even drive them to
reconsider the very usefulness of a United Nations that has
lost its credibility in the field of protecting peoples and
their rights and sovereignty.

As is known, the political decision of the Arab
States to begin negotiations with Israel was a decision
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1969) and 338
(1973) and on the principle of land for peace.

Today, the Security Council has before it an extremely
sensitive question. The Arab world and the Islamic world

But now the Council is meeting today in the wake
of the recent decision by the Government of Israel to

8

The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the
kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Ould Ely (Mauritania)(interpretation from
French): I wish first, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May 1995. I am sure that your experience and skill will
ensure the success of the Council’s deliberations. My
confidence in you is made even stronger by the important
role that France, this friendly country, is playing in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I take this opportunity also to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Karel Kovanda, on the
efficient and skilful way in which he guided the Council’s
work in April.

The decision of the Government of Israel to begin
negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the signature of the Declaration of Principles
by the two parties strengthened confidence in the peace
process.

Security Council
Fiftieth year
confiscate 53 hectares of Palestinian land in occupied East
Jerusalem. This action, which has aroused almost universal
disapproval and has had a negative impact on the fragile
peace process in the Middle East, is a blatant and flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, United
Nations resolutions and the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements, signed on
13 September 1993. What is more, the decision runs
counter to the norms of international conduct, the United
Nations Charter and the rules and principles of international
law. Far from promoting the emergence of a climate of
confidence in the difficult negotiations now under way, it
is yet another obstacle on the path towards an overall
settlement of the question of the Middle East.
That is why the Islamic Republic of Mauritania — as
many other countries have already done — strongly
condemns the Israeli decision, which aspires to present the
international community with a fait accompli and, by so
doing, continues to turn a blind eye to the feelings and
aspirations of the immense majority of the world’s peoples.

3536th meeting (Resumption 2)
16 May 1995
True, there has been a great deal of progress since
the Madrid Peace Conference over three years ago.
Negotiation and respect for the norms and principles of
international law were in the process of ousting the
tension and violence the peoples of the Middle East had
suffered under for so long. But today the peace process is
at a critical stage: the Security Council must take urgent
steps to address these serious violations of international
law. Progress in, indeed the success of the peace process
depend to a large extent on the political will and the
commitment of the two parties to fulfil the undertakings
they have put their names to. Unilateral actions such as
the one that brings us here today cannot but arouse
suspicion and doubt, and undermine the aspirations of the
peoples of the region for peace and concord.
The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Mauritania for his kind words
addressed to me.
There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

9
