United Nations

S/PV.6121

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6121st meeting
Friday, 8 May 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion
Letter dated 6 May 2009 from the Permanent Representative of Chad to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2009/232)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-33090 (E)

*0933090*

S/PV.6121

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I now give
the floor to Mr. Titov.

Adoption of the agenda

Mr. Titov: Members of the Council may recall
that in the briefing by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to the Council on 24 April (see S/PV.6111),
we called attention to a significant build-up of the
Chadian National Armed Forces in eastern Chad, both
in personnel and in equipment, apparently in
anticipation of a rebel incursion. At that time, we noted
reports of a parallel build-up of Chadian armed
opposition groups across the border in West Darfur, in
the area of El Geneina. While this was cause for
serious concern, this build-up did not, until recently,
result in any significant clashes or cross-border
incursions by the armed opposition groups.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion
Letter dated 6 May 2009 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2009/232)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representatives of Chad and the Sudan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) and Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) took seats at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Dmitry Titov,
Officer-in-Charge of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Titov to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to a letter dated 6 May 2009 from
the Permanent Representative of Chad to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, contained in document S/2009/232.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Dmitry Titov, Officer-in-Charge of the

2

To the extent possible, the United Nations
undertook to deploy much-needed additional United
Nations troops more rapidly to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) in the eastern part of the country, to
enable it to deliver on its protection mandate. As
Council members are aware, the mandate authorizes
the United Nations to protect civilians in danger,
facilitate delivery of humanitarian aid and movement
of humanitarian personnel and protect United Nations
personnel and facilities.
On 26 April, we began receiving unconfirmed
reports, including through MINURCAT, of minor
skirmishes between the Chadian security forces and
small groups of rebels of the Union des forces de la
résistance (UFR) in eastern Chad. Subsequently, we
received unconfirmed reports of air strikes conducted
on 1 and 2 May by the Chadian National Armed Forces
on rebel positions. This was occurring in the vicinity of
the border with the Sudan. In a statement dated 4 May,
the Secretary-General expressed his serious concern
over the build-up and movement of army and rebel
forces and called on the Governments of Chad and the
Sudan to make every effort to immediately ease
tensions.
On 5 May, MINURCAT was able to confirm that
the Chadian National Armed Forces were conducting
air strikes, using jet fighters and attack helicopters,
against a rebel column in eastern Chad in the area
south of Goz Beida. Reports indicated the existence of
three main rebel columns: two had moved into eastern
Chad, while the third reportedly remained in a static
position across the border. Reports on the actual sizes

09-33090

S/PV.6121

of the columns vary, but each column is believed to
number anywhere between 50 and 100 vehicles.
Regrettably, the situation intensified, and on
6 May the Secretary-General was compelled to express
his increasing concern and to call for respect of the
humanitarian character of United Nations operations
and the operations of our non-governmental partners in
eastern Chad.
On 6 and 7 May, we continued to receive reports
from MINURCAT on air strikes targeting the rebel
column, which was apparently located in a corridor
extending from Goz Beida to Koukou Angarana and
Kerfi in eastern Chad. These air strikes have reportedly
resulted in heavy rebel losses. The extent of these
losses, however, is difficult to assess at present. No
assessment is available on the extent of losses by the
Chadian army either.
Yesterday, we received reports of very heavy
ground engagement between the Chadian army and
UFR rebels in the vicinity of Am Dam, north of Goz
Beida in eastern Chad, which is believed to be a pivotal
area for any further progress towards the towns of
Abéché and N’Djamena. According to today’s report,
heavy fighting in this area continues and unconfirmed
reports received from the Chadian armed forces
indicate that the Front is claiming 125 rebels and
soldiers killed and over 150 rebels taken prisoner.
Meanwhile, the second rebel column is reported
to have moved southward to the area of Tissi, near the
border with the Central African Republic, and it has
since moved westward towards Am Timan. We have no
confirmed reports that this column has engaged in
fighting yet.
The deteriorating security situation in eastern
Chad has prompted humanitarian actors, including
three United Nations agencies and 11 international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), to relocate
their non-essential staff from Koukou Angarana to Goz
Beida as a precautionary measure. In addition, some
international NGOs have decided to relocate their staff
from areas such as Ade and Abéché. At the request of
the Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) command,
MINURCAT has also assisted in the relocation of 25 of
their officers in the area. In total, our Mission assisted
in relocating almost 100 various international and
national staff, who are currently under the protection of
the MINURCAT contingent.

09-33090

The head of MINURCAT, Mr. Victor Angelo,
visited Goz Beida two days ago to personally take
stock of the situation in town and to reassure the
United Nations and NGO staff as to the determination
and capability of MINURCAT to protect them. Also,
two days ago, the United Nations suspended all its
activities in several regions of eastern Chad, owing to
movement of armed opposition groups in those areas.
Thus far, no significant population displacements
have been reported as a result of fighting. The
confrontation, however, has gravely compromised the
ability of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and their NGO partners to deliver
humanitarian assistance.
On 3 May in Doha, under the auspices of the
Governments of Qatar and Libya, the Governments of
Chad and the Sudan signed a new bilateral agreement
to normalize relations and deny any support, in their
respective territories, to rebel groups that are hostile to
either of them. Only two days later, on 5 May, a
spokesman of the Government of Chad accused the
Government of the Sudan of sending armed elements
into eastern Chad and thus breaching the Doha
agreement. A spokesman of the Government of the
Sudan has denied this accusation, noting that his
country remained committed to the Doha agreement.
It is essential, therefore, that both Governments
act upon the Doha agreement and past commitments to
prevent further rebel incursions from either side of the
border. It is also essential that armed opposition groups
realize that efforts to seize power through force are
unacceptable. In that regard, the current presence of
representatives of the Justice and Equality Movement
in Doha for meetings with representatives of the
Government of the Sudan is an encouraging
development from our point of view.
At the same time, as the rainy season is
beginning, it is critically important that the
humanitarian community be able to pre-position
essential humanitarian supplies and materials,
especially in the communities that become isolated due
to flooded and impassable roads. Should the current
situation worsen, it could potentially jeopardize that
very important humanitarian work.
As of today, the MINURCAT force stands at
2,396 personnel, which represents 46 per cent of its
authorized strength. The force lacks 14 of the 18
military utility and reconnaissance helicopters called

3

S/PV.6121

for in the concept of operations for the Mission. It has
yet to achieve the full deployment of the Ghanaian
battalion, and will not commence deployment of the
Nepalese battalion as an operational reserve, based in
Abéché, until June, based on that unit’s readiness to
move.
As a result, the United Nations military force
lacks the ability to observe and track incidents as they
develop, as well as a force reserve that possesses the
necessary mobility to reinforce sites or to react to
changing circumstances. We therefore urge the Council
to join the Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations is appealing to potential
troop contributors to provide MINURCAT with the
required helicopter and other assets in order to enable
it to fully deliver on its mandate. In the meantime, we
commend the work of the United Nations uniformed
and civilian personnel, who continue to serve in eastern
Chad under extremely difficult conditions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Titov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of May. I would also like to welcome the
Secretariat’s report and to assure it that it has received
our full attention.
I have come from Doha, where once again I was
naive enough to hope that the Khartoum regime had
decided to put an end to its aggression against my
country and indeed to its subversive attempts to thwart
our policy to consolidate the rule of law and
democracy. For a moment, I actually hoped that it
would be the end of those attempts to overthrow the
legitimate institutions of the country and to install in
N’Djamena an authority loyal to Khartoum —
Khartoum, which thus hopes to benefit from the
complicity of such an authority to continue with
impunity its crimes against humanity in Darfur.
However, at the time of the press conference that
followed the signing of the agreement, a slight doubt
about Khartoum’s good faith crossed my mind. Indeed,
in answer to a question about the presence of
subversive forces on Sudanese territory, the Sudanese
Minister wanted it believed that the fighters of the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) were based in

4

Chad, giving as an example the presence in N’Djamena
of Mr. Khalil, the head of that movement. However,
with the agreement of the Sudan, we facilitated a
meeting between the envoy of a great country and
Mr. Khalil of JEM. That envoy used his good offices
for the resumption of the Doha inter-Sudanese talks,
with a view to a ceasefire and a political settlement of
the Darfur crisis. He managed to convince JEM to
dispatch a delegation to Doha. Did we commit a crime
by playing our role of facilitator?
Khartoum’s attitude does not surprise us if we
look at the past. Peace agreements have been signed at
the level of heads of State — first in Tripoli, Libya, on
8 February 2006; in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on 3 May
2007; and in Dhaka, Senegal, on 13 March 2008 — not
to mention the many communiqués issued in the
context of peace initiatives of the countries of the
subregion or of the African Union under the auspices
of our brother, Guide Muammar Al-Qadhafi. Once the
meeting was over and the agreement signed, the ink
hardly dry, whether immediately afterwards or a few
days or weeks later, we were attacked by forces coming
from the Sudan.
In short, if, despite all those agreements, the
situation continues to worsen, it is because somewhere
there is ill will and bad faith. One tends to say that it is
the fault of both countries, which seems to us
inaccurate. How can you put on an equal footing the
one that started the war — the aggressor — and the one
that is defending itself: the victim.
We are the victims of a Machiavellian
machination of the Khartoum regime, whereas we have
not stopped working for peace in Darfur. But Khartoum
has unjustly accused us of being behind the rebellion in
Darfur and has mounted a vast war machine to
destabilize our country. The proof exists. We have
proof that since the beginning of 2005, the Sudan has
recruited, equipped and trained a subversive tribal
force against Chad. These are Sudanese, Chadian and
bi-national combatants whose only goal is to overthrow
the legitimate institutions of the country. It made
available to that force Toyota military vehicles, heavy
weapons, equipment stockpiles, food, fuel and so on.
And it has not stopped trying to unite all those tribal
components into a common front and has made
available to them several military training camps in
Darfur.

09-33090

S/PV.6121

Moreover, the Khartoum regime applauded the
desertion of some elements of the Chadian National
Armed Forces in October 2005 and the defection of
some Chadian officers in December 2005. Those
soldiers and officers were retrieved by Khartoum,
which placed them at the head of its war machine to
conceal its aggression as an intra-Chadian issue.
That subversive force became active on
26 September 2005, when it attacked the Chadian town
Moudeina. Two major attacks were carried out on Adré
on 18 December 2005. That double attack on Adré was
followed by a huge offensive against several Chadian
military garrisons in eastern Chad and a Sudanese
refugee camp on Chadian territory. But the most
spectacular attacks were those of 13 April 2006 and
2 February 2008 on N’Djamena, clearly revealing
Khartoum’s intention to overthrow State institutions.
With regard to what is occurring in the eastern
part of my country, members will agree with me that I
was right to tell them in my previous communications
that the rule of law and democracy, which we intend to
consolidate in Chad, necessarily depend on stability
and peace in the country, and not the obscure strategies
of the groups of armed mercenaries in the pay of the
Sudan. They will agree that the establishment of a
lasting peace in Chad depends also, and in particular,
on the consolidation of the democratic rule of law in
the country through effective implementation of the
provisions of the 13 August 2007 political agreement
sponsored by the international community. They will
agree too that those who, as I said, are still today being
unfairly called the armed opposition must renounce the
use of force and return to the country, in accordance
with the 25 October 2007 Sirte Agreement, instead of
rejecting that Agreement on the pretext that it is
obsolete, thus helping to consolidate the democratic
rule of law, to which we want them to truly commit
themselves by endorsing the 13 August 2007 political
agreement. However, I also quite rightly emphasize
that we should not dream too much, as we know that
they are not free to choose that path, which is contrary
to their masters’ Machiavellian designs.
Despite the Doha agreement, their masters
ordered them to enter Chad, and its army supports them
in attacking Chad. Members will recall that I
emphasized their presence in the Sudan and that, under
the 25 October 2007 Sirte Agreement, they were
supposed to be disarmed and regrouped where they
were stationed. That is why, before the Council, we

09-33090

welcomed the Secretary-General’s most recent report
on this topic (S/2009/199), in which he stated in
paragraph 13 that those indebted to Khartoum — our
phrase — “continued to consolidate their forces in
West Darfur near El Geneina”. On the same occasion, I
reaffirmed our commitment to comply with the
provisions of all the peace agreements linking us to the
Sudan: the Tripoli, Dakar and Riyadh Agreements. And
I concluded by expressing to the Council our hope that
the Chadian-Sudanese peace talks to be held in Doha,
Qatar, would pave the way for a true normalization of
our relations.
On 5 May, the Government of the Republic of
Chad recalled that it had welcomed the signing of the
Doha agreement on normalizing relations with the
Sudan — the umpteenth agreement, as knowledgeable
observers ironically stressed. Trusting in the
commitment of the mediator countries and the
expressed will to implement the provisions of all
previous agreements, the Government of the Republic
of Chad emphasized that it hoped that this time, there
would truly be a return to peace and trust between the
two countries.
Regrettably, the Chadian Government bitterly
noted that the intentions and the strategy of the
Khartoum regime had not changed and that, by signing
the Doha Agreement, the Khartoum regime had acted
with the same duplicity as with previous agreements.
With the ink on the Doha Agreement not even dry, the
Government of Chad denounced the aggressive posture
of the Khartoum regime, which had launched several
armed columns, equipped with 350 vehicles, against
our country. They were defeated, but we do not exclude
the possibility that Khartoum will repeat its aggression.
The Chadian Government believes that, by unleashing
that planned aggression against Chad, the Sudanese
regime renounced the Doha agreement.
Through its statement, the Government of the
Republic of Chad wishes to draw the international
community’s attention to the bad faith of the Khartoum
regime and to ask that it take all necessary useful
measures to help Chad protect its stability, its integrity
and the safety of its beleaguered population. Therefore,
I wish to state that, on my Government’s instructions, I
requested that the Security Council hold an urgent
meeting to consider the new aggression committed by
the Sudan against my country. I thank the Council for
heeding our appeal and organizing this meeting.

5

S/PV.6121

It is no longer a secret to any Council member
present here that the puppet force created, armed,
equipped and led by Sudanese soldiers and reinforced
by the notorious Janjaweed militia has constantly
attacked my country. As I said, the Secretary-General’s
most recent report indicated the presence of that force
near El Geneina, in the Sudan. The Chad-Sudan
mediation cannot deny that, because it requested that
the Doha meeting be delayed and held on 28 April
instead of 7 April, as previously planned, to give the
Sudanese Government time to fulfil its commitments
under the 25 October Sirte Agreement by moving its
puppets away from the border and disarming them. The
Doha agreement also refers to the Sirte Agreement in
its provision calling for the parties to comprehensively
implement the agreements of which they have been
witnesses and guarantors.
This new situation, which dangerously threatens
peace and security in the subregion in general and in
Chad in particular, deserves the urgent attention of the
Council so that it can take all appropriate measures to
put an end to the Sudan’s repeated aggressions against
my country, which needs the international community’s
support to protect its integrity, its stability and the
security of its population. The Security Council must
no longer tolerate the fact that thousands of men
equipped with hundreds of vehicles are being
mobilized by the Sudan in plain view of the entire
world to attack my country. The Council must clearly
condemn the Al-Bashir regime for its repeated acts of
aggression over the years against my country, which
has suffered too much from war and aspires to live in
peace under the rule of law and democracy, even
though that is not what Khartoum would prefer.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now call on
the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to express our satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council as the
representative of a country that is well known for its
full commitment to the firm principles guiding
international relations and that has friendly relations
with my own country. We have no doubt that, with
your wisdom, you will lead the Council’s deliberations
to the success to which we all aspire. We also
commend
your
predecessor,
the
Permanent
Representative of Mexico, for the skilful manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council last

6

month. In addition, we thank the representative of the
Secretariat for his valuable briefing today.
Once again, the Sudan was not surprised by the
crocodile tears that Chad shed before the Security
Council. We have never been surprised when Chad has
rushed to accuse our country, which is not involved in
the internal conflicts that have intensified between
Chad and its opposition. That has become a consistent
and well-known method of the Chadian Government.
We have not been surprised at Chad’s tendency to
blame the Sudan — in ploys that no longer deceive
anyone anywhere in the world — for its own failure to
honour commitments under the agreements that it has
signed with Chadian factions against the Sudan.
What is happening in Chad is an internal affair
that the Sudan has nothing to do with. On several
occasions, the Sudan has called for independent
mechanisms to investigate Chadian allegations that
were made to conceal Chad’s domestic failures and to
mask its plans for aggression against the Sudan.
Yet, as is well known, Chad continues to avoid
meetings of the Contact Group stipulated in the Dakar
Agreement, and member States of the Group can testify
to that fact. A lack of political will on the part of the
Chadian leadership to implement its agreements with
the Sudan has become entirely clear to everyone.
We would like to draw attention to the fact that
Chad has made a habit of covering its criminal
activities on Sudanese territory by bringing complaint
after complaint to the Security Council, and by
multiplying its false accusations whenever it plans an
act of aggression against our country.
There is abundant evidence. We recall the
aggression carried out against Omdurman on 12 May
2008: a few days prior to the attack, Chad complained
to the Security Council in order to pre-emptively cover
it up. We assure the Council that these latest
accusations against the Sudan are yet another obvious
and clear manoeuvre to cover up intensive aggression
that is taking place and that will be carried out by the
Justice and Equality Movement from Chadian territory
against positions and sites of a party to the Darfur
Peace Agreement.
The Movement attacked the area of Forawiya on
5 May and took the area leader as prisoner, and on
6 May it attacked the area of Abu Kumbra. At this very
moment, the Justice and Equality Movement, which is

09-33090

S/PV.6121

supported by Chad, is conducting attacks on several
areas east of Djebel Mara and around Djebel Moun,
relying on major logistical support from the
Government of Chad. This support takes the form of
200 Land Cruisers, 22 four-barrelled guns, 60 DShK
guns, 150 Karnov machine guns and 20 oil tank trucks,
in addition to other military support. Through this
Chadian support, the Justice and Equality Movement
has resumed its military activities in Darfur, having
been compensated by the Government of Chad for the
losses it incurred during its attack on Omdurman.

the N’Djamena Agreement of 14 May 1993 between
the National Front of Chad led by Mr. Elharith and the
Government of President Idriss Déby. The Government
of Chad knows very well that the Sudan led a
mediation initiative to address the problems that arose
between Chadian President Idriss Déby and his former
Defence Minister Abbas Koty. That mediation led to
the conclusion of the Tripoli Agreement of 14 August
1993, under which the former Defence Minister
returned to Chad. But Chad’s record of eliminating all
those who oppose it is well known to all.

In clear violation of all relevant provisions of the
agreements, the Government of Chad has facilitated the
Justice and Equality Movement’s entry into the refugee
camps in eastern Chad, allowing it during the past few
months to conduct conscription campaigns among the
refugees and displaced persons. They have even
recruited children and used them in their irresponsible
adventures. Reports submitted to the Council by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
testify to that state of affairs.

Chad knows very well that the Sudan led the
reconciliation efforts between President Idriss Déby
and the National Reform Council group. That
mediation culminated in the Reconciliation Agreement
of 1995.

Everyone has to recognize and admit that our
neighbour Chad has complicated internal problems that
predate the Darfur problem by decades, and for which
a peaceful and comprehensive political settlement is
needed. Avoiding the facts and levelling accusations
against others will not help to bring about the peace
and stability that we in the Sudan are eager to see as
soon as possible, for we know that in the stability of
Chad lies the stability of the Sudan as well.
Therefore, Chad’s accusations that the Sudan is
destabilizing Chad are without merit, as they are
intended to cloak an act of aggression that is taking
place now and to divert attention from the real
problems of Chad. As members of the Council know,
the Sudan is eager to bring about stability in Chad. Our
initiatives and contributions are in no way transient:
bringing about stability in our neighbouring State is
our strategic goal, to which the Sudan has devoted
considerable efforts over the decades, well before the
problem of Darfur arose. The Government of Chad
knows very well that the Sudan sought to achieve
national reconciliation in Chad throughout the 1970s,
1980s and 1990s.
The Government of Chad also knows that, at the
initiative of the Government of the Sudan and under its
auspices, reconciliation between the Government of
Chad and the opposition culminated in the signing of

09-33090

On 22 October 1997, Khartoum hosted the
reconciliation meeting between the Government of
Chad and four opposition factions, which culminated in
the conclusion of the Khartoum Agreement between
both sides and the return of the opposition parties to
N’Djamena in a Sudanese aircraft accompanied by a
high Sudanese official. The Government of Idriss Déby
knows that in July 1999 the Sudan led reconciliation
efforts between the Government of Chad and the
National Movement for Democracy and Development
led by Moussa Madela.
Those are only a few examples of the
reconciliation agreements that were brought about
through the initiative of the Sudan, and under its
auspices before the Darfur problem arose. Yet some
have claimed that the problems flowed from Darfur
into Chad rather than acknowledging that Chad had its
own chronic and difficult problems.
Regarding the agreement between Chad and the
opposition groups, in which the Sudan has played a key
role, we refer as an example to the participation of the
President himself in the reconciliation and mediation
effort that led to the conclusion of the Sirte Agreement
between the Government of Chad and the main
opposition factions on 25 October 2007, under the
auspices of President Muammar Al-Qadhafi of Libya.
Over the years, the Sudan has remained a constructive
party in all the efforts, including bilateral and regional
mediation initiatives, between President Idriss Déby
and the Chadian opposition.
It is sad indeed that I am obliged to describe to
the Council Chad’s constant attempts to undermine the

7

S/PV.6121

agreements that have been reached and to which the
Sudan remains unilaterally committed. Those
agreements include the Tripoli Agreement of
8 February 2006, the Khartoum Framework Agreement
of 28 August 2006, the Riyadh Agreement of 3 May
2007, the Dakar Agreement of 13 March 2008 and the
recent Doha Agreement of 3 May 2009, on which we
were negotiating just as the Government of Chad and
the Justice and Equality Movement were preparing
their criminal invasion, which is now under way and
which Chad is attempting to conceal under a multitude
of accusations against the Sudan.
We look forward to Chad turning its attention to
the resolution of its own internal problems. We look
forward to it ceasing its continued attempts to
destabilize the Sudan and prolong the war in Darfur,
using the Justice and Equality Movement to that end,
and putting an end to its blatant allegations. The Sudan
already has enough priorities and challenges to face,
and it has nothing to gain by interfering in the internal
affairs of any other country, let alone those of the
Government of Chad. The Sudan attaches great
importance to Chad and knows that it will be
affected — negatively or positively — by anything that
happens in Chad. In view of the kinship that links us
with the tribes and all the people of Chad, we hope that
the Government of Chad will have the courage to
address its internal problems and fulfil its
commitments in that regard.
Levelling accusations at the Sudan will not help
Chad. The international community must recognize too
that Chad has chronic problems that predate the Darfur
issue. The Government of Chad must acknowledge the
Sudan’s good-offices efforts rather than making
baseless accusations. It must show the political will to

8

fulfil the aspirations of both peoples to a stable and
safe environment, something to which my country is
committed.
Chad’s repeated recourse to the Security
Council — with the well-known support of one
member of the Council which seeks only to further its
own strategic interests in the region — is not in the
interest of Chad or its people and does not serve the
stability of these two neighbourly States. Nor does it
serve the credibility of the Security Council.
If it truly wishes to help the sister Republic of
Chad, the Security Council must advise it first to seek
reconciliation among its own people and not to ignore
regional mechanisms such as the Community of
Sahelo-Saharan States, which is making praiseworthy
efforts to build peace in the region. The Security
Council has been calling for a larger role for regional
arrangements, and it should translate its words into
deeds. It is strange indeed that Chad should rush to the
Security Council in this way at the very time when the
African Union Peace and Security Council is considering
this matter.
I wish in conclusion to assure the Council that the
Sudan is fully committed to the policy of goodneighbourliness and to implementing all agreements
concluded between our two States, in the interests of
peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I should now like to invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

09-33090
