S/2020/358

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 May 2020
Original: English

Implementation of paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013)
Twenty-sixth report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to missing Kuwaiti and thirdcountry nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, since
my previous report, dated 20 February 2020 (S/2020/133).

II.

Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return of all
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains
2.
Owing to constraints related to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic
and the associated response, the Technical Subcommittee postponed until further
notice its 113th meeting, which had been planned for 20 April 2020. The d ecision was
made in consultation with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Kuwait and the Ministry of Defence of Iraq.
3.
The Tripartite Commission continued to follow up on decisions and action
points from the 112th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, held in Amman on
16 February 2020, which the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
attended in its capacity as observer. During the meeting, the Technical Subcommittee
received updates on activities and developments pertaining to the search for the
remains of Kuwaiti and third-country nationals since its most recent meeting, on
3 December 2019. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to follow up on sites of
interest, in particular those in Samawah, Khamisiyah, Radwaniyah, Karbala’ and
Salman Pak, as well as the naval base in Kuwait. In addition, the Ministry of Defence
of Iraq continued to issue quarterly public appeals for witnesses to come forward.
4.
During the 112th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, the Ministry of
Defence of Iraq gave a detailed account of the events that had led to the exhumation
of a third mass gravesite, which was located at the Samawah burial site and discovered
thanks to coordinates previously provided by Kuwait and co rroborated by witness
testimony, on 31 January 2020. The gravesite was located at the Tall al -Shaykhiyah
mass grave cluster in Samawah, within close proximity to two other gravesites that
had been exhumed in March 2019 and contained remains suspected of be longing to
Kuwaiti citizens or third-country nationals. Human remains recovered from the third
gravesite were immediately transported to the Medico -Legal Directorate of the

20-06028 (E)

060520

*2006028*

S/2020/358

Ministry of Health of Iraq, in Baghdad, for DNA profiling to determine whether they
belonged to Iraqi nationals. If it is determined conclusively that the remains do not
belong to Iraqi nationals, the Directorate will transfer them to Kuwait for
identification. Meanwhile, forensic teams in Kuwait continued to perform DNA
identification of the human remains exhumed in March 2019, which included the
complex process of reassembling them.
5.
The use of satellite imagery supported by witness testimony has proved crucial
to locating all three burial sites at the Tall al-Shaykhiyah mass grave cluster.
Subsequently, the Technical Subcommittee emphasized the need to utilize that type
of analysis for two other sites of importance: Karbala’ and Khamisiyah. The Technical
Subcommittee agreed to reassess all available information on the two sites to
determine exact points of interest.
6.
Also during the 112th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, Kuwait briefed
the members on exploratory missions that it had carried out in early January to four
areas inside Kuwait where satellite imagery analysis had indicated the existence of
potential burial sites believed to contain the remains of missing Iraqi soldiers.
7.
Owing to COVID-19, UNAMI postponed to the third quarter of 2020 its planned
training of dedicated staff of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on the use of ground
penetrating radar. UNAMI, in partnership with geospatial expert trainers at the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, continued to prepare to deliver the training
at a more appropriate time.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
8.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, which is tasked with the return of
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, informed UNAMI that it had
located more Kuwaiti property, including microfilm and scientifi c books. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs had planned to hand over the property to Kuwait in April,
but postponed the transfer because of restrictions on movement imposed in both
countries to counter the pandemic.

IV. Observations
9.
In these unprecedented and challenging times, planned activities related to this
file have faced inevitable delays following significant advances made in recent
months. Nonetheless, I wish to commend the continuing collaboration between
members of the Tripartite Commission, in particular following the exhumation in
January of additional human remains. In addition, I appreciate the significant efforts
of the Technical Subcommittee. The Ministry of Defence of Iraq deserves recognition
for its strong commitment to the exhumation process. The International Committee
of the Red Cross is to be commended for its steadfast leadership and guidance, in
particular against the backdrop of the pandemic outbreak.
10. The Kuwaiti authorities deserve praise for their patience and constructive
contributions to this process, including by creating conditions conducive to additional
exhumations inside Kuwait, which may yield the remains of Iraqi missing persons.
11. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq remains fully committe d to
resolving the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property, including the Kuwaiti
national archives, and will continue its activities and assistance in furtherance of those
important objectives with its counterparts in the Tripartite Commission and t he
Governments of Iraq and Kuwait.
2/2

20-06028
