S/PV.7073

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7073rd meeting

Thursday, 5 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud/ Mr. Lamek . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Zhenhua
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Mr. McKell
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (S/2013/460)
Report of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2013/463)

13-59376 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1359376*

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

Letter dated 13 November 2013 from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2013/663)
Letter dated 18 November 2013 from the President of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2013/678)
Letter dated 18 November 2013 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2013/679)

2/32

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Report of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (S/2013/460)
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (S/2013/463)
Letter dated 13 November 2013 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2013/663)
Letter dated 18 November 2013 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/678)
Letter dated 18 November 2013 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2013/679)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and President of the International Residual Mechanism

for Criminal Tribunals; Judge Vagn Joensen, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr.
Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and Prosecutor of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2013/460 and S/2013/463, respectively
containing the report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2013/678 and S/2013/663, respectively
containing a letter dated 18 November 2013 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and a letter dated 13 November 2013 from
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/679, a letter dated 18 November
2013 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to address the Security Council once again
as President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I wish to
congratulate Ambassador Gérard Araud of France upon
his assumption of the presidency of the Council. France
is known for its tireless support to international justice.
I wish him the greatest of success in the discharge of
his duties.
(spoke in English)
I am appearing before the Council today in
my two capacities as President of the ICTY and of
the Mechanism. Written reports concerning both
institutions were submitted to the Council last month.
In my remarks today, I wish to focus on the most
noteworthy issues detailed in those written reports.
Before doing so, however, I would like to take this

13-593763/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

opportunity to express my gratitude once again to the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
In particular, I would like to recognize the exceptional
leadership of Guatemala over these past two years.
Guatemala’s support for the Tribunals and for the
Mechanism during this critical period of transition has
been sustained, constructive and truly appreciated. I
would also like to recognize the continuing support and
assistance provided to the ICTY and the Mechanism by
the Office of the Legal Counsel.
Allow me to first update the Council on the progress
being made by the ICTY towards the completion of its
mandate and its closure. The Tribunal has continued to
make progress in completing the final cases before it.
Since my last completion strategy report (S/2013/308),
the Tribunal has rendered five judgements. In the Trial
Chambers, judgements were rendered in the cases of
Prlić et al. and Stanišić and Simatović. In addition, the
Appeals Chamber renderd a judgement in the rule 98
bis appeal in the Karadžić case. Finally, one contempt
trial judgement and one contempt appeal judgement
were also rendered.
The forecast judgement delivery dates remain
unchanged in seven of the Tribunal’s 11 remaining
cases. In particular, the forecasts for the delivery of
the appeal judgements in the cases of Popović et al,,
Stanišić and Simatović, Tolimir, Stanišić and Župljanin
and Prlić et al. have not changed. The Hadžić trial also
remains on track and is expected to be completed by
the end of 2015. The Mladić trial is likewise proceeding
apace and is expected to conclude by mid-2016, as
previously forecast.
The delays in three of the remaining four cases are
of a very limited nature. The delivery of two appeal
judgements in the multi-accused case of Šainović et al.
and in the case of Ðorđević has been delayed by one
month. The appeal judgements in those cases, originally
forecast for December 2013, are now scheduled to be
delivered on 23 and 27 January 2014, respectively.
Those short delays have been the result of various
factors, including the complexity of the cases and the
heavy workload of the judges involved.
The Karadžić trial judgement, originally planned
for July 2015, is now forecast to be delivered in October
2015. The delay in that case is attributable to the Appeals
Chamber’s rule 98 bis judgement delivered in July of this
year. In that judgement, the Appeals Chamber reversed
the Trial Chamber’s decision to acquit Mr. Karadžić on
count 1 of the indictment against him and directed the
4/32

Trial Chamber to determine Mr. Karadžić’s relevant
culpability after hearing defence evidence. Following
the Appeals Chamber’s ruling, the Trial Chamber
determined that an additional three months were
necessary for further preparation and presentation by
the defence.
Finally, the conclusion of the trial in the Šešelj case
has also been delayed. The Trial Chamber in that case
had previously issued an order scheduling the delivery
of the judgement on 30 October. However, in July, the
accused filed an application for the disqualification
of one of the judges in his trial. The panel of judges
appointed to consider the issue upheld the application
by a majority and another judge was subsequently
appointed to the trial bench. That newly appointed
judge is currently familiarizing himself with the trial
record and reviewing related documents. Once he
completes that process, the trial bench will be in a
position to decide on the next steps in the case. I will of
course provide more information about the case in my
next completion strategy report.
As set out in my report, almost all ICTY cases will
have been completed by 31 December 2014. Of the six
cases that will not be concluded by then, half involve
the trials of the late-arrested accused Mr. Karadžić,
Mr. Hadžić and Mr. Mladić. In addition, the judgements
in two appeal cases — Tolimir and Stanišić and
Župljanin — are forecast to be delivered in the first
few months of 2015. Finally, the multi-accused case of
Prlić et al. is expected to be completed in mid-2017.
I note that in the latter case, the trial judgement was
rendered only in late May and is very voluminous,
numbering approximately 2,500 judgement-size pages
or more than 4,000 pages in the United Nations format.
The case also involves a large number of appellants and
expected appellants. Those factors contribute to the
comparatively late forecast delivery date for the appeal
judgement.
I am of course so sorry that certain cases have
been delayed and that we will not be able to complete
all ICTY judicial work by 31 December 2014. I note,
however, that several of the delays that I have reported
and our inability to complete all ICTY judicial work
by the end of 2014 are directly attributable to factors
outside the case management process and reflect the
inherent uncertainty in predicting the time needed
to complete judgements in highly complex cases, as
well as previous uncertainties as to which cases would
transition to the Mechanism on appeal.

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

Looking forward, the Tribunal is making every
effort to ensure that the forecast completion dates for
cases remain on schedule. In particular, the Tribunal’s
Chambers are coordinating closely with the Registry
to ensure that the significant reductions in personnel
do not adversely impact our ability to complete trials
and appeals in an efficient and fair manner. I remain,
as ever, tremendously appreciative of all the hard work
and dedication shown on a daily basis by the many
talented staff members employed by the Tribunal.
I note, however, that staff morale continues to be
affected by the knowledge that many staff members’
contracts will not be renewed. I have been working with
the Tribunal’s Registrar and others to take a variety of
measures to bolster morale. Staff members nevertheless
continue to seek more secure employment elsewhere,
and staff departures pose additional challenges as we
strive to maintain the previously forecast judgement
delivery dates.
As I have previously informed the Council, other
potential risks to the timely completion of trials and
appeals stem from the unique circumstances of the
Tribunal, which is located thousands of kilometres from
the scene of the alleged crimes, required to translate
a myriad of documents into multiple languages and
called on to handle volumes of evidence that are almost
unheard of in domestic criminal prosecutions. The
Tribunal has developed robust systems and processes
to address those challenges. However, especially in
a downsizing environment and even as we take the
practical steps necessary to ensure the Tribunal’s
orderly closure, I remain particularly vigilant to ensure
that the services necessary to the Tribunal’s functioning
are retained long enough to ensure that trials and
appeals are completed in accordance with the schedule
previously forecast.
In that connection, I would like to note that the
terms of office of all ICTY judges expire at the end of
this month and Security Council action is needed. My
requests of 30 October and 19 November asked that the
judges’ terms of office be extended through the period
in which their last trial or appeal is expected. In making
such requests, I was guided by the considerations
of efficiency and maximum transparency. Indeed,
extensions that correspond to the lengths of the judicial
proceedings in which the judges are engaged will
bolster the Tribunal and also reduce the demands on
the Security Council’s valuable time. I am grateful for
the Council’s consideration of my requests.

Before concluding my report on the ICTY, I would
like to share certain reflections based on my visit to
Bosnia and Herzegovina last week. I held meetings with
victims from various communities and participated in
a conference marking the twentieth anniversary of the
Tribunal. Discussions at that conference confirmed
the importance of the Tribunal’s work in the former
Yugoslavia. However, conversations during my visit
also underscored for me that the Tribunal’s work,
important though it is, cannot address all the needs
of the region. Instead, the international community
needs to support additional, complementary initiatives
that provide for reconciliation through dialogue and
restitution.
In particular, I would like to urge Member States to
support efforts to provide reparations and support for
victims of the wars in the former Yugoslavia. Many of
those victims continue to face serious challenges relating
to injuries they suffered during wartime. More broadly,
I was particularly encouraged by the conversations that
I took part in during a meeting held at the Prijedor area.
Local representatives of victims’ associations from
various communities undertook a dialogue that was
both constructive and forward-looking. In the coming
months, I hope to explore the possibility of encouraging
similar local-level initiatives. In my view, that kind of
dialogue is a necessary complement to the Tribunal’s
work and essential to peace and reconciliation in the
former Yugoslavia.
I would now like to turn to the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
Following the opening of the Mechanism’s Hague
branch on 1 July 2013, the institution is now fully
formed. I am tremendously grateful to the Mechanism’s
Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, the Registrar,
Mr. John Hocking, the Mechanism staff, and the
principals and staff of both the ICTY and the ICTR for
all that they have done to ensure a smooth launch of
the Hague branch, as they previously did for the launch
of the Arusha branch. I am equally grateful for all that
they continue to do to ensure the Mechanism’s efficient
and effective functioning.
As the Mechanism moves forward in its second
year, it is now operating on two continents and has
inherited work from two related but distinct tribunals:
the ICTY and the ICTR. There are many challenges
that come in the early years of any new institution, and
that makes the work both exciting and rewarding. The

13-593765/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

Mechanism is fortunate in that, in its formative stages,
it can learn from and build on the best practices of
our predecessors, as well as draw upon the talents and
expertise of colleagues at the ICTY and the ICTR. Our
progress thus far is the result of a truly collaborative
undertaking.
As the members of the Council are aware, the
Mechanism’s mandate encompasses both judicial work
and certain other essential functions. The one appeal
from judgement filed thus far, in the Ngirabatware
case, is forecast to be completed by the end of 2014.
In the meantime, my fellow Judges and I continue to
address a variety of other judicial matters, ranging
from requests for variation of protective measures
to motions concerning contempt allegations. The
Mechanism is also expected to hear appeals, if any, in
the Šešelj, Karadžić, Hadžić and Mladić cases and must
remain ready to address any additional judicial matters
that may come before it, such as requests for review of
judgements or orders for retrial. Although we do not
know when the remaining three fugitives who have
been indicted by the ICTR and are expected to be tried
by the Mechanism will be arrested or will surrender,
I profoundly hope that it will be soon, and I call upon
the members of the Council and the Member States of
the United Nations to do all in their power to make that
hope a reality.
The Mechanism, of course, is responsible for
many other functions besides judicial work, including
ensuring the monitoring of cases referred to national
jurisdictions; providing protective services to witnesses
and victims; enforcing sentences of those convicted by
either the ICTY or the ICTR; responding to requests for
assistance from national jurisdictions; and managing
the archives of both the ICTY and the ICTR. Details
concerning the Mechanism’s activities in those areas are
included in my written report; I wish only to underscore
that we are fully engaged with our responsibilities in
those areas and making good progress.
I mentioned a moment ago the importance of
Member States’ assistance in relation to apprehending
the remaining fugitives who are expected to be tried
before the Mechanism. In truth, the Mechanism depends
on the cooperation of the international community
in all that it does, and it particularly depends on the
cooperation of the affected States, including both
Rwanda and the States of the former Yugoslavia. Strong
relationships and partnerships with those States, and
with other States and organizations, will remain vital

6/32

to the Mechanism going forward, given its unique
mandate to be an efficient and temporary institution
whose size and functions are to diminish over time.
In that respect, I am pleased to report that, several
weeks ago, President Joensen of the ICTR, Prosecutor
Jallow of the ICTR and the Mechanism, and I, along
with representatives of the Registrars of both the ICTR
and the Mechanism, visited Kigali, where we held
very productive meetings with Government officials. I
was also in Sarajevo just last week and hope to return
to the region again next year. Meetings of that sort,
whether with high-level officials or with those at the
working level, are crucial to helping to ensure that lines
of communication are kept open and that, during this
time of transition between the original ad hoc Criminal
Tribunals and the Mechanism, the nature and effect of
that transition are fully communicated and understood,
particularly in the communities most affected by our
work in both Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia.
One issue that continues to be raised, and one
that is particularly important for many from those
communities, concerns access to information about the
work of the Tribunals. In resolution 1966 (2010), the
Council requested that the Mechanism, along with the
ICTY and the ICTR, cooperate with Rwanda and the
States of the former Yugoslavia and other interested
parties to facilitate the establishment of information and
documentation centres by providing access to copies
of public records of the archives of the Tribunals and
the Mechanism, including through their websites. With
respect to the role of the Mechanism, I can assure you
that we are taking seriously our responsibilities in that
regard. In the months and years ahead we will continue to
take steps to ensure that such access is widely available,
whether online or otherwise, and we welcome ideas and
suggestions from any and all interested parties. I look
forward to reporting to the Council on our progress,
as well as on other developments, in my next written
report on behalf of the Mechanism next year.
As always, I come before the Council committed
to the most complete transparency possible. I hope,
however, that my frank discussion of delays, challenges
and potential future risks does not give an unnecessarily
negative impression of the Tribunal. The staff and
Judges of both the Tribunal and the Mechanism remain
fiercely committed to completing trials and appeals
efficiently and in accordance with the highest standards
of procedural fairness.

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

Indeed, the twentieth anniversary of the ICTY
this year provided an opportune time to reflect on the
Tribunal’s tremendous accomplishments. What the
Tribunal has achieved in the course of two decades
has been extraordinary. It has accounted for all 161
individuals indicted, given rise to an authoritative
and extensive corpus of procedural and substantive
law relating to serious international crimes, assisted
national judicial systems in conducting their own trials
of such crimes, and helped to end impunity, even for
national or military leaders. These accomplishments
are a reflection not just of the hard work and dedication
of the Tribunal’s staff and judges, but also of the key
assistance provided to the Tribunal by the United
Nations and its Member States. Without this support,
the success of the bold experiment in international
justice initiated by the Council in 1993 would never
have been possible.
As the Mechanism carries the legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR forward, I know that it will serve as a
worthy successor to these two institutions and continue
to symbolize the determination of the international
community and the Council to bring an end to impunity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Joensen.
Judge Joenson: I would like to begin by extending
my sincere congratulations to the representative of
France, which is presiding over the Security Council
in December, as well as the representatives of Chad,
Chile, Lithuania and Nigeria on their nations’ election
to the Security Council for the term beginning in
January 2014. I wish them all the best for a successful
tour of duty.
I would also like to thank the representatives of
Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo
for their nations’ service to the Security Council as
they near the completion of their terms, and express
the gratitude of the entire Tribunal to all Governments
represented on the Council for the continued support
they have provided as we draw closer to the completion
of our mandate and the closure of the Tribunal. In
particular, please allow me this opportunity to extend
my sincere gratitude to the representative of Guatemala.
His country’s excellent leadership as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
for the past two years has led to continued excellent
communication and cooperation between the Tribunals

and the Working Group, which helps to ensure that the
Council and Tribunals remain aware of each others’
needs and concerns, which is especially crucial at this
time of transition and as we near closure.
It is as always an immense honour for me to
have this opportunity to address the members of the
Security Council and to provide them with an update
on the progress being made towards the completion of
our work. First and foremost, I would like to express
my sincere gratitude to the past and current judges and
staff members of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) for all of their hard work and the
dedication that they have shown, which have led us to
the stage we are at today, with only appeals remaining
following nearly two decades of judicial work.
As Council members are aware, it has been nearly
one year since the ICTR completed its work at the
trial level. As of today, the Tribunal has concluded
appellate proceedings in respect of 46 persons. The
Appeals Chamber will render one more judgement
on 16 December in the Ndahimana case, while four
other appeal judgements concerning eight persons will
be disposed of in 2014. This leaves only one appeals
case, Nyiramasuhuko et al. (“Butare”), which will be
completed in 2015.
While the Appeals Chamber has continually
devoted its best efforts towards the completion of
all appeals work by the end of 2014, the final appeal
judgement concerning six persons in the Butare case
is now projected to be completed not before the end
of July 2015. As explained more fully in my written
report submitted in May 2013 (see S/2013/310), the
initial change in the briefing and projected schedule
for the completion of the appeal in the Butare case was
occasioned, in part, by the sheer complexity of the case,
coupled with an inability to meet expedited translation
goals with respect to the more than 1,400-page trial
judgement.
I have worked closely with the Presiding Judge on
the Butare case since May, when the projection was
pushed past the end of 2014, to see what could be done
to mitigate the delay. Unfortunately, during the past
six months amid these efforts, the Butare case also had
an unexpectedly large amount of pre-appeal work that
threatened to further delay the projected completion
date. I am happy to inform the Council today, however,
that our efforts to advance the completion date,
including the allocation of additional resources to the
Butare team in 2014, have at least had the effect of

13-593767/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

preserving the projection of completion around the end
of July 2015, in spite of the pre-appeal litigation that
distracted from the core judgement work.
I would also like to note that I remain in close
contact with the Presiding Judge, who continues to
take all necessary measures to expedite the appeal
work in this case without compromising the rights of
the parties. In that respect, the Presiding Judge held
a status conference in May aimed at streamlining the
consideration of several motions and at facilitating
more efficient disposal of pre-appeal work. The
Appeals Chamber has taken further steps to follow-up
with the translation unit to accelerate the translation
of pre-appeal documents, and the Butare legal team in
Chambers now consists of staff members able to work in
both English and French, which facilitates preliminary
work on submissions from the parties without awaiting
translations.
I wish to underscore that every effort is being
made by the Tribunal to complete this case while fully
respecting the fundamental rights of the accused to due
process in accordance with international standards,
and I assure the Council that the Registrar and I will
continue to closely monitor the status of the Butare
case in order to forestall any further impediments to
its completion.
I must now take this opportunity to extend my
sincere gratitude to all of the judges and the support staff
of the Appeals Chamber, who have worked tirelessly
to complete the Tribunal’s work under extremely tight
deadlines. I hope that the Member States will also join
me in recognizing their efforts.
On a related note and as detailed in my previous
report to the Council, Judge Andrésia Vaz resigned
from her position as appeals Judge in May. In order
to mitigate any detrimental effect on the completion
of appeals work that would come with the loss of
such an esteemed judge, in accordance with article 12
bis of the Statue of the Tribunal I requested that the
Secretary-General appoint a replacement judge to
serve the remainder of Judge Vaz’s term. I am therefore
grateful to the Secretary-General for his appointment
of Mr. Mandiaye Niang of Senegal as permanent judge
of the ICTR to replace Judge Vaz. I am confident that
the appointment of Mr. Niang, coupled with the recent
election of Mr. Koffi Afande as Permanent Judge of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), will play a crucial role in contributing to the
remaining work.
8/32

I would next like to take this opportunity to inform
the Council about a recent joint visit of the ICTR and
the Mechanism to Rwanda on 4 and 5 November. In
order to strengthen mutual assistance and cooperation
between both institutions and Rwanda, for the first
time the Presidents, Prosecutor and representatives of
the Registrars of the ICTR and the Mechanism met
with senior Government officials in Kigali. During
these meetings, discussions took place regarding issues
of mutual interest, and the ICTR delegation provided
updates on the problems that the Tribunal is facing in
terms of relocating acquitted and convicted released
persons who are still residing in Tanzania. The ICTR
delegation further outlined the progress being made
in terms of reparations for victims and survivors of
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, and on the very recent
commissioning of a draft project proposal to be carried
out by the International Organization for Migration.
That proposal will provide a meaningful way forward
that is in line with the position that the General
Assembly has taken in calling for assistance to victims
and survivors of the 1994 genocide.
Returning to the matter of relocation, I note that, as
the ICTR continues to make preparations for closure,
the issue of the relocation of acquitted and convicted
released persons in Tanzania remains one of the most
serious challenges to the successful completion of
the Tribunal’s mandate. For the past five years, all
efforts made by the ICTR to achieve the relocation of
the remaining individuals have proved unsuccessful.
To date, seven acquitted and three convicted released
persons reside in a safe house in Arusha, despite the
fact that some of those persons were acquitted over a
decade ago.
Since the last report to the Council, and pursuant
to the framework of the strategic plan submitted to
the Security Council’s Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, the Registrar and I met with
representatives of North American, European and
African countries between May and October 2013.
More specifically, I met with representatives of nine
European countries, while the Registrar met with
representatives from four African and two European
countries, to brief them on the serious challenges
facing the ICTR in terms of relocation and to appeal
for their assistance in accepting one or more acquitted
or released persons currently residing in Tanzania. The
Registrar and I continue to follow-up with the officials
of each country that we met with, as well as others,
in order to continue to explore all possible avenues
13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

available to the Tribunal to find an equitable resolution
to the problem of relocation.
I firmly believe that failing to relocate the acquitted
and released persons residing in Tanzania represents a
serious challenge to the credibility of the enforcement
of international criminal justice. Therefore, recalling
resolution 2080 (2012), in which the Council reiterates
its call upon Members States that are in a position
to do so to cooperate with the Tribunal, I must once
again call upon the Council for urgent assistance and
increased cooperation from Member States to support
the Tribunal in its efforts to find host countries for the
seven acquitted persons and three convicted released
persons still residing in Tanzania.
I next turn to the transition to the Mechanism.
The monitoring of all ICTR cases referred to national
jurisdictions is now the responsibility of the Mechanism.
That currently includes two cases referred to France
and two cases referred to Rwanda. The Mechanism
will also be responsible for monitoring the six fugitive
cases transferred to Rwanda once those individuals are
arrested and proceedings commence. The Registrar and
I continue to oversee the administrative functions of the
monitoring of the Uwinkindi trial in Rwanda, and will
do so until the end of 2013. The Mechanism has assumed
all responsibilities associated with the monitoring of the
Munyagishari case in Rwanda upon his transfer in July
and for the two cases referred to France, save for the fact
that the ICTR is providing interim monitors who are
now working closely with Mechanism staff as interim
monitors until arrangements with an organization are
finalized.
With respect to the archives, the Mechanism has
begun to assume responsibility for the management of
the archives for both Tribunals. Since the last report to
the Council, the ICTR has completed three temporary
archives facilities and handed them over to the
Mechanism, together with some of the ICTR records
that have already been prepared for management by the
Mechanism. The transfer to the Mechanism of judicial
records not in active use remains ongoing and is still
expected to be completed by the end of 2014. However,
records that are still in active use, including records
related to the Butare case, will remain the responsibility
of the ICTR and will be transferred only once they are
no longer in use. The Tribunal remains hopeful that the
preparation and transfer of its records will be completed
prior to its closure.

I would next like to take this opportunity to
congratulate my friend and colleague President
Theodor Meron on his re-election as President of the
ICTY. I have come to work very closely with President
Meron in his role as President of the Mechanism and
I cannot stress enough how important it is that he and
Registrar Hocking have ensured such great cooperation
between the Mechanism and ICTY offices and the
ICTR, allowing for a very smooth transition so far. I
want to also thank the Registry, especially the archives
staff, for the important work they have completed to
date with distinction.
As the work of the ICTR concludes, it is worth
remembering that it was the Security Council that not
only established the ICTR to try those accused of being
most responsible for the planning and execution of the
genocide in Rwanda, but also provided the ICTR with
a broad mandate that included helping to contribute
to the process of peace and reconciliation in the Great
Lakes region by helping to bring to justice those most
responsible for the Rwandan genocide. While the legacy
of the ICTR will no doubt include its jurisprudential
contributions to the development of international
criminal law and international humanitarian law, it
remains important to also recall the efforts that the
Tribunal continues to make to foster genocide education
and remembrance through its outreach and capacitybuilding initiatives.
Throughout its existence, the ICTR has instituted
training
programmes,
professional
workshops,
visiting professionals programmes and partnerships
with institutions of higher learning across the globe.
The Tribunal created the Umusanzu Information and
Documentation Centre in Kigali and a capacity-building
task force. It also instituted programmes aimed at sharing
lessons learned with respect to the administration of a
court adjudicating international crimes and with respect
to running an international court in general. The Office
of the Prosecutor created a manual of best practices on
the tracking and arrest of fugitives from international
criminal justice and recently finalized a best-practices
manual on the investigation and prosecution of sexual
and gender-based violence. Those capacity-building
initiatives represent some of the concrete measures
that the Tribunal has taken to help to restore peace and
reconciliation in the region and ensure that present and
future generations are provided with the necessary
tools to continue the fight against impunity long after
the Tribunal closes its doors.

13-593769/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

It remains my distinct honour to address the Council
once more on behalf of the Tribunal. I wish to express
our gratitude for the support members’ Governments
have shown over the past 19 years. I truly believe that,
with continued assistance from Member States, the
Tribunal will close its doors with its mandate completed
and its legacy secured.

grave in north-western Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is
one of the largest graves uncovered, with more than
474 bodily remains so far exhumed. That number is
expected to rise before work on the grave is complete.
The size of the grave and the calculated planning that
obviously informed its design, underscore the extent of
the tragedy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Judge
Joensen for his briefing.

The Tomašica grave is also a timely reminder that
efforts to resolve the issue of persons still missing
from the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia must be
accelerated. In that regard, I express my full support
for the International Commission on Missing Persons,
which is working hard to provide families of the missing
with long-awaited and desperately needed information,
thereby helping to advance the reconstruction of
communities. We endorse the idea of establishing
the Commission as a permanent institution so that
its expertise can also be made more systematically
available in other regions of the world where work is
needed on missing persons.

I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I would like to thank the Council
for this opportunity to address it on our progress
towards the completion of our mandate.
In this reporting period, we have advanced
significantly towards the conclusion of our remaining
three trials. In the Karadžić case the defence is in the
final phase of presenting its evidence. In the Hadžić case
the Prosecution has finished presenting its evidence
and is preparing for the rule 98 bis hearing later this
month. And in the Mladić case the Prosecution is in the
final stages of presenting its evidence and expects to
finish by the end of the year. That means that, by early
2014, the Prosecution will have finished presenting
its evidence-in-chief in all trials before the Tribunal.
I acknowledge the tremendous effort of staff members
across my Office, which has facilitated the expeditious
presentation of evidence in our final cases. The trial
teams, with essential support from the Appeals
Division, have coped with a staggering workload and
successfully confronted many challenges throughout
the reporting period.
Contrasting with this positive progress, the Šešelj
case suffered a serious setback. The delivery of the
trial judgement, scheduled for 13 October 2013, was
postponed following the disqualification of a judge
from the Šešelj Trial Chamber. Concerns raised by
the Prosecution and by members of the Šešelj Trial
Chamber regarding the validity of the disqualification
decision were dismissed. A new judge was appointed on
31 October, and the parties await the Trial Chamber’s
further directions about the finalization of the case.
The Tribunal is now 20 years old. But events during
this reporting period remind us that many people in
the former Yugoslavia are still waiting for answers
about the fate of their loved ones. In particular, since
September this year, the International Commission on
Missing Persons, along with national authorities, has
been exhuming the recently discovered Tomašica mass
10/32

When it comes to cooperation between the Tribunal
and the countries of the former Yugoslavia on day-today matters, I am pleased to say there are no problems.
Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina have
responded as required to our requests for assistance
and have facilitated our work on the remaining trials
and appeals. We thank the national authorities for their
cooperation, and we call upon them to maintain that
positive approach in the next reporting period.
We remain seriously concerned, however, about
the progress of national war crimes cases in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The main issues are threefold.
First, very little progress has been made towards
finalizing 9 of the 13 category II cases transferred by
my Office to Bosnia and Herzegovina between 2005
and 2009. In October this year, I met with the Chief
Prosecutor in Sarajevo to review the outstanding case
files. I received an undertaking that a decision would be
made on the status of each case before the end of this
year, and I await a further update.
Secondly, the national war crimes strategy is
floundering. Measures taken to relieve the bottleneck
of cases before the State Court have not yet been
matched with essential resources for the entity-level
courts receiving the cases. Nor is there currently
an effective strategy for training national personnel
for war crimes cases. As set out in an expert report
prepared on behalf of my Office, a comprehensive

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

national training programme, implemented by officially
designated central bodies, is urgently required. My
Office appreciates the support of our international
partners, particularly the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union and the
United Nations Development Programme, in working
to improve the coordination and quality of training
for war crimes cases in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
hope there will be visible progress in the next reporting
period.
Thirdly, the implementation of the European
Court of Human Rights’ decision in the Maktouf and
Damjanović case by the judicial system in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has raised a number of issues. Among
them is the unconditional release from custody of
12 persons convicted by the State Court of serious
crimes — including, in some cases, genocide — pending
correction of their sentences. The release of those
prisoners poses a threat to the proper conclusion of
the cases and undermines public confidence in the
administration of justice. The significance of the
issue is reinforced by the fact that up to 40 additional
convicted persons have appealed their verdicts and
sentences before the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We encourage all concerned to urgently
find coherent ways of addressing the fairness issues
identified in the Maktouf and Damjanović ruling, while
at the same time safeguarding the proper administration
of justice in war crimes cases.
When it comes to regional cooperation between
Croatia, Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina on war
crimes issues, the picture is mixed. We are pleased to
note that following the recent conclusion of cooperation
protocols, regular meetings are taking place and
information on cases is being exchanged. However,
further reforms are still needed to resolve ongoing
coordination problems, especially the legal barriers
that remain to extradition.
When we survey developments in the field of
international criminal law over the past few years,
it is clear that the future of international justice is,
increasingly, national justice.
While international courts will always be needed
to provide an accountability safety net, building the
capacity of national systems to effectively handle
crimes under international law is the lynchpin of the
justice system. In that respect, the former Yugoslavia
provides an important precedent. There are lessons to
learn from the different models and structures adopted

by the countries of the former Yugoslavia, which have
assumed responsibility for war crimes cases. There
are also lessons to learn from the process by which
the Tribunal has transferred expertise and helped to
build capacity nationally. That is an ongoing process.
Within the limits of our resource constraints, my
Office remains engaged in several innovative capacitybuilding projects.
Twenty years after the Tribunal opened its doors
we are yet to fully deliver on our promise of justice
for victims and survivors of atrocities in the former
Yugoslavia. Their expectations are high — and rightly
so. In coming forward to testify in proceedings before
our Tribunal and elsewhere, many have confronted
deep-seated fears and trauma. Without their courage
and commitment to the Tribunal’s success, we would
have achieved very little. At the same time, we are
conscious that recent developments have seriously
strained the Tribunal’s relationship of trust with victims
and survivors. My Office reiterates its commitment
to using the last phase of our work to address those
concerns.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: I thank the Council for the opportunity
to once again brief the Council on the progress of the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and of the
Mechanism for International Criminal Tribunals.
At the ICTR the Office is currently fully engaged
in the completion of its remaining activities in order to
ensure a smooth, efficient and effective closure of the
Tribunal and the handover of all residual matters to the
Mechanism. Since my last report to the Council (see
S/PV.6880), my Office has continued to work on the
prosecution and completion of the appeals cases, the
preparation of the records of the Office of the Prosecutor
(OTP) of the ICTR for archiving and handover to the
Mechanism, the completion of residual and closure
issues, as well as providing support to the OTP of the
Mechanism. We have also devoted considerable time
and effort over this period to ensuring the establishment
of the OTP Hague Branch of the Mechanism, which
was launched on 1 July 2013.
The heavy appellate workload of the ICTR continues
to require significant time and human resources. Since
June 2013, the ICTR-OTP has responded to 8 appeals

13-5937611/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

filed by 8 different convicted persons in the Butare,
Nzabonimana and Nizeyimana cases. It has also assisted
the Mechanism-OTP in responding to the appeal in
the Ngirabatware case. The cases are now pending
hearing by the Appeals Chamber. Furthermore, the
OTP has been actively preparing for the hearings in the
Karemera et al case involving two convicted persons
that the Appeals Chamber has scheduled for the week
of 10 February 2014. In the meantime, we are awaiting
judgement by the Appeals Chamber in the Ndahimana
case for 16 December 2013 and in the Military II case
involving four accused in February 2014.
A key milestone in the archiving project was
achieved with the commissioning of the OTP archives
store and its transfer to the Mechanism. The facility,
I am advised, conforms to the required international
standards of archiving and provides enhanced security
of the records. The handing over of the OTP records to
the Mechanism Registrar continues. It is expected that
an additional 231 boxes in respect to three completed
cases will be handed over at the end of this year. In
the meantime, the Mechanism OTP will continue full
access to the active records of the ICTR, which will
also in due course be transferred to the Mechanism.
That process will continue on an ongoing basis as and
when related litigation is concluded.
As expected, the imminent closure of the ad
hoc tribunals has generated broad interest within
the international community on the potential for
their practices and other aspects of their legacy to
contribute to the capacity-building of national and
other international tribunals in the investigation and
prosecution of international crimes. That impetus
has encouraged the ICTR OTP and the offices of the
prosecutor of other tribunals to share their experiences
with national and international stakeholders on best
practices in the fight against impunity.
Meanwhile, work on the OTP’s best-practice
manuals continues. The Manual on the Investigation
and Prosecution of Sexual Violence will be finalized
and launched, after review, in Kampala in January 2014.
That will follow the earlier launch of the Manual on the
Tracking and Arrest of Fugitives, which was effected in
September 2013.
I would now like turn to the activities of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism.
This reporting period has involved much activity on
the establishment of The Hague branch, the recruitment

12/32

of staff for core and ad hoc functions, the preparation
of the budget for the 2014-2015 biennium, the setting
up of systems and procedures to streamline operations
and to ensure greater coordination between the Arusha
OTP and The Hague branch, as well as the management
of the ad hoc and core activities of the Mechanism OTP
in general.
In May 2013, in preparation of the start of
operations of The Hague branch, I participated in the
annual regional conference of chief prosecutors in the
former Yugoslavia in Brijuni, Croatia, together with the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I am pleased to report
to the Council, that the recruitment of core staff for The
Hague branch, which was launched on 1 July 2013, is
almost complete. I am hopeful that the remaining core
staff will be in place by the end of this year. In addition,
OTP staff in both the ICTR and the ICTY have been
designated to double-hat to support the Mechanism
OTP during their tenures at the respective Tribunals, as
envisaged by the Security Council.
The creation of a roster of potential staff for
recruitment in the event of an arrest and subsequent
trial or appeal is also in progress. Tracking of the three
fugitives, namely Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana, remains a top priority for
the Mechanism. We continue to actively engage with
all States with which the fugitives may have any
connections. I plan early in the year to visit a number
of countries in East, Central and Southern Africa in
order to secure enhanced cooperation from them in the
tracking effort of the Mechanism.
1 would like to seize this opportunity to thank
INTERPOL and the United States Department of
State through its War Crimes Rewards Program for
their continuing support in those tracking efforts. The
Security Council should continue to call on all States to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in order to ensure
that those indicted are brought to account. That will
ensure that justice is done for the victims and survivors
of this great tragedy and that there is a proper closure
of this process of accountability, in which the United
Nations and the rest of the international community
have rightly devoted considerable effort and resources.
The Mechanism OTP, in conjunction with
INTERPOL and the Office of Global Criminal Justice
of the United States State Department, continues to lend
support to Rwanda’s tracking efforts with regard to the
six fugitives cases that have been referred to Rwanda.
13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

These are the cases of Charles Sikubwabo, Fulgence
Kayishema, Ladislas Ntaganzwa, Aloys Ndimbati,
Charles Ryandikayo and Phénéas Munyarugurama.
Last month, in November 2013, I joined the Presidents
and Registrars of the ICTR and of the Mechanism on
the first joint ICTR-Mechanism principals’ mission to
Rwanda to meet and consult with senior Government
officials and to brief them on the Mechanism, the
ICTR’s remaining workload, the ongoing transition of
responsibilities from the ICTR to the Mechanism and
the areas for potential cooperation between Rwanda
and the Mechanism, particularly in the area of training
and other capacity-building efforts.
In relation to the continuing activities of the
Mechanism OTP, the Office has during this reporting
period responded to a total of 80 requests for assistance
from 17 countries and international organizations, out
of a total of 112 requests for assistance for both the
Arusha and The Hague branches. Responding to those
requests has involved locating and reviewing relevant
evidence, certification of documents, contacting
witnesses, requesting variation of protective measures
and seeking the consent of providers for disclosure of
restricted material.
We continue to monitor the cases of Munyeshyaka
and Bucyibaruta, which were transferred to France
in 2007, together with those of Uwinkindi and
Munyagishari, transferred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013,
respectively. Munyagishari Bernard was physically
transferred to Rwanda on 24 July 2013, and his case is
now at a pre-trial stage before the Rwandan courts. The
commencement of the trial of Jean Uwinkindi has now
been set for 22 January 2014 before the High Court in
Rwanda. Both cases also continue to be observed by
monitors appointed by the Prosecutor of the Mechanism.
Briefing
on
the
Augustin
Ngirabatware
appeal — the only appeal currently before the Arusha
branch of the Mechanism — was completed during this
reporting period, and we anticipate that oral argument
will take place in the first half of 2014. In addition, the
Mechanism ad hoc appeals team responded to several
motions filed in that case and in the Niyitegeka cases.
The Hague branch has also been active in the
reporting period, responding to the appeal of Radovan
Stanković against a decision of the ICTY Referral
Bench and a motion for contempt filed against Radovan
Karadžić.

Although established in two branches, at The Hague
and in Arusha, we are committed to ensuring that the
OTP operates as a single office. I believe this can be
attained through regular periodic consultations and
working visits between staff, the redeployment and use
of human and other resources between the two branches
in response to work demand and the harmonization,
where possible, of working methods and prosecutorial
regulations between the two branches.
The first of such high-level consultations, involving
the senior legal officers in charge of the two branches
and some senior staff with the Prosecutor, has just
concluded in Arusha. The meeting provided us with
the opportunity to consider and agree upon measures
that, in our view, will enhance the efficiency of a single
OTP of the Mechanism. In that respect and as a result
of the meeting, I have last week promulgated a code
of conduct for the staff of the Mechanism OTP, which
regulates the professional conduct of such staff, as well
as regulations for the management of foreign requests
for assistance from the Mechanism.
The ICTR remains committed to and confident of
a timely and efficient completion of its mandate, with
the conclusion of the bulk of appeals anticipated in 2014
and the conclusion of legacy-related works by that time.
The Mechanism, too, is now fully operationa, with both
branches largely staffed and attending very actively to
both its continuing and ad hoc activities. The support
of the management and staff of both the ICTR and the
ICTY, the Secretariat of the United Nations and of
Member States, as well as the very effective and dynamic
leadership of Honourable Judge Theodor Meron — the
first President of the Mechanism — have all combined
to achieve the historic launch and functioning of a new
international tribunal within a relatively short period.
We are confident that with that continuing support,
the Mechanism will, despite challenges in tracking
of fugitives, among others, also come to realize and
fulfil the mandate that has been set for it by the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Jallow
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin my statement by thanking the
the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the

13-5937613/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their reports (S/2013/678 and S/2013/663, respectively),
as well as the President and the Prosecutor of the
Residual Mechanism for their reports (S/2013/679).
These reports, along with the extensive briefings today,
reflect the tireless efforts of both Tribunals to comply
with the objectives set out in the completion strategies.
Nevertheless, beyond this judicial work, there is a
central aspect in the mandates of the Tribunals that we
should not in any way overlook: the promotion of peace
and reconciliation.
This year, we are celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the establishment of the Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, and next year we will celebrate
the twentieth anniversary of the Tribunal for Rwanda.
We acknowlegde their considerable achievements and
progress in developing international jurisprudence, in
delivering justice to victims, in apprehending fugitives
and in trying those individuals who bear the greatest
responsibility for serious human rights violations and
violations of humanitarian law. Furthermore, both
Tribunals have contributed to strengthening the national
justice systems, working closely with local authorities.
The work of the Tribunals finds itself at a very
crucial stage as they attempt to conclude effectively
cases that are still underway while referring pending
tasks to the Residual Mechanism. The Mechanism
ensures that no gaps will remain in the fight against
impunity, given the considerable number of ongoing
functions that persist beyond the closure of a Tribunal.
In that respect, we congratulate the President, the
Prosecutor and Registrar of the Mechanism for the
timely opening of The Hague branch in July of this
year. We would like to highlight this historic ocassion,
when for the first time the three Tribunals are fully
operational: the ICTY, the ICTR and the Residual
Mechanism.
We welcome the signing on 26 November of the
headquarters agreement between the United Nations
and the Government of Tanzania for the Arusha branch.
We also ackowledge the close cooperation between the
ICTY and the personnel of The Hague branch in the
few months it has been operational, especially given its
double workload.
It has been a productive year for the ICTY, as shown
by its various decisions, as well as the election by the
General Assembly on 18 November of an additional
judge (see A/68/PV.53).

14/32

With respect to the ICTR, we note that it continues
its deliberations on important appeals while the transfer
of functions is underway, in particular through the
transfer of archives to the Mechanism. However, as the
closure of the Tribunal nears, we are concerned by the
human rights situation faced by those who have been
acquitted or those who have served their sentence but
are still waiting to be relocated. We firmly support the
strategic plan prepared by the Tribunal for Rwanda
to relocate those individuals. We also believe that we
have an obligation to find the proper way to resolve that
situation before the ICTR concludes its work. We call
on all States to continue to actively address that matter.
We continue to be concerned by the reports of both
Tribunals on the difficulties in retaining staff, which
is one of the main obstacles to achieving the strategies
objectives. That is why we must support the Tribunals
both politically and financially. We will be closely
following this issue in the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly.
Our mandate as Chair the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals is coming to an end. Next
Monday, I will be presenting an oral report to the
Security Council with an evaluation of our work and
experience. At this moment, I would simply like to
take advantage of the ocassion to thank the principals
of the Tribunals, the Office of Legal Affairs and the
Security Council Affairs Division for all their support
and contributions. Likewise, our sincere gratitude goes
to each of the delegations for their collaboration and
active participation over the past two years when we
have had the privilege of chairing this Group. We very
much appreciate this opportunity, which has allowed
us to fully assume a leadership role in the discussions
about peace and justice.
Lastly, we believe that the Tribunals have had an
important role in consolidating the rule of law and
in promoting reconciliation and long-term stability,
not only in the Balkans and Rwanda, but in the entire
world. Their jurisprudence has had far-reaching effects
and has been a source of inspiration for all national
and international jurisdictions, in particular for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. We
hope that more measures can be taken to preserve their
legacy and to facilitate the transfer of the knowledge
and experience acquired to other jurisdictions.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Judge
Meron, Judge Joensen, Prosecutor Brammertz and

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

Prosecutor Jallow for their comprehensive reports to
the Security Council.
Pakistan commends and supports the important
work of the two Tribunals to deliver justice and end
impunity. The prevention of mass atrocities and genocide
is a legal and moral responsibility of the international
community. The provision of justice to victims of such
crimes is important, not only for accountability but also
for closure and healing. During their proceedings, the
Tribunals have developed a comprehensive corpus of
precedents in international criminal law. We welcome
their contribution.
There has been progress in the completion
strategies of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) during the period covered
by the latest reports of the Presidents and Prosectors
of the two Tribunals (see S/2013/663 and S/2013/678,
respectively). In the past six months, the Tribunals have
continued to engage in trial and appeal proceedings,
the drafting of judgements and the referral of cases to
domestic jurisdictions. It is a matter of satisfaction that
the ICTR has completed the substantive cases at the
trial level for all 93 of the accused who were indicted by
the Tribunal. The ICTY has also concluded proceedings
against 136 out of the 161 individuals it indicted.
The transition from the ICTR to the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals appears
to be on track. The Tribunals continue to contribute
to procedural and evidentiary international criminal
law in a professional manner. They have taken several
measures to improve the drafting of judgements,
translation, outreach and the preservation of archives.
The Tribunals’ initiatives on assistance and support
to victims, as well as legacy- and capacity-building
projects, are steps in the right direction.
The Tribunals need to demonstrate continuing
commitment to the timely conclusion of their
proceedings. We hope that the Tribunals will make
every effort to complete their judicial work as quickly
as possible, while taking into account the fundamental
rights of the accused and the appellants to due process,
according to international standards.
In the process of winding down the work of
the Tribunals, we recognize the challenges in the
assignment of work to judges, staff management and
the preparation of archives. The recruitment of workers
and the retention of staff with institutional memory

of cases are a crucial part of the completion process.
Adequate resources should therefore be provided to the
Tribunals to fulfil their responsibilities in an optimal
manner.
While there are no outstanding fugitives under
the jurisdiction of ICTY following the arrest of Ratko
Mladić and Goran Hadžić, there are individuals indicted
by the ICTR who remain at large. We hope that with
the cooperation and efforts of relevant Member States,
the remaining fugitives will be held accountable. We
support the efforts of the ICTR President and Registrar
to find hosts for the relocation of individuals who have
either been acquitted or have served their sentences.
We call upon States that are in a position to do so to
positively respond to the Tribunals’ requests. The
relocation of the acquitted and released persons to third
States would give them an opportunity to restart their
lives.
Over time, the decisions of the Tribunals have
produced a body of jurisprudence that will influence
the fight against impunity and shape the future of global
criminal justice. It is therefore important to preserve
the legacy of the Tribunals because of their rich
contribution to the fields of international humanitarian
law and legal doctrine. The Tribunals’ contribution to
jurisprudence and precedence in international law is
important. We hope that the Tribunals will contribute
to the process of reconciliation and lasting peace in the
Balkans and the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Presidents of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and the Prosecutors of the ICTY, the ICTR and the
Residual Mechanism for their respective briefings on
the activities of the two Tribunals and the Residual
Mechanism, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (S/2013/460) and the report of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2013/463)
indicate that both Tribunals are making progress
towards the achievement of their mandate, albeit by
modifying procedures, but nevertheless by upholding
the fundamental principle of due process. We note that
the ICTR has concluded all cases at the trial level and
referred cases to Rwandan courts, is preparing to hand
down a new appeals judgement before the end of the

13-5937615/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

year and is conducting pending appeal cases so as to
finish the majority of them in 2014 and a final one in
July 2015. The ICTY, for its part, seeks to uphold the
time lines, in spite of being understaffed by appeals
judges and the burden of new arrests.

Allow me, in passing, to warmly congratulate
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal and his team on the
effective and deft way in which Guatemala led the
work of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals during the past two years.

Togo remains confident that the recent appointment
of Judge Mandiaye Niang of Senegal and the
appointment on 18 November as Permanent Judge of
my fellow countryman Mr. Koffi Kumelio Afande,
who will be sworn in on 12 December, will contribute
to bolstering the number of judges and will help the
Appeals Chamber in upholding timelines.

When acquitted individuals are not relocated, any
inaction on the part of the Council affects the credibility
of the United Nations in ensuring international justice
in accordance with the rule of law or the primacy of
law. The Security Council could invite the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report on the role that is or
could be played by United Nations entities and make
recommendations to guide the Council.

We regret the negative impact of the attrition of
qualified staff on the Tribunals’ completion strategy
and on the transition to the Residual Mechanism. We
hope that the relevant United Nations bodies will take
the necessary measures to mitigate the impact of this
state of affairs. Togo supports any measure, including
the referral of cases to national courts, to ensure that
the closure of the Tribunals is not seen as signalling
impunity for those not yet arrested or prosecuted.
Monitoring mechanisms must be set up to guarantee
due process in those national juridictions.
Togo urges the various bodies of the two Tribunals
to coordinate their efforts, in cooperation with States
and international institutions, in order to facilitate the
execution of their mandate. That is why we welcome
the measures being implemented by the Office of the
Prosecutor to strengthen national capacities in criminal
prosecution as a fundamental element of national
reconciliation in concerned countries. Togo also
encourages the two Tribunals to pursue their efforts
to meet the needs of victims and witnesses who find
themselves in difficulty after having testified before
the Tribunals, especially since many of those witnesses
suffered losses and experienced suffering during the
conflicts.
My country also deplores the problems that
have arisen in relocating individuals who have been
acquitted or served their sentence, but arfe still denied
of their freedom for lack of a host country. Our Council
should explore appropriate ways to support the strategy
designed by the ICTY along those lines, which was
considered with the Registrar of the ICTR during the
interactive dialogue of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals on 20 November. At that time,
it was unanimously acknowledged the fact that those
individuals continue to be deprived of their freedom
constitutes a serious humanitarian issue.
16/32

Togo welcomes the substantive, multifaceted
assistance provided by all the sections of the Registrar
of the two Tribunals to the Residual Mechanism until
the latter can fully carry out the administrative and
judicial activities. The experience of the Arusha branch
of the Residual Mechanism, which is carrying out the
bulk of the judicial and prosecution functions, will be
used to better organize the ongoing transfer of functions
to The Hague branch, which was launched on l July.
With regard to the staff of the Residual Mechanism,
we have two hopes — first, that greater geographical
representation within the limits of the Mechanism’s
reduced staff will strengthen capacity in the represented
regions, and secondly, that women’s representation
should go beyond the number of women recruited
and lead to their being given positions of greater
responsibility.
In conclusion, Togo would encourage both
Tribunals to further increase awareness with regard to
their legacy through various social networks, as well as
academic and professional circles.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their reports and, even more,
for their dedication to global public service. The world
community is indebted to each one for their outstanding
leadership in the area of international criminal justice.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Permanent Representative
of Guatemala, for his service as chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. Ambassador
Rosenthal and his talented team have ably guided
the Informal Working Group over the past two years
as it confronted many important issues in the field of
international justice and accountability. Through their
13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

work, they have made tangible contributions to the
fight against impunity.
The United States has strongly supported the work
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda since their inception. As we
all recall, the Tribunals were established in response to
the horrors committed in the Balkans and in Rwanda
in the early 1990s, when the slaughter of hundreds of
thousands of innocent men, women and children led to
a wave of international revulsion.
The Tribunals were founded on the firm conviction
that those responsible for mass atrocities — no matter
what their rank or official position — must be held
accountable. Once the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) were up and
running, they began delivering international justice on
an unprecedented scale. To date, the two courts have
tried more than 200 defendants accused of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
top political and military leaders. The Tribunals have
operated on the principles of fairness, impartiality and
independence, and in the process have built up a robust
body of international humanitarian law.
While events in Syria, the Sudan and elsewhere
have shown that the commission of mass atrocities
continues to embody and urgent and profound challenge
to the global community, the ICTY and ICTR provide
a warning to leaders around the world that there are
consequences for the choices they make, the actions
they take and the orders they give.
With the historic work of the Tribunals now nearing
completion, the United States commends the efforts
of the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals
to enact cost-saving, managerial and administrative
measures and to transfer the remaining functions of the
Tribunals to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. At the same time, we recognize that
the exact closure dates will depend on the completion
of ongoing and soon-to-begin trials and appeals.
Turning specifically to the ICTY, we note, with
satisfaction, that the Tribunal continues to focus on the
completion of all trials and appeals, rendering 13 trial,
appellate and contempt judgements between August
2012 and July 2013 — a larger number of judgements
than in almost any previous reporting period. We are
pleased that The Hague branch of the Mechanism began
operating in July.

We particularly want to commend the work done by
the ICTY to enhance the training of judges, prosecutors
and defense counsel in States of the former Yugoslavia.
That investment in human and institutional capacity
will pay long-term dividends in peace and stability. We
urge all Governments of the region to continue working
towards reconciliation, to avoid statements that inflame
tensions and to continue to bring more criminals to
justice in local courts.
Regarding the ICTR, we are pleased that the
Tribunal has wrapped up its workload of trials and
continues to complete appeals, which we hope will be
done by 2015. The Arusha branch of the Mechanism
opened in 2012 and is operating smoothly. The United
States urges all States Members of the United Nations,
especially those of the region, to cooperate with the
Tribunal in the apprehension of the nine remaining
fugitives. Those alleged mass murderers must be
brought to trial. The United States continues to offer
monetary rewards for information leading to their
arrest, whether those individuals are to be prosecuted
in the Mechanism or in Rwandan courts. We also call
on regional Governments to work with the Tribunal on
the relocation of several persons who have either been
acquitted by the ICTR or served their sentences, but
whose return to Rwanda is problematic.
Looking back 20 years, it should be clear to all
that the two Tribunals have made enormous historic
contributions to international criminal law. Not only
have they brought to justice perpetrators of some of
the most heinous crimes known to humankind, they
have also assembled records and archives that will be
publicly accessible and that will protect the truth from
those who might, in the future, attempt to deny or
distort it. The Tribunals have fostered respect for the
rule of law, developed capacity at the national level,
and enhanced reconciliation and peace. They have also
shown that no one, no matter how powerful, is beyond
or above the reach of law. Those achievements have
transformed international criminal justice in ways that
will stand the tests of time and create a safer and more
just world for generations to come.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): I thank Presidents Meron
and Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for
their briefings today. I also thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate, which provides
us with an opportunity to reflect on the contribution
to peace and security made by international criminal
justice in general, and more particularly on the work

13-5937617/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
We welcome the progress made by the three
bodies in relation to their respective mandates in the
latest reporting period. Achievements include the
successful launch of The Hague branch of the Residual
Mechanism on 1 July, good progress in transferring
the ICTR’s archives to the Mechanism, the delivery
of five judgements by the ICTY and the signing of a
host-State agreement between the United Nations and
the Government of Tanzania for the Arusha branch
of the Mechanism. We also welcome the fact that the
ICTY will shortly be returned to its full complement
of judges.
As the reports before us and today’s briefings make
clear, the work of the ad hoc Tribunals is not yet done
and will clearly extend beyond 2014. Key trials and
appeals remain before the ICTY. The last appeal before
the ICTR is still to be finalized. Victims and witnesses
require ongoing protection. Fugitives from the ICTR
must be found and apprehended. The ongoing support
and cooperation of the international community is
therefore essential to the successful completion of the
work.
The Council must also play its role in addressing
the challenges that remain before the ICTY and the
ICTR. Specifically, Australia considers it necessary for
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
to give further consideration to how the Council can
support the ICTR’s efforts to relocate the 10 acquitted
and released persons currently in Tanzania, some of
whom, as we have heard, have been effectively confined
to safe houses in Arusha for over 10 years.
In light of the impending closure of the ICTR,
the time has come to elevate diplomatic and political
efforts to identify a solution and we urge all Member
States to enhance their cooperation with the ICTR on
that critical matter. We also consider it imperative that
the Council renew those mandates of ICTY judges
that will shortly expire, in accordance with the request
made by President Meron, in order to ensure that the
ICTY’s remaining cases can be concluded as efficiently
as possible.
Much has been said about the achievements of
the ad hoc Tribunals and the legacy that the Residual
Mechanism has been established to preserve. It is no

18/32

overstatement to say that the work of the ICTY and the
ICTR has been ground-breaking. Most obviously, the
Tribunals have played a major role in the development
of our understanding of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. But beyond that, the Tribunals
have won the cooperation of States that is necessary to
conduct investigations, obtain evidence, and arrest and
transfer indictees to Arusha and The Hague. They have
developed rules of procedure and evidence, constructed
legal aid systems, and found solutions for how and
where their sentences could be enforced. And they have
developed the means to protect victims and witnesses
in order to encourage them to let their voices be heard.
The Tribunals have also shared both evidence and
experience with national courts. In doing so, they have
helped to foster the type of national accountability
processes that are essential to truly ending impunity,
and in that way have made a major contribution to
strengthening the rule of law. It is crucial that the
experience of the Tribunals be shared and their legacy
promoted. To that end, Australia is pleased to be
supporting the ICTR’s international workshop on sexual
and gender-based violence, to be held, as we heard
earlier, in Kampala in January 2014. The workshop
is aimed at sharing international best practices in the
investigation and prosecution of sexual violence.
Twenty years ago, the Security Council breathed
life into the international community’s wish that those
alleged to be responsible for serious international
crimes be held to account. The Council’s power to
refer situations to the International Criminal Court
underscores the fact that it remains a key player in
accountability matters. As the work of the ad hoc
Tribunals winds down, it is more important than ever
that the Council fulfil its responsibilities regarding
ending impunity, including by providing ongoing
political and diplomatic support to the International
Criminal Court. Otherwise we will be failing to live up
to the vision that the Council established 20 years ago.
Finally, we wish to recognize and thank Guatemala,
Ambassador Rosenthal and his entire team for their
outstanding leadership of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals over the past two years.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to reaffirm Luxembourg’s full support
for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work shows that
international criminal justice can prevail and that
13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

sooner or later the perpetrators of the most serious kinds
of crimes must be held accountable. I thank Presidents
Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow for their comprehensive briefings and reports.
As the end of his term approaches, I would like to pay
tribute to Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala and his
team for the effectiveness and commitment with which
they have chaired the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.
The ICTY laid the foundations for what is now
an internationally recognized principle for promoting
conflict resolution and reсоnсiliаtiоп in regions
ravaged by war — that those suspected of responsibility
for the most serious kinds of crimes of concern to the
international community as a whole must be brought
to justice. The ICTY has played an essential role in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting stability
and long-term reconciliation in the Western Balkans,
but its contribution goes beyond that. Its jurisprudence
has contributed to the development of international
criminal law in areas such as individual criminal
responsibility and crimes of sexual violence. It has
given a voice to the victims, especially women and
children.
We thank the President of the ICTY for the report he
has just given us on the Tribunal’s future jurisdictional
activities, as well as on the reasons that led to the
revised trial schedule. It is crucial that the Council be
kept fully informed of relevant developments so that it
can quickly help overcome difficulties and monitor the
Tribunal’s completion strategy. The ICTY is currently
dealing with highly complex cases — which explains the
slippage in the schedule — particularly those of Šešelj,
Karadžić, Hadžić and Mladić. We also understand that
the problems related to staff retention have an effect on
the ICTY’s ability to prosecute certain trials according
to the original timetable.
Of course, we hope the Tribunal completes its work
as quickly as possible, but nothing should undermine
its ability to deliver justice in such serious cases. So
while the Court is faced with a heavy workload, we
welcome the fact that the election of the sixteenth
judge of the Appeals Chamber was finally able to take
place on 18 November (see A/68/PV.53). We support
the requested extension of the judges’ mandates. We
encourage the ICTY to take all necessary measures to
keep the delays to a minimum. The timely completion
of all trials is essential to achieving a smooth transition
to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

Tribunals. In that regard, we welcome the start of the
Hague Branch of the Mechanism’s operations on 1 July.
Like the ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda has made a significant contribution to
our common goal of ending impuпity for the crime of
genocide. We welcome the ICTR’s ongoing transition to
the Residual Mechanism and the fact that the transfer
of judicial functions will soon be completed. We also
welcome the fact that on 17 July the last remaining
case was transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction, thus
concluding an important element of the ICTR’s
completion strategy.
However, as has already been mentioned, nine
fugitives continue to evade justice. The Office of
the Prosecutor of the Arusha Branch of the Residual
Mechanism is rightly focusing its efforts on the
search for three high-level fugitives, Messrs. Kabuga,
Mpiranya and Bizimana. Catching the fugitives is an
urgent priority if justice is to be done. We therefore urge
all Member States to intensify their cooperation with
the Tribunal and provide all the assistance necessary to
arrest all the fugitives and bring them to justice.
We also call for a solution to finally be found so
that the five persons acquitted by the Tribunal and still
living in safe houses in Arusha under the Tribunal’s
protection can be relocated. With the date for the closing
of the Tribunal approaching, we encourage Member
States to help the ICTR implement the strategic plan it
has developed for relocating these persons.
With both Tribunals on track to complete their work,
the responsibility of States in the region for the fight
against impunity is growing, based on the principle of
complementarity. In both the Western Balkans and the
Great Lakes region it is essential to combat impunity
in order to promote national reconciliation, strengthen
regional cooperation and enable citizens to face the
future with confidence. In that context, we emphasize
the importance of strengthening national capacities and
raising public awareness, and of continuing efforts in
those areas.
The mass atrocities committed in recent decades
have shown that it is imperative to create a permanent
court to end impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern. The two ad hoc Tribunals have
played a crucial role and paved the way for the creation
of the International Criminal Court, with permanent
jurisdiction and universal authority.

13-5937619/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Luxembourg’s
commitment to supporting every effort aimed at
building on the legacy of the ICTY and ICTR at the
national, regional and international levels, including
through enhanced cooperation between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful today for the presence in the Council of
Presidents Meron and Joensen and of Prosecutors
Jallow and Brammertz, and to thank Judge Meron in
his capacity as President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the expertise of Guatemala and to thank
Ambassador Rosenthal for his leadership of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals. Sometimes,
when we talk about the ethics of responsibility and belief
we keep them separate, but I believe that in Ambassador
Rosenthal’s leadership the ethics of responsibility and
belief are all perfectly in line.
After two decades of activity, the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), as has been said, are in their final stages,
whereby, according to the completion strategies
laid down by the Council, they are to complete their
judicial work according to the established timetables
and to transfer their cases and archives to the Residual
Mechanism. Argentina would like to recognize the
progress reported by the ICTY and ICTR. We believe
that June was the most recent occasion on which we
considered the reports on the progress achieved by the
Tribunals (see S/PV.6977).
As for the Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, we
note that, 20 years after its creation, it has completed
136 prosecutions out of the 161 individuals accused
and that the Court has no fugitives under indictment.
The Tribunal has made progress in the completion of
cases, but we must also take into account the significant
challenges that it is facing owing to the loss of skilled
personnel at this stage prior to the final completion of
the Tribunal’s duties. The Security Council should,
as part of its responsibility, reconsider the measures
already requested by the Tribunal, and then the General
Assembly should consider them in the Fifth Committee.
For example, the Tribunal requested the creation of a
task force at the United Nations to provide opportunities
for absorbing ICTY staff and the granting of a special

20/32

payment to keep staff from pre-emptively abandoning
their duties in the expectation that their posts will be
eliminated.
Argentina supported the establishment by the
Council of an expedited mechanism for the election
of an additional permanent judge, as requested by
President Meron. I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Judge Koffi Kumelio Afande on his
election by the General Assembly to those functions.
I also wish to highlight the fact that Argentina
supports the extension of the mandate of the ICTY judges
requested by President Meron. We believe that, while
resolution 1966 (2010) set ideal dates for the transfer of
functions to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, the judicial function may, like life
itself, present challenges resulting from the complexity
of the cases and the transitional phase that we are in.
We appreciate the report of the ICTR regarding
compliance with the deadlines and projections made
for cases in the trial and appeal stages, and the fact that
the transition to the Residual Mechanism continues in
line with those projections, including the delivery to
the Mechanism of judicial and administrative archives
by the end of 2014.
Other colleagues have mentioned the issue of the
capture of the fugitives, and we agree that that is a
priority. The fact that nine of those indicted by the ICTR
are still fugitives is not good news. The Mechanism
is ready to begin proceedings, once those under its
jurisdiction are arrested, and that is also a priority. But
that requires cooperation on the part of all States, in
accordance with the obligations under resolution 955
(1994).
I would like to highlight the progress achieved
in the area of training and cooperation with States
and the creation of the Umusanzu Information and
Documentation Centre in Kigali, together with other
valuable contributions by the Office of the Prosecutor.
The recent drafting of a manual of best practices for
prosecuting and investigating cases of sexual and
gender-based violence also deserves our commendation.
With respect to the Residual Mechanism, Argentina
recognizes the progress made towards its full operation,
and the fact that both the Arusha and The Hague
branches are fully operational. The Tribunals represent
a substantial contribution to that noble objective of
living a life that is fully human.

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

I should like to make an unrelated announcement.
We have just received the painful news of the passing
of Nelson Mandela. Nelson Mandela was a man who
gave hope to the entire world in his fight for human
rights. It seems that nothing happens by chance in
the history of humankind. I would like to recall that
today, at this moment, mothers, grandmothers and
daughters of the Plaza de Mayo are marching around
the obelisk for the thirty-third time, with the slogan
“30 years of democracy, 30 years of dictatorship, 33
years of resistance”. Entire peoples, good men and
women — men like Mandela — resisted and taught us to
resist fear, to resist impunity and to resist forgetfulness.
The President (spoke in French): Members will
now stand and observe a minute of silence.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Council, I think we can all agree on the extent to which
we share the sentiment expressed by Ambassador
Perceval and her sadness at this news. In a certain
way, our meeting is about the values that Nelson
Mandela defended, which are the values of justice and
reconciliation, which go hand in hand.
Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I, too, would like to
thank President Meron, President Joensen, Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for the reports and
for their briefings today.
The United Kingdom continues to be a strong
supporter of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We
believe that the ICTY has played a key role in tackling
impunity and delivering justice to the countless victims
of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. We thank
and commend the Tribunal for all of its work over the
past 20 years. We are pleased to see that Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia are continuing to cooperate with the ICTY.
State cooperation is, in our view, absolutely essential
for the ICTY to be able to complete its mandate.
We note from the Prosecutor’s report (S/2013/678,
annex II) that the capacity of domestic institutions to
conduct effective war crimes prosecutions remains
a concern, especially in Bosnia. We share the
Prosecutor’s concerns about the limited progress on the
category II cases that were transferred to the Bosnian
authorities between 2005 and 2009. We consider that

the report’s suggestion, namely, that local authorities
consider adopting a comprehensive war crimes training
curriculum, is a good one. We encourage all parties
to consider that suggestion positively and to explore
ways to improve the capacity of domestic institutions.
The timely completion of all ICTY trials and appeals
is important. We urge the ICTY to take all necessary
steps to minimize any further delays in its proceedings.
On the ICTR, we remain pleased that it has
completed all of its trial work, and we note the progress
made on the appeals. It is welcome news that the
transition to the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals is going well. Apprehending
the remaining nine fugitives continues to be a cause
for concern. It is important that all of the individuals
indicted by the ICTR be captured and brought to justice.
We encourage all Member States to provide the ICTR
with their full and unequivocal support, so as to ensure
that all of those fugitives are apprehended as soon as
possible.
Once again, we note with regret that the problem of
relocating individuals who remain in Arusha following
their acquittal or the completion of their sentences has
still not been resolved. The United Kingdom shares
the ICTR’s view that enabling persons who have been
acquitted by an international tribunal to resume their
lives is a fundamental expression of the rule of law.
We commend the ICTR for its continued efforts and
we encourage all parties to work together to try to find
an acceptable solution to the problem as quickly as
possible.
We also regret to see that staff retention continues
to be an issue for both Tribunals. We acknowledge
the difficulties that staff shortages and the loss of
experienced members of staff can have on each
Tribunal’s ability to carry out its work. We thank the
Tribunals for their efforts to minimize the impact of
staff attrition on their work and we encourage them to
continue those efforts and continue to prioritize their
resources as rigorously as possible.
Last but not least, we would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of Guatemala for its
outstanding contribution on international justice issues
through its role as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals over the last two years.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

13-5937621/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports (see S/2013/463 and
S/2013/460, respectively) and comprehensive briefings.
I would also like to commend the work of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, under
the highly professional leadership of Ambassador
Rosenthal of Guatemala and his entire team, and of the
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs in assisting the
Tribunals and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals in their activities.
We welcome the efforts and commitment of
both Tribunals towards completing the outstanding
proceedings within the established time frame and
the progress made in the transition of the Tribunals’
functions to the Residual Mechanism. We note that the
ICTY has concluded proceedings against 136 out of 161
indicted individuals and that four individuals are on trial
and 21 others are in appeals proceedings. However, the
trials and appeals continue to be affected by a number
of factors. We take note of the clarifications provided in
that regard by the President of the ICTY in his written
report and in today’s briefing given to the Council.
With regard to the loss of the highly experienced
staff members, we commend the measures taken by
the Tribunal, including those aimed at improving job
security, conditions of work and providing a range of
training and career development opportunities. The
recent election by the General Assembly of Mr. Koffi
Afande (see A/68/PV.53) and the appointment by
the Secretary-General of Mr. Mandiaye Niang as
Permanent Judge of the ICTR will definitely aid efforts
to complete remaining work expeditiously.
The ICTR has completed its work with respect to
substantive cases at the trial level for all 93 accused
indicted by the Tribunal, leaving only the appeals cases
to be completed. It is anticipated that all but one of
the remaining appeals will be completed in 2013 and
2014. At the same time, as we have been informed by
the President of the Tribunal, the ICTR continues to
face serious difficulties in relocating individuals who
were either acquitted or released after completion of
their sentences and who still remain in safe houses in
Arusha under the Tribunal’s protection. We take note of
the Tribunal’s efforts in that regard and look forward to
that issue being resolved as soon as possible.
Consistent with resolution 1966 (2010) and its
mandate, the Residual Mechanism has now commenced
its work in both Arusha and The Hague. We commend

22/32

the Mechanism for its efforts to maintain and build
upon the achievements of the Tribunals and for its
commitment to staying focused on its mandate and
running as a small and efficient organization. The
cooperation of States and their continued support
remain a critical pillar of the work of the Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism. It is important that States
remain committed to meeting their relevant obligations
in that regard.
The international community, including the
Security Council, should spare no effort in providing
the Tribunals with the necessary support to achieve
completion of their mandates and in preserving
their legacy. The activity and jurisprudence of both
Tribunals have helped to develop international law,
fight impunity and deliver justice. The practice of
the Tribunals can obviously benefit national efforts
to pursue post-conflict justice, especially in those
situations where the prevailing culture of impunity
for serious crimes represents a considerable obstacle
to peace and reconciliation. It is essential to recall
once again the importance above all of human rights
doctrine, which is based on the need to respect human
dignity and consequently punish all those who seriously
attack that dignity.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Vagn Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and the Prosecutors,
Serge Brammertz of the ICTY and Hassan Bubacar
Jallow of the ICTR for their reports on the completion
strategies of their respective Tribunals. I would also
like to warmly congratulate Mr. Koffi Afande of Togo
for his outstanding election as Judge of the ICTY and
Mr. Mandiaye Niang of Senegal for his appointment
as a Judge of the ICTR. I remain convinced that those
two judges will contribute to the swift conclusion of the
remaining proceedings in the two Tribunals.
While progress in the two International Criminal
Tribunals is not symmetrical, the work of each is
progressively drawing to a close. However, my delegation
is concerned about the challenges encountered by the
two Tribunals, including attrition of staff who naturally
want to secure the next part of their careers. I call on the
General Assembly to cooperate more closely with the
two Tribunals to take measures to combat staff attrition

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

on the basis of the reasonable proposals formulated by
the ICTR and ICTY.
Rwanda welcomes the fact that the cases at the trial
level have concluded in the ICTR. However, the delays
in the appeals proceedings are a cause for concern, in
particular in the Nyiramasuhuko et al. (“Butare”) case,
for which delivery of the appeal judgement is projected
in July 2015 at the earliest. We know that there are
challenges relating to the staff and new requests from
parties, but we nevertheless feel that other reasons put
forward by the ICTR, such as translation of documents,
could have been planned for. We would therefore call
on the Tribunal to do all it can to speed up the appeals
proceedings so as to guarantee that all cases conclude
before the expiration of its mandate on 31 December
2014.
Regarding the cases transferred to national
jurisdiction under rule 11 bis of the rules of procedure
and evidence of the Tribunal, the results are very mixed.
While Jean Uwinkindi and Bernard Munyagishari,
who were transferred to Rwanda in April 2012 and
July 2013 respectively, have appeared before the
judges under the monitoring of Tribunal monitors, the
procedures for Mr. Laurent Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka, transferred to France in November 2007,
have practically stopped. It is totally incomprehensible
that so many years after their transfer there is no
end in sight for the two indictees. We also regret that
despite our repeated calls the report of the ICTR under
consideration provides no detail regarding progress on
the cases in France.
We would once again regard that rule 11 bis allows
the Tribunals to rescind transfer orders to national
jurisdictions at any time. In that regard, if those French
proceedings remain in the current deadlock, the ICTR
should envisage transferring the Laurent Bucyibaruta
and Wenceslas Munyeshyaka cases to Rwanda.
Rwanda is pleased to note that there are no longer
any fugitives from the ICTY. However, that is far
from being the case for the ICTR, from which nine
fugitives remain at large. We reiterate our support for
the continuous calls from the Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, and from the Council urging the
countries concerned to cooperate with the Office of
the Prosecutor in tracking and arresting the remaining
fugitives, including Félicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya
and Augustin Bizimana, who were among those who
planned the genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi in
Rwanda.

Similarly, we call on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to redouble their efforts to arrest the genocidal
members of the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), a group that was recently described
by the Security Council as a subject to United Nations
sanctions and whose leaders and members include
perpetrators of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, who
continue to promote and commit ethnic killings
and other massacres in Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, we reiterate our gratitude to Germany
for having begun trials against the leaders of the FDLR,
and we take this opportunity to call on other countries
of the European Union that are harbouring perpetrators
of the Rwandan genocide, including FDLR leaders,
to do likewise. We profoundly regret that the justice
systems in certain of those States, instead of bringing
justice to the victims of the genocide, for which they
have been waiting for 20 years, have preferred to
issue arrest warrants against those who arrested them,
thereby flagrantly abusing the principle of universal
jurisdiction. We urge those States to return to reason,
bring justice to the victims of genocide and abstain
from using justice for political purposes.
Rwanda welcomes the awareness-raising activities
of the Tribunal, in particular those of Umusanzu
Information and Documentation Centre in Kigali and
the 10 additional provincial information centres. Those
centres are indispensable tools that allow the Rwandan
justice system, students, researchers and individuals to
have access to the jurisprudence and other documents of
the ICTR. Rwanda believes that that fruitful initiative
should be a first step towards the transfer of the ICTR
archives to Rwanda at the end of the Mechanism’s
mandate. Those archives are an integral part of the
history and heritage of Rwanda. They are crucial for
the preservation of memory and for the education of
future generations. We remain fully committed to
continuing consultations with all interested parties
with a view to ensuring that that request, which we
have repeated many times before the Council, will be
met with concrete action.
I could not conclude my statement without paying
enthusiastic tribute to Ambassador Gert Rosenthal
of Guatemala, Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, for his devotion over the
past several years to the fight against impunity and to

13-5937623/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

international criminal justice, in particular through the
ad hoc Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide carried out against the Tutsi in Rwanda, I
must also pay tribute to Nelson Mandela for his life
devoted to justice and reconciliation.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I must convey the condolences of the Kingdom
of Morocco to South Africa and the entire African
continent upon the loss of the giant of Africa, Nelson
Mandela.
I wish to thank the Presidents of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Theodor Meron, and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Vagn Joensen, and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow, for their reports
and presentations on the activities of the Tribunals.
We noted with satisfaction the efforts deployed
by the two Tribunals during the reporting period to
implement the completion strategy for their work and
to achieve a smooth transition to the International
Residual Mechanism, while ensuring trials that respect
the fundamental principles of equity and due process.
The ICTR has taken an important step in the
process of transition to the Mechanism by concluding
trial division cases with regard to all of the individuals
before it and ensuring referrals to the Mechanism, while
the six remaining cases, in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010), come under Rwandan jurisdiction.
We welcome the spirit of cooperation and
coordination that has characterized the relations
between the Tribunals, which are closing, and the
Mechanism, which is being assisted in administrative
matters by the Tribunals and which will continue to
track fugitives, mount prosecutions and take on most of
the judicial functions.
The President of the Tribunal, as a permanent
judge of the Arusha Branch of the Mechanism, is now
focusing his attention on contempt allegations; he also
regularly meets with the Tribunal’s archive groups and
chairs meetings of the Joint Coordination Council of
the Tribunal and the Mechanism.
For its part, the Office of the Prosecutor is working
to complete appeal cases, monitor cases transferred to
national jurisdictions and take transitional measures to
ensure a smooth transfer of functions to the Office of

24/32

the Prosecutor of the Arusha Branch of the Mechanism
and the effective final closure of the Tribunal at the end
of its mandate.
In addition, the transitional activities have already
addressed the monitoring of the enforcement of
sentences by the President of the Mechanism and the
designation, on 17 September, of two facilities for
the transfer of the temporary Tribunal archives to the
Mechanism, which has now begun.
Nevertheless, the transition process is not without
its difficulties, such as the preparation of archives to
be transferred to the Mechanism and issues of staff
compensation, which have given rise to delays.
With respect to the ICTY, I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate my congratulations to Togo on
the election of Koffi Kumelio Afande on 18 November
by the General Assembly as a judge of the ICTY.
We support the extension of the judges’ mandates as
requested by President Meron.
Since its inception, the ICTY has made efforts
to complete its mandate. It was able to judge 136 out
of a total of 161 accused in the trial division and 21
appeals during the reporting period. There are no
outstanding fugitives, since Ratko Mladić and Goran
Hadžić were arrested in 2011. However, as indicated in
the report, there are still some remaining difficulties
to be overcome. The ICTY will not be able to deliver
judgements on the two accused whom I just mentioned
before 31 December 2014, as stipulated in resolution
1966 (2010), owing to the fact that their arrests were
so recent. Moreover, on the other cases, decisions
may not be handed down until June 2017, owing to the
appeals docket. The Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal
will therefore function in parallel with that of the
Mechanism after 31 December 2014.
Furthermore, practical solutions must be considered
for facilitating the resettlement and rehabilitation of
persons who have been acquitted or who have completed
their sentences.
We welcome the outreach programme, which
seeks to disseminate factual information regarding the
Tribunal to the communities of the former Yugoslavia,
targeting in particular young people in high schools
and universities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and Serbia. The documentaries transmitted by 12 local
television stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
judicial activities in the former Yugoslavia and post-

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

conflict reconstruction, as well as cultural events,
are extremely important when it comes to promoting
reconciliation.

ICTY branch of the Residual Mechanism commenced
operations as of 1 July. We acknowledge those
developments with appreciation.

While everyone recognizes the important role
played by witnesses in testifying to their experiences,
those people face great difficulties, especially those who
suffered atrocities. They therefore require multifaceted
support, including psychological support.

Secondly, we note that despite the progress in
the work of both Tribunals, there are still undue
delays in their proceedings. Individual cases have
been postponed for as long as six months owing to
translation issues. That is not in keeping with the spirit
of the completion strategy. China is of the view that
the relevant resolutions should be fully implemented.
We urge both Tribunals to take more rigorous steps
to accelerate their work, while ensuring the quality
of their proceedings to ensure the completion of their
work within the established time frame.

We are pleased to note the efforts made by the
Tribunal to implement the completion strategy and the
transition to the Mechanism. We welcome the transfer
of the archival and records management functions
from the Tribunal to the Mechanism on 1 July 2012;
local cooperation between the Tribunal and The
Hague Branch of the Mechanism, in accordance with
provisions of resolution 1966 (2010), during their
period of coexistence; and the support provided by the
Legal Affairs Section of the Tribunal in negotiations on
a headquarters agreement with the host country.
Lastly, it should be underscored that only through
continued dialogue between the Tribunals and the
other bodies of the United Nations will it be possible to
overcome the difficulties that they face.
I cannot conclude my statement without paying
tribute to the Ambassador of Guatemala and his team
for their praiseworthy efforts and professionalism in
leading the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.
Mr. Li Zhenhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
first like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their briefings and
their respective detailed reports on the implementation
of the completion strategies of the ICTY and the ICTR
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. With regard to the work of both Tribunals
and their residual mechanisms over the past six months,
I would like to say the following.
First, we are pleased that progress has been made
in the work of both Tribunals. During the reporting
period, the ICTY rendered five judgements. The ICTR
delivered an appeal judgement on the transfer of cases
to Rwanda. Both Tribunals have taken steps to advance
their completion strategies. The majority of the ICTR
judicial and appeal functions have been transferred to
the Rwanda branch of the Residual Mechanism. The

Thirdly, we acknowledge the transfer of cases by
both Tribunals to the relevant national courts. We hope
that both Tribunals and their residual mechanisms will
follow up on domestic judicial proceedings, provide the
necessary assistance and update the Security Council
regularly on the progress made.
Fourthly, we also note the difficulties and challenges
that both Tribunals continue to face in their work, such
as the resettlement of acquitted persons and those
who have been served their sentences and have been
released. It is against the spirit of fair justice to ignore
the fundamental human rights of such individuals.
In addition, the ICTR Branch is also responsible for
tracking and arresting fugitives and bringing them to
justice. We therefore call on the countries concerned to
continue to cooperate with the Tribunals.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Rosenthal, Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
In the past two years, Guatemala has provided excellent
guidance to the the Working Group under his able
leadership. We pay tribute and express our gratitude to
him and his team.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We share the feeling of deep sadness at the
passing of Nelson Mandela, a leading political figure
with whom the entire world associated a sense of
fairness and freedom.
We thank the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for their detailed briefings on the
progress of the judicial proceedings and the task of
winding up their activities.

13-5937625/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

We would like to begin by congratulating Togo
on the recent appointment of a candidate from that
country, Mr. Koffi Afande, as the sixteenth judge of
the ICTY. We hope that, as stipulated when the issue of
the appointment of an additional judge was proposed,
he will actively participate in the work of the Tribunal
and that, given the large number of cases, his work will
assist in bolstering the effectiveness of the Appeals
Chamber, in line with the opinion of the President
of the Tribunal set out in the relevant request to the
Security Council.
We eagerly await the decisions on the Šešelj
case in the Trial Chamber and on the Šainović et al.
and Ðorđević cases in the Appeals Chamber, which,
as we understand, have been delayed for a number of
procedural reasons. We closely follow and study the
course of those protracted cases and hope for their
objective consideration.
Unfortunately, there are ongoing difficulties with
regard to the translation of cases in both Tribunals. The
slow translation work continues to lead to significant
delays in the legal proceedings. With regard to the
translation of the judgement on the Prlić et al. case,
rendered in May, the Tribunal has postponed work for
a year, justifying the delay by the large caseload. The
same translation issue was the root cause of a significant
delay in the Butare case of the ICTR, where the material
took an excessive length of time, that is, from July
2011 to February 2013. We urge the Presidents of the
Tribunals to pay the closest attention to that problem.
The Tribunals have the financial means to resolve the
issue, including through the outsourcing plan.
We must mention yet another problem that could
ultimately hamper the closure of the Rwanda Tribunal
within the set time frame, namely, the resettlement
of individuals acquitted by the Tribunal in secure
countries. We understand and support the humanitarian
significance of that task. However, it must not be a
reason for postponing the closure of the ICTR. The
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals was established in order to resolve such
issues. That is the very body to which the function
should be transferred in a timely manner. In our view,
there are no legal constraints in that regard. We note
the assurances by the ICTR President and Prosecutor of
their readiness to undertake the transfer of that issue to
the Residual Mechanism by the end of 2014.
In general, we would like to underscore once
again that the practice of drawing out legal proceedings
26/32

contradicts the text outlined in resolution 1966 (2010),
that is, a swift drawdown of the work of the Tribunals.
The delays undermine the interest in international
justice and are costly to the international community.
They incur, inter alia, an increased financial burden for
States Members of the United Nations. We underscore
our commitment to that resolution.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
express our condolences on the sad demise of South
Africa’s great leader, Mr. Nelson Mandela.
At this meeting, my delegation is grateful to the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their respective
briefings. We also thank Ambassador Rosenthal
of Guatemala for his outstanding leadership in
conducting the work of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals for the past two years. With the
establishment of the Tribunals two decades ago, a new
era of international criminal justice began. It has been
20 years since the founding of the ICTY, while the ICTR
will reach that milestone in 2014. Both Tribunals have
been instrumental in the fight against impunity and in
developing key international legal precedents. We are
confident that the Residual Mechanism will continue to
maintain the high standard set by the Tribunals.
As the work of the Tribunals draws to a conclusion,
Member States must continue to lend their support at
this critical juncture. We welcome the fact that the ICTR
completed its workload on all 93 indicted individuals
at the trial level before the end of 2012 and we look
forward to the Tribunal’s completion of the outstanding
appeals by the projected date in 2015. We expect that
the appointment of Mr. Mandiaye Niang of Senegal
will be of assistance in facilitating the appellate work
of both Tribunals. We also support the efforts of the
ICTR to retain the humanitarian issue of relocating
acquitted persons and those who have already served
their sentences. We hope for an efficient and timely
solution to that problem.
The ICTY still faces various challenges, including
late arrests and staff attrition. Among the implications
for the Tribunal is a delay in its appellate work, which
is estimated to be completed as late as mid-2017. We
urge the Tribunal to do its best to complete its work in
a timely manner without sacrificing the principles of
justice. With the significance of meeting time frames
13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

in mind, we hope that the election of Mr. Koffi Afande
of Togo will aid efforts to complete the remaining cases
expeditiously. In that vein, we further expect that the
extensions requested by the Judges in the ICTY will
duly be considered.
We
welcome
the
Residual
Mechanism’s
engagement in numerous judicial activities during the
reporting period. That includes the appeal proceedings
in the Augustin Ngirabatware case. Such activities are
evidence that the Mechanism is well on the way towards
fulfilling its mandate. The arrest and prosecution of
nine outstanding fugitives from the ICTR remains a top
priority for the Mechanism. We encourage continuing
efforts to track down the fugitives and to secure the
cooperation of Member States in that regard.
To conclude, we also wish to stress that the Tribunals
have made a significant, lasting contribution to the
development of international justice. Their work has
enriched international humanitarian law and led to the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. The
Republic of Korea is firmly committed to providing our
continuing support to ensure that the Tribunals fulfil
their important mandates.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammetz for their statements.
This year, we celebrated the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 827 (1993), on the creation
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). Political dialogue in the region
continues to advance under the auspices of the European
Union. The Tribunal has played its full role in these
developments. To be sure, all is not ideal. Prosecutor
Brammertz referred earlier to missing persons. The
political rhetoric, the denial of certain crimes, and
the lack of regional cooperation in bringing mid-level
criminals to justice remain matters of concern. But
the historic agreement of 19 April between Serbia and
Kosovo, achieved under the auspices of the European
Union, creates a context that augurs well for the region’s
stability, the future of its people and the European
outlook for both States. Political dialogue, justice and
the fight against impunity should make it possible to
definitively turn the page on the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia.
The ICTY is handling matters of great complexity,
which accounts for delays in its schedule. We hope that

the Tribunal will conclude its activities as quickly as
possible, while ensuring that nothing undermines its
capacity to render justice.
The year 2014 will mark the twentieth anniversary
of one of the darkest periods in our collective history,
the Rwandan genocide. In memory of the victims, and
invoking our shared will, we hope to see the Great
Lakes region emerge once and for all from violence.
With respect to the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), I hope to be able to offer
the Tribunal some good news concerning the two cases
under French jurisdiction. Both Mr. Bucyibaruta and
Mr. Munyeshyaka have been indicted, and the French
authorities are devoting all their attention to the
questions raised by the Tribunal on those procedures.
Now that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda is about to closing out its activities,
we should remain vigilant. Three high-level
fugitives — Félicien Kabuga, Augustin Bizimana and
Protais Mpiranya — remain at large, and their arrest is a
priority. They will be tried by the Residual Mechanism
as soon as they are apprehended. We must ensure that
the Mechanism is provided with sufficient resources to
successfully complete that mission.
The cooperation of all with the ICTR is an
obligation pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. It is important for the Council to
remind everyone of that obligation. With respect to
assistance for the Tribunal, the relocation of persons
who have been acquitted or served their sentences
remains a central concern. France was the first country
to welcome a number of individuals to its territory at
the request of the Tribunal. We hope that more States
will accept such persons on their territory.
The Tribunals have placed justice at the core
of our concerns. The International Criminal Court,
which is permanent and universal, has already taken
up the pursuit of justice. That is the case, for example,
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and I take
this opportunity to note that, two weeks ago, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo undertook the
arrest and transfer to The Hague of a suspect being
sought by the International Criminal Court. That is an
encouraging sign.
I also note the Secretary-General’s resolute policy
on behalf justice and human rights, which excludes
all contact with persons sought by the International
Criminal Court. He has instructed his mediators not to

13-5937627/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

consider amnesty or immunity for the perpetrators of
serious crimes. He has done a great deal to reinforce
the impact of international justice. We commend his
activity in that regard along with that of Mr. Serpa
Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs.
Finally, I join previous speakers in thanking
Ambassador of Guatemala, Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, and his
entire team. Beyond his leadership of the Working
Group, Ambassador Gert Rosenthal has been an
unyielding and eloquent voice within the Council on
the fight against impunity, the role of the Tribunals and
the historical significance of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Medan (Croatia): At the outset, please allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December.
We would also like to join the previous speakers in
expressing our sadness of the passing of a great leader,
Mr. Nelson Mandela, of South Africa.
I would like to start by welcoming the Presidents
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Judges Meron and Joensen, along
with Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow. We commend
them for their important work. Croatia appreciates their
comprehensive reports on the work of the Tribunals,
the status of the cases before them, and the measures
undertaken in the implementation of the completion
strategy during the reporting period. Those documents
add to the substantive volume of work and legacy of the
ICTY and ICTR.
More than 20 years after the establishment of
the ICTY, it is possible to make a comprehensive
assessment of its activities and overall achievements.
There is also an opportunity to learn important lessons
and apply that significant empirical knowledge for
the sake of the further development of international
criminal justice. In our view, the establishment of both
Tribunals and their work have profoundly changed the
landscape of international criminal justice and paved
the way for the International Criminal Court. Croatia
advocated for the establishment of the ICTY from the
very beginning. We believed then, as we do today,

28/32

that it is of paramount importance to put an end to the
culture of impunity, regardless of the causes and nature
of the specific conflict within which the crimes against
humanity were committed.
Croatia welcomes the results achieved by the ICTY
to date. However, the work of the Tribunal is not over.
Some of those most responsible for the carnage, deaths
and suffering are still waiting for the verdict to be
pronounced against them. We note with satisfaction the
precise and entirely positive assessment in the ICTY
Prosecutor’s report of Croatia’s cooperation with the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Tribunal. The brevity
of that part of the report speaks volumes on Croatia’s
support and cooperation, which leaves not even the
smallest room for doubt or second thoughts. Members
can rest assured that Croatia will continue to cooperate
and render its full support to the Tribunal.
This is the first time that Croatia has participated
in the Security Council’s debate on the ICTY as a State
member of the European Union (EU). Along with many
other accomplishments, our membership has been
achieved through full cooperation with the ICTY and
as a result of important reforms in our national judicial
sector, including the establishment of specialized warcrimes chambers in selected courts. Croatia was the
first country in the history of the EU’s enlargement that
had to meet numerous benchmarks in the negotiating
chapter on judiciary and fundamental rights, among
the most important of which were cooperation with the
ICTY and processing war crimes in domestic courts. I
am proud to say that we succeeded with flying colors.
Croatia has spoken in detail on this subject numerous
times, praising but sometimes also criticizing the work
of the Tribunal, so I will not repeat our well-known
position. Let me just say that the results achieved and
the Tribunal’s far-reaching legacy do not and cannot
mean that there is no room for improvement in its work.
In that context, what comes to one’s mind are often
criticized protracted judicial processes, which in some
cases undermined their own purpose.
Late justice is by all means better than no justice at
all, but such delays interfered with the expectations of
the victims’ longing for justice to be delivered. Equally
so, the accused have the right to trials that are not only
fair, but also of reasonable duration. One could also
argue that the modifications of the Tribunal’s rules of
procedure did not always contribute to legal security,
nor to the clarity or simplicity of the proceedings. Those

13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

are lessons learned that we should apply circumspectly
in the future development of international law.
Enhanced regional cooperation in the area of war
crimes and related issues represents one of the most
important legacies of the Tribunals. Croatia stands
ready to continue mutual cooperation in that area, in
accordance with the generally accepted principles of
international criminal law, and with full respect for the
relevant national jurisdictions and competences.
The saying that there can be no true justice without
peace, nor peace without justice, is a hard-earned
truism. What really matters in the final analysis is
the long-term impact left by the work of the Tribunals
on the ground and their legacy in the countries
concerned. Establishing individual accountability
based on judicially verified facts is a vital tool in the
reconciliation process. However, that process cannot be
carried out by the international tribunals alone. They
can lay the foundation for it, but it is up to societies to
bring the process of reconciliation to its culmination.
Finally, let me conclude by praising once again the
important and valuable work of the Tribunal.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): It is with great sadness
that we extend our deepest condolences to the people
of South Africa and our colleagues in the Mission of
South Africa. In this moment of great loss, we stand
together with them.
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Gérard Araud,
Ambassador of France, and the French delegation on
their assumption of the presidency of the Council for
December, and to wish you, Mr. President, great success.
I also acknowledge Mr. Liu Jieyi, Ambassador of
China, for his successful conduct of the proceedings of
the Council during November. Our special appreciation
goes to Guatemala for the hard work and leadership in
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
Let me begin by welcoming the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and by thanking them
for the reports they submitted. We studied them with
great attention.
At the outset, I would like to point out that
the cooperation of the Republic of Serbia with the

International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has been based on continuity and that it
continues to evolve unimpeded and at a very high level.
That fact was also confirmed in the latest reports of
the ICTY President and the Prosecutor, in which it was
stated that there are no more outstanding fugitives and
that, in general, Serbia has shown continued diligence
in processing the requests for assistance of the Office
of the Prosecutor.
Proceeding from Serbia’s determination of
Serbia to make a contribution to regional peace and
reconciliation, as well as from its readiness to continue
to cooperate constructively with the ICTY, I would like
to take this opportunity to inform the Council on the
concrete results that my country has achieved in its
cooperation with the ICTY, confirmed also this time
round in the ICTY President’s and the Prosecutor’s
reports of December 2013, just as they were confirmed
in previous reporting periods.
There are no outstanding or overdue requests for
assistance. Summonses were served on time, court
orders were executed and witness interviews were
arranged without delay or difficulty. In that way,
my country has shown that it is not only seriously
committed to abiding by its international obligations but
also that, by taking each and every step in good faith,
it is resolved to contribute to achieving international
justice and regional reconciliation. Concrete examples
and results reflect Serbia’s cooperation with the ICTY
in the best possible way, and I shall mention a few here.
In July 2011, Serbia completed cooperation with
the ICTY on the transfer of all accused persons.
Serbia responded to more than 3,350 requests for
assistance received from the Office of the Prosecutor
or the defence counsel regarding access to documents,
archives and witnesses. Only those of a more recent
date are still being processed. No request for assistance
from the Office of the Prosecutor or defence counsel
regarding access to archives has been rejected, while
all witnesses for whom waivers were requested were
granted. That enabled them to testify before the ICTY.
According to the data of the Republic of Serbia Office
of the War Crimes Prosecutor, 410 individuals indicted
for committing criminal offences under international
humanitarian law have been tried in the courts of the
Republic of Serbia.
Serbia has shown in a demonstrable way that
it is fully committed to the quest for truth about the
crimes committed during the armed conflicts on the

13-5937629/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

territory of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and to bringing those responsible for the
crimes to justice, irrespective of their nationality or the
nationality of the victims.
My country is of the opinion that the Security
Council, whose resolution provided the basis for
the establishment of the ICTY, has an exceptionally
important role and responsibility in ensuring the
impartiality of the Tribunal, respect for basic
international legal norms and laws and in eliminating
all forms of politicization and voluntarism in its work.
In that context, let me draw the Council’s attention
to the case of Vojislav Šešelj, whose detention, lasting
almost 11 years without a judicial decision, is a gross
violation of basic human rights and civilizational
values. The length of the detention in this case is in
contravention of the provisions of the United Nations
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European
Convention on Human Rights. The two international
documents provide for a fair and public hearing within a
reasonable time. Although the term “a reasonable time”
may be interpreted elastically and vary from case to
case, an 11-year lapse of time can hardly be considered
a reasonable time. We also believe that the detention of
a person without a first-instance decision is tantamount
to the denial of the presumption of innocence. We are
convinced that the case is less than conducive to the
ICTY’s reputation and that concrete measures should
be taken speedily in order to unlock the legal and
procedural deadlock in which the case finds itself.
Bearing in mind that Serbia is firmly committed to
cooperation with the ICTY, and the fact that 20 years
have elapsed since its establishment, I would like to
point out once again that my country attaches great
importance to the initiative that those convicted by The
Hague Tribunal be allowed to serve their sentences in
the States that emerged in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. This initiative is motivated by the desire
of Serbia to assume responsibility for its nationals and
other persons convicted by the Tribunal serving their
senstences, as well as by its belief that the purpose
of punishment — which implies, among other things,
the resocialization of convicted persons — can hardly
be achieved if they serve their sentences in far-off
countries, the language of which they do not understand
or speak, and when family visits and contacts are
reduced to a minimum.
Yet today, the States that emerged in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia have no possibility to conclude
30/32

agreements with the ICTY on the serving of sentences,
even though President Meron said in his report that,
in addition to 17 existing agreements, additional
agreements should be concluded in order to complete
the ICTY’s mandate successfully.
In that context, let me recall that since 2009 Serbia
has requested the signing of such an agreement with the
ICTY. From the outset, we have very actively sought to
promote this initiative. Serbian officials have written
to the United Nations and the ICTY on a number of
occasions. Regrettably, no progress has been made
because the question continues to be determined by the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to the Security
Council in May 1993 that “the enforcement of the
sentences should take place outside the territory of the
former Yugoslavia. While that position may have been
justifiable in 1993 at the time of the war in the former
Yugoslavia, it is clear that the situation has changed and
lost its relevance a long time ago.
The results of the years-long cooperation with
the ICTY indicate that my country takes this question
seriously and that it is ready to accept international
supervision of the enforcement of sentences and
to provide clear guarantees that convicted persons
will not be paroled without a decision of the ICTY,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals or some other organ or body of the United
Nations to be made responsible for this matter in the
future.
Let me also recall that, on 20 January 2011,
the Republic of Serbia signed an agreement on
the enforcement of criminal sentences with the
International Criminal Court. Under the agreement,
persons convicted before the Court for war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide may serve their
sentences in Serbia. My country is the first country in
South-East Europe to sign such an agreement — Great
Britain, Austria, Belgium, Denmark and Finland having
done so earlier. Once again, I express my country’s
expectation that the Security Council will vest its full
attention on this initiative and enable those convicted
by the Tribunal to serve their sentences in Serbia.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
readiness of Serbia to, and interest in, addressing the
question of the ICTY archives. We advised the Security
Council of our official position on the matter in October
2008. My country is ready to participate actively in all
future discussions and to continue to cooperate with the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals on
13-59376

05/12/2013 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda S/PV.7073

this question. Also, as in the past, Serbia is ready to
fulfil its obligations resulting from cooperation with
the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals.
In conclusion, let me point out once again that
Serbia is committed to regional peace, stability and
reconciliation. In that commitment, however, the
quest and respect for justice and fairness are of vital
importance. The international judicial system has a key
role to play in the process, and the Tribunal is dutybound to make a contribution by ensuring full respect
for international norms, human rights and the right to a
fair hearing and defence. The influence of the Tribunal
and its decisions are fully felt both within regional and
national confines. Attaining justice is just as important
as establishing the difference between fairness and
vengeance all over again, for the two notions send
basically different social and political messages to our
societies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First of
all, on behalf of my country, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and my personal behalf, I wish to express my deepest
condolences to the people of South Africa on the passing
away of the great leader, humanist and symbol of the
fight for justice and human rights, Mr. Nelson Mandela.
I would like to welcome the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and to express our gratitude
for their reports and respective briefings at today’s
meeting. I also want to express our appreciation to the
Permanent Mission of Guatemala for its successful
chairmanship and leadership of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. The Tribunals serve
as a constant reminder that there is no impunity for
the serious crimes that were committed. In that light,
the successful completion of the work and missions
of the ICTY and the ICTR is necessary to achieving
sustainable peace and reconciliation.
The ad hoc Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda are milestones in the development of
international criminal law. The ICTY and the ICTR
established that crimes against humanity could be
committed not only in armed conflict, but also in its
absence. Thus, those who were not members of armed

forces have been brought to justice for their involvement
in violating international norms and laws.
Throughout history, women have often been victims
of rape and other forms of sexual abuse in conflict and
war. At the present, the documentation of facts related
to sexual violence is better than at any time in history.
The ICTY and the ICTR have contributed to classifying
sexual abuse as a crime against humanity, and as such
sexual abuse has become an integral part of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). Women
judges and women in senior positions in the Offices
of the Prosecutors have made significant contributions
to the effective prosecution of cases of sexual violence
against women. In general, the Tribunals have sent a
strong crime-prevention message to all those who have
committed crimes against humanity, regardless of the
functions they serve.
The punishment should from the outset prevent the
emergence of conspiracies to commit genocide, crimes
against humanity, crimes against peace and other
serious crimes. We support efforts to harmonize the
serving of prison sentences with the norms of human
rights. However, we underline that the manner in which
prison sentences are served should not put into question
the meaning of the punishment.
Considering that the Tribunal will soon complete
its mandate, the further processing of war crimes will
have to be transferred to national judicial systems.
Our commitment to investigating, prosecuting and
appropriately punishing perpetrators of war crimes is
unquestionable. We are also making additional efforts
to increase the number of completed cases at the levels
of State and entity.
As regional cooperation also plays an important
role, we are certain that the protocol on the exchange
of evidence and information on war crimes, signed
between the Offices of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and of Serbia and Croatia, will serve as
an impetus towards strengthening communication and
enhancing coordination of the Offices. My country
remains dedicated to further promoting and increasing
regional cooperation, since it is in the common interests
of the countries in the region as well.
In order to preserve documentation pertaining to
the ICTY, we have proposed that the information centre
be located in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The centre would
serve future generations and be a constant reminder

13-5937631/32

S/PV.7073 International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia/International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda 05/12/2013

that violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law should never be repeated.
It is very important that the Tribunal’s completion
strategy and its transition to the Residual Mechanism
be successfully achieved. We welcome the decision
that, among other countries, the Residual Mechanism
staff will also include persons from the countries of the
Western Balkans region. However, we are surprised
and very much regret that at present no staff members
will be from Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that
the issue deserves further consideration in the spirit,
good practice and inclusiveness of the United Nations.
Finally, the establishment of the ICTY and ICTR
was not a random experiment, but rather the result of the

32/32

efforts of the international community in strengthening
human rights and international humanitarian law.
After the tragic experiences in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, we need to contribute to the creation of
international legal systems that will be able to punish
those responsible for the violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law, regardless of the
persons’ rank or position. We hope that the experience
of the ICTY and ICTR will be expanded in the work of
the ICC. We know that it is difficult to achieve the ideal
of justice, but we should never stop trying.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

13-59376
