S/2020/1115*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2020
Original: English

Special Report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and a follow-on presence
I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2525 (2020) of 3 June 2020, requested
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to provide a special report with recommendations on the appropriate
course of action regarding the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The present special report provides an overview of the political
and security situation in Darfur, efforts made by the transitional Government to
advance the peace process and the protection of civilians with the support of
UNAMID, and options with respect to UNAMID beyond the end of its current
mandate on 31 December 2020.

II. Situation in Darfur
2.
In the period under review, Darfur was marked by important political and
security developments. The signing of a peace agreement between the transitional
Government and an alliance of Sudanese armed groups in Juba on 3 October 2020
was a political milestone for the region and has created an opening to address long standing grievances as part of the transition process. However, while negotiations for
the peace agreement were being held, there was an uptick in local-level clashes
involving rebel elements, intercommunal violence and civil unrest. Areas under the
influence of groups that have not joined the peace process remain volatile. Darfur, the
most impoverished region in the country, is particularly affected by high inflation and
a scarcity of fuel and other commodities.

A.

Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan
3.
The peace talks held in Juba culminated in the signing, on 3 October 2020, of a
peace agreement between the transitional Government of Sudan, the coalition of the
Sudanese Revolutionary Front armed opposition groups and with the Sudan
Liberation Army led by Minni Minawi. The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan
has region-specific protocols pertaining to, respectively, Darfur, the Two Areas as
relating to the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N) Malik Agar
* Reissued for technical reasons on 19 November 2020.

20-14922* (E)

201120

*2014922*

S/2020/1115

faction, East Sudan, North Sudan and Central Sudan, and a separate protocol on
national issues. Under the protocol on national issues, the transitional period has been
set at 39 months from the signing of the Agreement and rebel signatories have been
allocated three seats on the Sovereign Council and 25 per cent of the seats in the
transitional legislature and the Council of Ministers. The national protocol also
provides for the creation of regional systems of governance and for national dialogue
and constitutional reform. The protocols on Cen tral, East and North Sudan address
economic, political, social and cultural issues in each region. The protocol involving
SPLM-N/Agar stipulates power- and wealth-sharing and security arrangements that
include the reform of the national army, a permanent c easefire and monitoring
mechanism, and a comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.
4.
The protocols on Darfur deal with security arrangements, power- and wealthsharing, as well as with displacement, accountability and justice, land, and
intercommunal reconciliation. The security arrangements include a permanent
ceasefire, the establishment of monitoring mechanism, the deployment within 90 days
of a 12,000-strong security-maintenance force composed of forces from the
Government and armed groups. Other key provisions include the restoration of
Darfur’s regional status, the proportional allocation of state and local government
posts, inclusion of women at all levels of authority and decision -making, the launch
of a Darfur development fund with an annual budget of $750 million over 10 years,
the resolution of forcible land occupation and the establishment of a Darfur land
commission, the establishment of a special court for crimes committed in Darfur and
the appointment of an independent prosecutor, the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons and refugees with guarantees of security, return of land,
compensation and basic services.
5.
The implementation of these provisions will be supported by a series of
committees to be established, three of which provide a specific role for the United
Nations: a joint military high committee for security arrangements, which will serve
as the main mechanism for decision-making and dispute resolution with regard to the
implementation of the Agreement and in which the United Nations will be
represented; a permanent ceasefire committee, chaired by a representative of the
United Nations as a third party, that is accountable to the joint military high
committee; and a regional disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
commission, to be established within 30 days, with the support of the United Nations
as a third party, as well as of other United Nations system agencies. In addition, the
protocols on internally displaced persons and refugees sti pulate partnership with
UNAMID or another United Nations system agency as a third party, United Nations
system agencies, relevant national and international agencies, and international and
national aid organizations to facilitate the delivery of humanitari an assistance and
ensure the protection and dignified treatment of internally displaced persons and
refugees during the process of return and reintegration or resettlement. The
Agreement also provides for guarantors from the African Union, the United Natio ns,
South Sudan and the international community to support the monitoring,
implementation and evaluation of the Agreement. Finally, the Constitutional
Declaration was amended to reflect the provisions of the Juba Agreement.
6.
The Juba Agreement creates an opportunity to address the conflict drivers in the
Sudan, including in Darfur. A permanent ceasefire, the formation of an accountable
and representative security-maintenance force and the integration of the former
combatants into the national army can reduce violence and enhance public trust in
security and rule of law institutions, provided that those steps are taken with the
participation of affected communities and in line with international human rights
standards. The establishment of a special tribunal for crimes committed in Darfur,
2/14

20-14922

S/2020/1115

together with other justice, accountability and reconciliation measures that address
impunity for war crimes and serious violations of human rights, including those
committed against children, will be an essential part of fostering confidence in the
new arrangements. The restoration of regional autonomy is a significant step that,
together with the earmarked fund for Darfur, can generate greater administrative
focus and attention for the fair and equitable allocation of resources for the
development of the region. In addition, the establishment of comprehensive
mechanisms and processes for the demarcation, restitution and legal recognition of
land and hawakeer (land traditionally used by a particular clan or tribal group),
including for women and young people, could facilitate durable solutions to forced
and voluntary displacement and promote intercommunal reconciliation.
7.
The Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction (SLA/AW) has remained
outside the ongoing peace process and has mobilized opposition to the Juba
Agreement within some camps for internally displaced persons, which poses a
challenge to the comprehensive resolution of the conflict, as well as to the protection
of civilians. On 1 September, speaking by audio link to over 1,500 supporters who
had gathered at the Humaira camp in Kass, South Darfur, Abdul Wahid announced his
own peace initiative in the form of a national dialogue that would encourage the
participation of all groups and actors. On 17 September, a pro posal attributed to Abdul
Wahid was announced for an internal dialogue on the peace process to allow Darfuris,
especially internally displaced persons, to voice their opinions on resolving long standing grievances and root causes of the conflict. From 6 to 8 September, thousands
of internally displaced persons loyal to Abdul Wahid demonstrated in the Hamadiya,
Hasahisa and Khamsadagaig camps for internally displaced persons in Central Darfur,
voicing their opposition to the Juba Agreement. In Kass and Menaw ashei, in South
Darfur, internally displaced persons also expressed their rejection of the Agreement
to UNAMID.
8.
The SPLM-N faction led by Abdelaziz al-Hilu initially withdrew from the talks
on 20 August to express its discontent with the composition of the Government
delegation. Eventually, it signed a declaration of principle with the Prime Minister,
Abdalla Hamdok, in Addis Ababa on 3 September to support the democratization of
the Sudan on the basis of the separation of religion and State and later st arted to
engage in the peace process. On 3 October, a coalition of eight splinter rebel groups
issued a statement to criticize the Juba Agreement as incomplete, having excluded
certain groups from the negotiations.

B.

Women, peace and security
9.
With UNAMID support, 20 women from Darfur and other regions attended the
talks in Juba and presented a position paper to inform the negotiations. On 3 October,
UNAMID supported three Darfuri women leaders to witness the signing of the Juba
Agreement. However, women’s representation in decision-making remains low,
including in the security sector, notwithstanding the Government’s efforts to recruit
women to the police. The Darfur Women’s Platform, an umbrella organization of
women’s protection and mediation networks, professional women’s associations, the
women’s wing of the Forces for Freedom and Change, women-led civil society
organizations and representatives of displaced women, continues to advocate for the
inclusion of women in the political process.

20-14922

3/14

S/2020/1115

C.

Fighting involving armed movements
10. Although the level of fighting between government forces – composed mainly
of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces – and SLA/AW had
subsided after the start of the peace talks in Juba in August 2019 , the conflict
continued to simmer and escalated in 2020. In May 2020, SLA/AW resumed its
attacks against government forces. On 1 June, SLA/AW forces attacked a Sudanese
Armed Forces checkpoint in Kutrum, 22 km north-east of Nertiti, Central Darfur,
which resulted in 27 soldiers of the Sudanese Armed Forces and 9 SLA/AW
combatants killed. The intermittent clashes between government forces and SLA/AW
are concentrated around Golo and to the east of Nertiti, Central Darfur. Clashes
between SLA/AW factions have been concentrated in the area between Golo and
Daya, as well as near Rockero, in Central Darfur, and in the Torong Tonga, Deribat
and Kidingir areas in South Darfur. They have caused new displacements to the Toga
and Savanga gathering sites east of Golo and Rockero in Central Darfur, and to
Kidingir and Layba in South Darfur. In the period from May to October 2020,
approximately 27,000 people were reportedly displaced.
11. Factional infighting within SLA/AW over its participation in the peace process
also intensified. From May to October, UNAMID recorded 162 fatalities from 82
incidents involving armed confrontations, amounting to a more than fourfold increase
compared with the 39 fatalities from 53 incidents recorded from January to May and
a more than sixfold increase compared with the 25 fatalities from 35 incidents
recorded from August to December 2019. For instance, on 21 May, SLA/AW factions
led by Abdelgadir Abderrahman (“Gaddura”) and Saleh Borsa renewed their attacks
against another faction, led by Mubarak Aldouk, in Daya, Central Darfur, to
consolidate their control over all elements of the movement. The attempt was opposed
by other commanders, which led to clashes in Torong Tonga from 26 July to 3 August
2020 resulting in 48 fatalities. Since 30 September, infighting over the control of local
gold mines and tax collection has been reported in the Duo area north -west of
Menawashei in South Darfur, with an unconfirmed number of displaced persons,
according to a verification patrol conducted by UNAMID on 13 October.
12. From 5 to 16 September, a total of 392 female-headed households, were
reportedly displaced from the Sortony gathering site for internally displaced persons
in North Darfur to the Savanga and Toga gathering sites in the vicin ity of Rockero
and Golo, respectively, in Central Darfur. This new displacement reportedly followed
the detention of several internally displaced persons accused by a commander of the
Rapid Support Forces against internally displaced persons of being part of SLA/AW.
Some of the women reported physical assaults by members of the Forces, while the
Forces had also arrested a dozen other internally displaced persons on the pretext of
anti-crime campaigns. Internally displaced persons have also reported several
incidents of assault, detention and harassment by the Sudanese Armed Forces at the
Savanga site. Humanitarian needs at these congested sites, which continue to receive
new arrivals, include shelter and other non-food items, nutrition for children, medical
assistance, particularly in the light of the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) and
protection services. Humanitarian convoys from El Geneina, West Darfur, were
scheduled to arrive in Zalingei on 24 September but were blocked by the Massalit
community in the Mornei area, where tensions persist following the escalation of
intercommunal tensions in July 2020. Meanwhile, UNAMID has visited the Sortony
site to verify the reports and has informed the local authorities.

4/14

20-14922

S/2020/1115

D.

Intercommunal violence
13. Intercommunal conflict increased in 2019 and into 2020. From June to October
2020, UNAMID recorded 146 fatalities (111 in July alone) as a result of 31 clashes
and disputes, amounting to a more than fourfold increase in the number of casualties
compared with the same period in 2019, which saw 31 fatalities as a result of 23
incidents, and a more than eightfold increase compared with 2018, when 17 fatalities
were caused by 15 incidents. Land-related conflicts, predominantly involving crop
destruction by pastoralists, remained almost constant, with 32 fatalities from 134
incidents between June and October compared with 49 fatalities from 171 incidents
during the same period in 2019 and 20 fatalities from 126 incidents during the same
period in 2018.
14. The areas most affected by land-related incidents are Kutum, Sortony and Saraf
Umrah in North Darfur, El Geneina, Masteri and Jebel Moon in West Darfur, Golo
and Nertiti in Central Darfur, and Kass and Graida in South Darfur. In Graida, on
23 July 2020, attacks by Fallata herders against Masalit farmers in Abdos returnee
village resulted in 15 returnees being killed and 20 others injured. In Masteri, where
84 civilians were killed in clashes between the Masalit and Northern Rizeigat in July
2020, the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces have been deployed
to towns but not to the surrounding areas, which has prevented farmers from accessing
the land, which has in turn resulted in continued intercommunal tensions. A UNAMID
staff member was deployed to co-locate with the Governor of West Darfur and provide
advisory support, and the state security committee has agreed to send mobile forces
to the Masteri area to protect farmers and their lands during annual cultivation and
harvest seasons in the future, but this is yet to materialize.
15. Similarly, the level of criminality involving armed robbery, theft, and other acts
of violence remained relatively unchanged in 2020. From June to October, UNAMID
recorded 97 fatalities from 882 criminal incidents, compared with 78 fatalities from
812 incidents during the same period in 2019. The period from January to May 2020
saw 129 fatalities from 1,107 incidents. There were 166 incidents of violence and
harassment against internally displaced persons in the five-month period from June
to October 2020, compared with 247 cases during the five-month period from January
to May 2020. Incidents of conflict-related sexual violence reported to UNAMID from
May to August 2020 increased by 10.5 per cent compared with the same per iod in
2019. Overall, data about security incidents in Darfur show an increase in violence
since the beginning of the year, with spikes in intercommunal conflict caused by
armed nomads, an expansion of the affected territory and an escalation in the fighti ng
between combatants associated with SLA/AW and government security forces since
May 2020.
16. While tensions between nomadic and farmer communities usually heighten
during the farming season, from May to November, the escalation of intercommunal
violence in 2020 appears to be linked to the ongoing national transition process.
Farming communities and internally displaced persons in Darfur have demanded
basic services, as well as the disarming of militias and armed nomads and protection
from them, and the removal of herders from their lands. To voice their demands, they
have staged peaceful protests in Kabkabiyah, Kutum and El Fasher in North Darfur,
Nertiti and Kass in Central Darfur, Ed Daein in East Darfur and El Geneina, Masteri
and Mornei in West Darfur. Such protests are no longer isolated incidents. A sustained
sit-in movement that started in Nertiti on 28 June and resulted in a decision by the
transitional Government to remove local officials still in place from the previous
Government, inspired further sit-in protests in Fata Borno, Kutum and Kabkabiyah.
In response to the protests, the Government announced a series of measures, some of
which are yet to be implemented, such as the disarmament of nomadic militias in

20-14922

5/14

S/2020/1115

Nertiti and the resolution of land disputes through joint committees in Kutum. In
Mornei, local communities staged a peaceful sit-in protest after a dispute over
farmland destruction had led to two deaths on 17 September. They submitted a series
of demands to the Governor of the state, including the demand to transfer commanders
of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudanese police forces. Some of the protests
came under attack by armed militias, for example in Fata Borno. From June to
October, there were 6 fatalities and 86 injuries from 100 cases of civil unrest,
compared with one fatality and 18 injuries from 72 cases from January to May.
17. Consultations with UNAMID, humanitarian partners and Sudanese experts on
the ground provide further context to the intercommunal tensions in the past few
years. To some extent, the arms collection campaign carried out by the Government
in 2017 and 2018 improved the security situation in urban areas and led to the
voluntary return of internally displaced persons. However, the return or resettlement
was not sustained, as many returnees only visited farms for crop cultivation and
harvesting, rather than staying on a permanent basis. Meanwhile, nomads also
struggle with their seasonal migration practices, as demographic shifts, in particular
shifts in population growth, displacement and urbanization, have changed their
ecological needs, notably their need for access to water and forestry. Those factors
are compounded by climate change. Some nomads have opted to resettle, including
in places of origin of internally displaced populations. This has led to an increase in
disputes over land with herder communities, which turned violent in 2019, as
government security forces withdrew to Khartoum in response to the political
developments in the capital. The escalation of intercommunal violence in West Darfur
in December 2019 between the Masalit and Rizeigat groups was an example of such
tensions. It is noteworthy that the deployment of the government security forces
contained the situation for some time, even though tensions have lingered and
escalated again in July 2020, resulting in 67 fatalities.
18. The trend continued in 2020, as armed nomadic groups resorted to attacking
internally displaced persons and farmers staged large-scale and prolonged sit-in
protests to demand the restoration of their land rights, as witnessed in Fata Borno,
North Darfur, on 13 July 2020. The protests also constituted a challenge for the
government security forces. Meanwhile, the Government has indicated that it plans
to complete the arms collection campaign, informing UNAMID on 9 September of its
plan to initiate an operation to search for and forcibly seize illegal weapons.
UNAMID has engaged with government authorities on this approach, as such an
operation could have security implications in volatile camps, such as Kalma,
Hamadiya and Sortony, as well as among armed tribal groups.

E.

Access restrictions
19. From June to October 2020, there were two incidents in which access was
denied on security grounds. On 7 August, the planning team for the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) was denied access
to Golo. On 4 September, a UNAMID police patrol accompanying a
non-governmental organization was denied access at a checkpoint of the Sudanese
Armed Forces in the vicinity of Golo.

6/14

20-14922

S/2020/1115

III. Protection of civilians
A.

National plan for the protection of civilians
20. It is significant that the Sudanese transitional authorities have publicly taken
full responsibility for tackling the protection of civilians for the first time since the
beginning of the conflict in Darfur. Their national plan for the protection of civilians
after the exit of UNAMID (see S/2020/429, annex), submitted to the Security Council
on 21 May 2020, encompasses eight thematic areas and contains a wide range of
commitments. The national plan is overseen by means of an implementation
mechanism based in Khartoum that involves key ministries. A workplan is currently
being developed. The national plan provides for more training and financial
incentives for military and police personnel with protection tasks, for the deployment
of police to camps for internally displaced persons and for the establishment of
community police.
21. The plan initially announced by the transitional Government to deploy 12,000
security personnel from the Sudanese Armed Forces, the Rapid Support Forces and
the Sudanese police forces to Darfur, was subsequently revised to 6,000 personnel.
By 26 August, an undisclosed number of joint forces in 80 armed vehicles (10
belonging to the Sudanese Armed Forces, 50 to the Rapid Support Forces and 20 to
the reserve police) arrived in North Darfur to protect farming areas in the localities
of Kabkabiyah, Saraf Umra and Sereif. With the assistance of UNAMID, the
Government also dispatched civilian and security personnel in response to incidents
that occurred in the Kalma camp for internally displaced persons on 11 June 2020, in
the Hamadiya camp on 29 June, and in the Fata Borno camp on 13 July. Government
security forces were also deployed to Abdos, South Darfur, from 23 to 25 July, to
Masteri on 25 July and to Nertiti on 3 October.
22. The efforts of the Sudanese authorities in the wake of intercommunal violence
and civil unrest are a welcome development. Their presence has thus far been focused
on areas around state capitals or has been temporary in nature in the aftermath of
large-scale incidents. Their presence requires further capacities to ensure sustained
engagement, protection and prevention in areas of concern. In places where
government forces do not yet have full access, particularly in the Jebel Marra and
surrounding areas (such as the Kalma camp) that are under the influence of SLA/AW,
UNAMID has continued to play a pivotal third-party role, facilitating dialogue and
promoting confidence-building measures with conflict-affected constituencies. In the
Hamadiya camp, UNAMID responded to the increase in violent attacks and casualties
relating to factional infighting by ensuring the round-the-clock presence of one of its
formed police units supported by a military quick reaction force starting on 3 August
2020. UNAMID has engaged the state-level authorities, including by proposing joint
patrols with the Sudanese police forces, but the internally displaced persons have
rejected any entry of State security forces in the camp. Internally displaced persons
continue to report violations, including in Sortony, especially against women
conducting livelihood activities outside the camp.
23. Women’s protection networks supported by UNAMID continue to provide real time information on emerging tensions, flashpoints and impending attacks. These
community-level networks have cooperated with UNAMID and the joint government
forces to map hotspots and inform patrol plans at the locality level. The attacks against
civilians in Kutum, Kass and Boronga in June and July 2020 were first reported by
the local women’s protection networks.
24. With regard to locations from which UNAMID has withdrawn, as in West
Darfur, peacekeepers have continued to engage the Sudanese authorities remotely,

20-14922

7/14

S/2020/1115

conveying early warning signs, offering support, urging them to react quickly and
implementing peacebuilding initiatives through its State liaison functions. In West
Darfur, UNAMID advised state authorities to take security and reconciliation
measures to diffuse tensions in Masteri. In addition, as part of its support to the
implementation of the national plan for the protection of civilians, UNAMID has
proposed to the transitional Government that its military advisers co -locate with
Sudanese security personnel in state capitals across Darfur to provide advisory
support on protection issues, as recommended in the previous special report
(S/2020/202). However, that offer was not supported by the counterparts in the
Government who, instead, requested mostly logistical and financial support from the
United Nations for the implementation of the national plan.

B.

Rule of law and human rights
25. In Darfur, with the support of UNAMID and the United Nations country team,
justice chain institutions have been extended to many remote locations, including
district courts, prosecution offices, prisons and police stations. There has been an
increase in the number of police stations and posts being established in remote areas.
Yet the effective use of these institutions remains a challenge for a number of reasons,
including capacity deficits and resource constraints. While a few prisons in Darfur
have been rehabilitated, they remain congested and those in remote localities continue
to be in decrepit condition. There are currently 115 formal judges at all levels and 58
prosecutors in Darfur. In response to intensified tension and violence, the Government
deployed three prosecutors to the Nertiti locality during the reporting period.
26. However, a number of challenges persist, such as building confidence among
local communities in the ability of the rule of law institutions to deliver justice,
ensuring accountability and providing legal protection to vulnerable communities, in
particular women and children. Some Sudanese police personnel have been accused
of tribal bias and ineffectiveness, and their stations and facilities in Kutum,
Kabkabiyah, Kass, Nertiti and El Geneina have been attacked during protests.
Similarly, demonstrators have targeted prison facilities in Kass and Ardamata, which
made it necessary to transfer detained persons to Khartoum and Nyala. UN AMID has
stepped up a range of activities with the Sudanese police forces to enhance police
relations with communities, including joint patrols within and around the camps for
internally displaced persons, community policing and the establishment of emerge ncy
response centres. A total of 84 joint patrols were conducted from August to October
2020, including in Zalingei, Saraf Umrah, Shangil Tobaya and the farming areas
around Kutum, Fata Borno and Tawillah, and in Kalma. In Kutum and Kalma,
communities have requested that UNAMID, the Sudanese police force and
prosecution authorities conduct joint investigations into incidents of violence.
27. Of the 179 cases of human rights violations and abuses documented between
May and October 2020, 36 cases of human rights violations in Darfur were attributed
to members of the State security forces, including the Rapid Support Forces, Sudanese
Armed Forces and Sudanese police forces. In total, 137 cases were reported to the
Sudanese police forces, but case files were reportedly opened for 46. Most reports
were not acted upon by the police beyond taking the complaint and opening a file.
Arrests were few, with only 66 documented arrests of the alleged perpetrators. Only
rarely did cases go through the entire criminal justic e process of arrest, investigation,
trial and sentencing, as appropriate. Efforts are hampered by a lack of resources,
especially vehicles and other equipment needed to conduct investigations and
follow-up on complaints, as well as a lack of capacity and access. The lack of
knowledge and understanding among the victims of their right to seek legal redress

8/14

20-14922

S/2020/1115

or to participate in investigations are additional factors limiting the number of cases
that go through the criminal justice system.
28. In June 2020, UNAMID documented 11 cases of conflict-related sexual violence
in North, West and Central Darfur, with nine of the victims being gang -raped. This
was a significant increase compared with June 2019, when two cases of conflict related sexual violence were documented. In July 2020, there were nine cases of
conflict-related sexual violence in North and Central Darfur, six of which involved
child victims. The perpetrators were identified as uniformed armed men, persons
described as nomads and SLA/AW members. Most of the survivors of the conflictrelated sexual violence committed in 2020 were girls under the age of 18.
29. Human rights violations against children in Darfur remain prevalent. From June
to October 2020, the most frequently occurring such violations were killing and
maiming (123 children, including 41 girls) and sexual violence (19 girls). A majority
of the violations occurred in the context of intercommunal violence or conflicts
between nomads and farmers in rural areas. In Jebel Marra, infighting betwee n
SLA/AW splinter groups has exacerbated violations against children, including rape,
killing and maiming, and abduction, and the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
Children living in Government-controlled areas of Jebel Marra also remain vulnerable
to attacks. Almost one third of the total violations against children were attributed to
government security forces, often in the context of military operations, attacks against
civilian populations or excessive use of force against demonstrators. Government
security forces were also responsible for occupying three hospitals and three schools.
30. In the light of the foregoing, it is commendable that the Government has taken
measures to end and prevent violations of child rights, including their recruitment
into and use in armed groups, and that it conducted a national awareness -raising
campaign aimed at preventing violations against children. With technical support
from UNAMID and UNICEF, the Government has developed a national plan for the
prevention of violations against children and has supported the training of security
forces, local authorities and community members on child rights. Another welcome
development is that the Rapid Support Forces continue to collaborate with UNAMID
for the establishment of its own human rights and child protection unit. Finally, the
Government has continued to work with UNAMID to establish community -based
child protection networks and set up training on child protection and child rights for
child protection committee members, particularly at the state level.

C.

Protection issues and the way forward
31. There is a broad understanding that, in Darfur, two main types of structural
threats have an impact on the civilian population and on relations between pastoralist
and farming communities: the remnants of the counter-insurgency policy pursued by
the former regime, and climate change. With regard to climate change, notably the
decline in rainfall and its impact on the grazing routes of nomads and the harvest of
farmers, which has critically altered the relationship between these complementary
production systems. The reversal of the impact of the Darfur conflict, which enabled
nomad groups to displace many farmer communities into the camps for internally
displaced persons, requires good governance and courageous decisions to address,
primarily, the issues of land and internal displacement. From that perspective, the
protection of civilians goes well beyond the provision of physical security and should
be aimed at creating a broader protective environment to include the protection of
livelihoods and food security.
32. The political transition that the Sudan is currently undergoing has led the
Government of the Sudan to assume its primary protection responsibilities and create

20-14922

9/14

S/2020/1115

the policy and institutional framework necessary for doing so. At a joint workshop on
the implementation of the national plan for the protection of civilians in Darfur, held
on 13 and 14 August, the Government and UNAMID identified as issues requiring
immediate attention, namely those pertaining to the camps for internally displaced
persons and intercommunal conflicts, weapons collection, the identification of
hotspot areas and capacity-building for actors involved in the national plan for the
protection of civilians. A joint task force was established to coordinate and implement
a set of actions by deadlines ranging from October to December. Through the joint
task force, the Government authorities have requested the assistance of UNAMID
regarding 15 subjects, mostly in the areas of training, logistics support, such as the
provision of equipment and rehabilitation of infrastructure, the removal of
unexploded remnants of war, and community policing. UNAMID intends to provide
support in these areas for the remainder of its mandate.
33. The Juba Agreement established a comprehensive framework to address the
protection of civilians in a multifaceted way by providing solutions to the dimensions
of security, justice and reconciliation, refugees and internally displaced p ersons, land
and hawakeer, and livelihoods. Some of the provisions in the security protocol to the
Agreement would, however, require time, well beyond the current mandate of
UNAMID. The new 12,000-strong security-maintenance force, made up of 6,000
members of all Sudanese security forces and 6,000 members of armed groups, is to
be established within 90 days from the signing of the Agreement and is to be tasked
with law enforcement responsibilities in Darfur to fill the gap after the departure of
UNAMID. The timelines for the effective formation of the security-maintenance force
will depend on a number of important factors. The forces belonging to the signatory
armed groups are reported to be outside the Sudan. The process could require further
negotiations with government security forces on details of the movement, cantonment
of forces and organization of the security-maintenance force, as well as the eventual
integration of the rebel forces into a national army. Its successful operation in Darfur
will greatly depend on the training of the force and, most importantly, on building
trust among communities, especially among those in camps for internally displaced
persons who have expressed scepticism towards the Juba Agreement. The
implementation of processes related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, as well as justice, will require integrated planning and approaches,
effective coordination and adequate operational and programmatic support from
national and international counterparts.
34. In line with Security Council resolution 2525 (2020), UNAMID commenced the
implementation of a comprehensive planning and performance assessment in July. A
timetable has been developed to plan, develop, test an d launch the relevant tool by
November, focusing on five themes, namely security, the peace process, the
protection of civilians and human rights, and access to basic services and to the
authorities at the level of the states.

D.

Deployment of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan
35. In its resolution 2524 (2020), by which it established UNITAMS, the Security
Council assigned to the Mission as one of its strategic objectives to “assist
peacebuilding, civilian protection and rule of law, in particular in Darfur and the Two
Areas”. In line with that objective, UNITAMS will support the strengthening of
institutions to deliver justice and accountability and coord inate United Nations
civilian protection and peacebuilding activities, such as local-level conflict
prevention, mitigation and reconciliation, and community violence reduction,
particularly for women, children and vulnerable groups. The primary modes of

10/14

20-14922

S/2020/1115

engagement for UNITAMS will be advocacy, technical advice and capacity -building
in support of national and international partners, including United Nations system
agencies, funds and programmes. It is anticipated that UNITAMS will have a field
office in El Fasher and liaison presences in Zalingei and Nyala.
36. As UNITAMS and the United Nations country team endeavour to expand their
presence to some capitals of the Darfur states in 2021, the nature of their engagement
in the protection of civilians will be fundamentally different from that of UNAMID.
UNITAMS is not mandated to provide physical protection. The Mission will support
the implementation by the Sudanese authorities of the national plan for the protection
of civilians to build a greater protective environment for civilian populations in
conflict and post-conflict areas. The country team is already conducting protection
activities in Darfur, but financial constraints, exacerbated by the current fiscal climate
and the cost of the COVID-19 response, could limit the scope of those activities and
of any additional efforts by UNITAMS. UNITAMS will also aim to contribute to the
mobilization of support for peacebuilding activities by the country team in order to
strengthen the protective environment. UNAMID will play a key role by leveraging
existing capacities to support UNITAMS start-up through transfers of assets and
extending administrative support on cost-reimbursable basis in that period. The
country team has relied on government escorts, which have so far been unable to enter
some of the camps, including Kalma in South Darfur, Hamadiya, Hasahisa and
Khamsadagaig camps and from Nertiti towards the mountains of Rockero and Golo
localities of Central Darfur.
37. Considering the pace at which UNITAMS and government security forces are
being deployed to Darfur, active measures to enhance the protective environment in
support of the Government’s efforts to implement the national protection plan and the
framework of cooperation on conflict-related sexual violence signed between it and
the United Nations are of the utmost priority.
38. The worsening economic crisis in the Sudan is a significant factor in the
country’s fragile security situation. Given the need for coordinated international
support for the Government’s economic reform and recovery efforts, UNITAMS has
a mandate to support the mobilization of economic and development assistance and
to promote cooperation with international institutions and donors. The announcement
by the United States of its decision to remove the Sudan from its list of State sponsors
of terrorism would open the door for the country’s access to international financial
assistance, investment and debt relief. Economic recovery will be a critical element
in the restoration of peace and security in the Sudan and, by extension, in Darfur.

IV. Recommendations for the appropriate course of action
regarding the Mission drawdown
A.

Consultations with the transitional Sudanese authorities
39. As part of the tripartite coordination mechanism on UNAMID, representatives
of the African Union, the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan met in
Khartoum at the expert level on 22 October and at the principal level on 25 October
2020 with the participation of the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Smail Chergui, the Under-Secretary-General of the Department for Peace
Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, the Under-Secretary-General for Operational
Support, Atul Khare, the UNAMID Joint Special Representative, Jeremiah
Mamabolo. The delegation of the Government of Sudan was co-led by Mohamed
Sharief Abdalla, Under-Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Omer El
Sheikh, Chair of the National Executive Committee for Coordination with

20-14922

11/14

S/2020/1115

UNITAMS. The participants received an update on the protection of civilians in
Darfur and discussed the further course of action.
40. During those meetings, the representatives of the African Union and the United
Nations acknowledged the concrete practical steps and the progress achieved in the
implementation of the national plan for the protection of civilians along both tracks,
physical protection and protective environment. They also acknowledged the positive
impact of the political transformation in the Sudan on the protection of civilians in
Darfur and reaffirmed the primary responsibility of the Government to protect its
citizens. In that regard, they welcomed the establishment, by decree No. 360 of
13 October 2020, of a civilian protection force, which started to deploy on 15 October.
The force is composed of 12,000 troops based in three sectors at 18 team sites in
Darfur, including the current footprint of UNAMID, and at an additional six sites.
They also welcomed the collection and destruction of some 300,000 weapons; the
strengthening of the Sudanese police presence in Darfur by newly graduated units of
female-only police officers to tend to the needs of women and children; the training
of internally displaced persons in community policing and early warning as a measure
to address their specific needs and build trust; the adoption of new legislation as well
as engagement with communities of internally displaced persons to find long -term
solutions to their needs; and the organization of a number of reconciliation
conferences between tribes in West and North Darfur.
41. Furthermore, the participants in principal-level meeting of the tripartite
coordination mechanism acknowledged the unequivocal position of the Sudanese
transitional authorities on the termination of the UNAMID mandate by 31 Dec ember
2020 and the full operationalization of the UNITAMS presence thereafter in line with
Security Council resolution 2524 (2020). In the meantime, the participants in the
mechanism agreed that UNAMID would continue its capacity-building work until
31 December 2020 in accordance with its mandated tasks. In addition, a document
detailing the lessons learned by UNAMID from its experience will be prepared as a
legacy for the African Union and the United Nations and for sharing with their
Sudanese counterparts and civil society organizations. It was agreed that the
discussion and the views of the Government would be duly reflected in the joint report
of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union on UNAMID, to
be submitted to the Security Council by 31 October 2020. The views of the
Government were further reiterated in meetings held on 25 October 2020, with the
Prime Minister and with the Chair of the Sovereign Council, Abdel Fattah al-Burhan.
42. The participants in the meeting took note of the ongoing preparations by
UNAMID for a sequenced and responsible drawdown pending the issuance of
guidance and timeframes in line with Security Council resolution 2525 (2020). The
Government reaffirmed its commitment to fully facilitating all drawdown activities,
including repatriation of personnel from troop- and police-contributing countries and
their contingent-owned equipment immediately after the adoption of the Security
Council resolution on terminating the mandate of UNAMID.

B.

Recommendations on the appropriate course of action
43. In response to the request of the Security Council, formulated in its resolution
2525 (2020), for recommendations on the appropriate course of action regarding the
drawdown of UNAMID, and in the light of recent developments in the Sudan and
consultations with the country’s transitional authorities, we recommend the
termination of the UNAMID mandate by 31 December 2020 and the full
operationalization of the UNITAMS presence in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2524 (2020).

12/14

20-14922

S/2020/1115

44. In the meantime, UNAMID will continue its support to the implementation of
the Juba Agreement and capacity-building work until 31 December, in line with its
mandated tasks. It is recommended that the international community, in particular the
United Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, continue to explore, together with the Sudanese authorities, a ppropriate
support measures to sustain peace, security and development efforts in Darfur and
other parts of the Sudan in order to help to end the cycle of violence. Finally, it is
recommended that a lessons-learned exercise be carried out to fully document the
experiences accumulated by UNAMID as a legacy for the African Union and the
United Nations, and that that document be shared with the Sudanese counterparts and
other relevant partners, including civil society organizations.
45. The environmental clean-up, the removal of the Operation’s footprint and the
repatriation from closed locations of staff, troops and police will take an estimated
six months, subject to COVID-19 and the rainy season. In the meantime, the El Fasher
logistics hub and a small team in Khartoum will be the residual operations required
to liquidate the Operation.
46. As agreed within the tripartite coordination mechanism, UNAMID and the
National Executive Committee for Coordination with UNITAMS are to hold regular
meetings on arrangements for the period following 31 December, subject to Security
Council guidance, to ensure that UNAMID staff can complete outstanding drawdown
activities and downstream activities associated with the liquidation. The principles of
the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations regarding the disposal of
property, including by gift, were reaffirmed, with UNAMID confirming that all
United Nations-owned equipment was designated primarily for UNAMID-mandated
activities, which included support to the national plan for the protection of civilians
as managed through the joint task force mechanism and State liaison function
activities, and that any surplus was prioritized for other entities of the Organization,
such as UNITAMS and the United Nations country team, to be used in the interest of
civilian end-users and local communities.

C.

Financial overview
47. The General Assembly, in its resolution 74/261 C of 30 June 2020, appropriated
the amount of $240.2 million for UNAMID for the period from 1 July to 31 December
2020. As at 8 October 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNAMID amounted to $168.7 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations amounted to $2,723.3 million. Reimbursement of troops
and formed police costs has been made for the period up to 31 December 2019, while
reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has also been made for
the period up to 31 December 2019, in accordance with the quarterly payment
schedule.

D.

Observations
48. The transitional Government has taken two significant steps towards achieving
sustainable peace across the country, including in Darfur. First, it has transmitted to
the Security Council its national plan for the protection of civilians. Second,
following months of negotiations, it signed the Juba Agreement. In both documents,
it sets out important commitments with regard to protecting civilians and addressing
the root causes of conflict across the country, including Darfur. Both are ambitious
plans that will serve as a framework of engagement for the United Nations and the
African Union and will require substantial commitment to implement.

20-14922

13/14

S/2020/1115

49. The Juba Agreement is the culmination of all prior efforts aimed at achieving an
inclusive peace in the Sudan. Those include previous agreements, such as the Darfur
Peace Agreement and the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, as well as the work of
the Africa Union and its High-level Implementation Panel. Considering the extent of
the international investment made thus far in peace efforts in Sudan and Darfur, the
momentum and opportunity before the Security Council of the United Nations and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union ar e unprecedented. Conversely,
to succeed where past processes have faltered will require significant political will as
well as technical support to manage a series of linked and complex processes. In that
context, as the parties enter the implementation phase of the Juba Agreement, Member
States could consider bilateral support for the fulfilment of specific provisions,
particularly those in which third-party involvement is envisaged, in line with similar
arrangements from the past in other areas of the Suda n and based on needs expressed
by the Sudanese transitional authorities.
50. The recent spike in violence in Darfur, albeit not on the scale of the early days
of the conflict, highlights the inherent fragility of any major political transition. The
shift in the balance of power – with new alliances made, both at national and local
levels – also entails inevitable uncertainties. The Juba Agreement, however,
reinforces the sense that previous structures and arrangements will be overturned with
an attendant reshaping of the relationships between the Government and armed
groups, as well as among ethnic communities and other relevant constituencies. The
accommodation of representatives of armed groups in the Sovereign Council and
other governing bodies will affect the national transition process, which may prompt
further readjustments in the implementation of the Constitutional Declaration and the
milestones enshrined in it. While Darfur presents distinct security and protection
challenges, these issues need to be considered in conjunction with the overall progress
in the country and the overall support of the United Nations system and the African
Union. Considering the urgent and multifaceted challenges facing the transitional
Government as it responds to the continued economic crisis, readjusts the timeline,
completes the remaining transitional tasks and undertakes life-saving efforts in areas
affected by prolonged conflicts, it is imperative that international partners seize the
opportunity and support the Government in implementing the national plan for the
protection of civilians and the Juba Agreement.
51. We should also acknowledge the multiplicity of challenges that continue to face
the country, which invariably have a negative impact on its overall security. In that
connection, it is particularly important that the international community assist the
Sudan with its economic recovery in order to contribute towards the overall
stabilization of the political and security situation in the country.
52. In conclusion, we would like to express our gratitude to the Joint Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations for UNAMID, Jeremiah Mamabolo, and to
the leadership and all the personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations country team
and the humanitarian partners who continue to work committedly on the transition to
the exit of the Operation from Darfur.

14/14

20-14922
