A /76/PV.67

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

67

th plenary meeting
Friday, 8 April 2022, 12.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Afonso
(Mozambique), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of agenda item 12 at its 55th plenary meeting on
20 January. In order for the Assembly to take action
on draft resolution A/76/L.48, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of agenda item 12. May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/76/L.48)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Qatar to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.48.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to introduce before the General Assembly
today draft resolution A/76/L.48, entitled “2022

International Federation of Association Football World
Cup in Qatar”.
I am honoured to begin introducing the draft
resolution by referring to an address made by His
Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir
of the State of Qatar, during the World Cup final draw
in Doha on 1 April. His Highness expressed his pride
and joy over the fact that the State of Qatar would soon,
as promised, host an exceptional World Cup event in
our Arab world. His Highness also reiterated that the
impact of this great event would not be limited to
sports, but would also be felt on a wider scale, such as
rapprochement and acquaintance among the peoples of
the world.
My country, the State of Qatar and other State
sponsors of the draft resolution — more than 100
of them — have been eager to introduce it on the
International Day of Sport for Development and Peace,
as we believe in the role of sports, in particular football,
in strengthening peace and security, sustainable
development and human rights as the three main pillars
of the United Nations.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
welcomes the fact that the State of Qatar will host
the 2022 World Cup organized by the International
Federation of Association Football (FIFA). It is the
first time that such an event, the 2022 World Cup, will
take place in the Middle East. The draft resolution
also emphasizes the role of sport events in ensuring
community health and supports an initiative entitled
“Healthy 2022 World Cup — Creating Legacy for Sport

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31296 (E)

*2231296*

A/76/PV.67

and Health”, a multi-year collaboration among the
International Federation of Association Football, the
World Health Organization and the State of Qatar. The
aim is to ensure that the 2022 World Cup becomes a
beacon in promoting healthy lives, physical and mental
health and psychosocial well-being.
The draft resolution also refers to the need to
organize major international sport events in a spirit
of peace, mutual understanding and international
cooperation, as well as friendship and tolerance,
without any form of discrimination. There is also a
need to respect the inclusive and consensual nature of
this event.
The 2022 FIFA World Cup in the State of Qatar will
be the first such major event to bring people together
since the onset of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
which the world has suffered for more than two years.
We reiterate that the State of Qatar is completely ready
to host an exceptional championship that will be held at
the end of the year. It will leave a legacy of peace and
development in the Middle East and the Arab region.
I would like to thank Member States that have made
constructive contributions during the consultations
on the draft resolution. We are also grateful for their
productive cooperation, which allowed us to agree on
the excellent text before us today. We hope that the
draft resolution will be adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar eagerly awaits
the day when we welcome our guests from all over the
world from 21 November to 17 December. Member
States may rest assured that the State of Qatar will
spare no effort in hosting the peoples of the world in
an exceptional environment that no one will forget. It
will be an amazing experience encompassing all the
features of genuine Arabic culture and hospitality.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/76/L.48.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position
before the adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus thanks the delegation of Qatar for
introducing draft resolution A/76/L.48 and is grateful
that it was drafted through an inclusive and transparent
negotiations process. We wish the State of Qatar every
2/3

08/04/2022

success in hosting the Football World Cup this year,
which will be held in the Middle East for the very
first time.
Regrettably, of late high-performance sports
have been synonymous with high-performance
politics. Instead of advancing peace and facilitating
development, athletics are now held hostage to political
games and have become a tool of pressure and sanctions
used against certain States. Under those circumstances,
all parties wind up losing — whether they be fans
awaiting vivid competition and fair victories or
athletes stripped, due to political motivations, of the
opportunity to fulfil their potential after long, arduous
training. What is particularly cynical is the sidelining
of paralympic athletes from competitions. Those are
people who have overcome tremendous life obstacles
and inspire, through their example, millions of others
to believe in themselves.
We categorically object to the recommendation of
the International Olympic Committee and subsequent
decisions of international athletic federations to ban
Belarussian athletes and teams from participating
in international competitions. We call for sports to
be free of politics, as set out in the Olympic Charter.
We reaffirm our country’s commitment to the
development of international athletic cooperation and
the strengthening of friendly relations among peoples
through athletics, based on the ideals of humanism and
the principles of Olympism.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position before adoption.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.48, entitled “2022 International
Federation of Association Football World Cup in Qatar”.
For the Assembly’s information, the draft resolution
has closed for e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of draft resolution A/76/L.48,
and in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
22-31296

08/04/2022

Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Chad, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guyana, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mexico, Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.48?
Draft resolution A/76/L.48 was adopted (resolution
76/259).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Denmark.
Ms. Andersen (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the Republic
of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania;
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
the European Free Trade Association member country
Liechtenstein, member of the European Economic
Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We welcome this important discussion on
the occasion of the International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace. The importance of major
international sports events in fostering international
cooperation, supporting sustainable development,
upholding human rights and promoting peace cannot
be understated. The EU therefore appreciates the
inclusion of stronger human rights, gender equality and
sustainable development language in resolution 76/259.

A/76/PV.67

While we join the consensus today and respect
the autonomy and decision-making process of the
international sports federations, we urge them to pay
close attention to respect for fundamental human rights
and labour standards when awarding international
sports events. In the light of the 2022 World Cup, the
Qatari Government has initiated fundamental reforms
aimed at improving human rights and labour standards.
While we welcome those efforts, we remain concerned
about their implementation and resulting conditions
for migrant workers during preparations for the
International Federation of Association Football (FIFA)
World Cup.
Let me reiterate, in that context, our unwavering
commitment to human rights, transparency and
democracy, as well as labour rights and standards. We
therefore appreciate the inclusion of a reference in the
resolution to respect for the United Nations guiding
principles on business and human rights in the tenth
preambular paragraph, which are of great importance
in the preparation and implementation of mega
sports events.
We recall in particular the fundamental principle
that States have a responsibility to protect against human
rights abuses by business enterprises and to take the
appropriate and necessary steps to address such abuses.
Business enterprises, in turn, must respect, among
other things, the principles set out in the International
Labour Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental
Principles and Rights at Work. We also call for respect
for all human rights; the elimination of all forms of
discrimination; and for the freedom of expression and
assembly in the preparation and execution of major
sports events.
The occasion of the 2022 FIFA World Cup makes
this a critical year for us to promote greater respect
for human rights, democracy and transparency in
international sports. We strongly urge the international
community to seize this moment.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation after adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 12?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-312963/3
