82

General Assernbly-Thirty-second Session

regularly to the Secretary-General on the steps taken
by them and the resources they have madc availablc
to assist Mozambique;
11. Requests the Sccrctary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the resources neccssary for an effective programme of financia!, technical and material assistance to Mozambique;
( b) To cnsure that adequate financia! and budgetary arrangements are rnade to continue the mobilization of resourccs and to co-ordinate the intcrnational
programme of assistancc to Mozambique;
(e) To arrange for a rcview of the economic situation of Mozambique in time for the matter to be considered by the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session;

(d) To keep the situation in Mozambique under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financia]
institutions, and to report on the question to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session.

101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32/96.

Assistance to Sao Tome ami Principe

The General Assembly,
Mindful of its rcsolution 31 / 187 of 21 December
1976, in which it expressed deep conccrn at the serious
economic and social situation in Sao Tome and Principc
as a rcsult of thc total lack of infrastructure for dcvelopment,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 Decembcr
1976, in which it urged ali Governments, in particular
those of thc developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for thc
implcmentation of the specific action envisagcd in
favour of developing island countrics within the frarncwork of their devcloprnent plans and prioritics.
Noting that thc appeal rnade in resolution 31 / 187
for assistance to Sao Tome and Principe thus far has
not met with the desired response,
Having noted the report of the Sccrctary-Gencral on
assistance to Sao Tome and Principc 3 " and thc statcmcnt subrnitted by thc Governmcnt of that country on
its most urgent needs, 36
Having noted thc report of thc Committee for Devclopment Planning, in which thc Committce decidcd
to cxamine 37 at its fourteenth session the question of
the inclusion of Sao Torne and Principe in the list of
the Ieast developed countries, 38 on the basis of more
recent and more detailed information,

1. Renews the
31/187;
2.

appeal

madc

in its resolution

Requests the Sccretary-General:

35 A/32/220 and Add. t.
36 A/32/220/ Add.1, appendix.
3 7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 4 ( E/ 5939 and Corr.1),
para. 83.
38See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).

(a) To continuc his cfforts for the mobilization of
thc financia!, technical a:1d cconornic assistance of thc
interriational community, in particular of thc dcveloped
countries and the appropriate organizations within the
United Nations systcm, with a v;ew to meeting the
short-term and long-term nceds of Sao Tome and
Principc;
( b)
To ensurc that adcquate financia! ami budgetary arrangcmcnts are madc to continuc thc mobilization of rcsources ami to co-ordinate the intcrnational
programmc of ~1~;sistancc to Sao Tome and Príncipe;
(e)
To seno a special mission to Sao Tome aml
Principe with a vicw to continuing the consultations
with the Govcrnrncnt on urgent necds and identifying
thc crnnomic prob!ems facing the country, and to
cnsurc that the report of thc mission is issued in time
to enablc the Economic and Social Council to consider
the q ucstion at its sixty-fifth session;

( d)
To ensure that the report of thc special mission is circulatcd to ali Member States and to all regional and intcrnational organizations concerncd, including the Unitcd Nations Development Programmc.
the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programrne
and the United Nations Childrcn's Fund;

(e) To kccp thc situation in Sao Tome and
Principe under constant review and to maintain close
contact with Member States, regional and other intergovcrnmental organizations, the specializcd agencies
and intcrnational financia! institutions, and to rcport on
the question to the General Assembly at it thirty-third
session.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/97.

Assistanee to Botswana

The General A ssembly,
Recalling Sccurity Council resolutions 403 (1977)
of 14 January 1977 and 406 (1977) of 25 May 1977
concerning thc comp!aint by the Governmcnt of Botswana of acts of ag:grcssion committcd airninst its tcrritory by thc i1lcgal ;égime in Southcrn Rhodcsia,
Deep/v com·emed at the loss of human lifc and
damagc to propcrty causcd by the acts of the illcgal
régimc in Southcrn Rhodesia against Botswana,
Rca!izing the nced for Botswana to strcngthen its
sccurity in ordcr to safcguard its sovercignty, territorial
intcgrity and indcpendcncc.
Recogni::.ing thc plight of thc rcfugecs lkeing from
opprcssion and the additional burdcn imposed upon
Botswana by thcir continuing influx,
Nvting the rcport of thc mission to Botswana,
transmitted by a note by the Secretary-General dated
28 March 1977,:rn which assessed the special economic
nceds of Botswana in February 1977,
Having examined the report of the review mission to
Botswana, transmitted by a note by the SecretaryGeneral dated 26 October 1977 40 in accordance with
39
Official Records of tlze Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supplement for ltmuary, February and Marclz 1977,
document S / 123 07.
40
A/32/287-S/12421. For the printed text, see Ofjicial
Records of the Security Counci/, Thirty-second Y ear, Supplement far October, November and December 1977.
