II
/i

1
#
1

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

28 JANUARY

1982

N&W YORK

CONTENTS

!

/
(

PQC?

I

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2330) . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement by the President . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(n) Resolution 497 (1981);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2330

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Sc’curity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
md
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2330th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 28 January 1982, at 11 a.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Soviet Socialist Republic, the United Arab Emirates,
Viet Nam, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber;
I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional
Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(0) Resolution 497 (1981);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took places
at the Council table; Mr. Zurif (Afghunistan), Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria), Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh), Mr. Tsvetkov
(Bulgaria),
Mr. Bwakira
(Burundi),
Mr. L6pez De1
Amo (Cuba), Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Ashtal
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic),
Mr. Ghikas (Greece), Mr. Taylor
(Grenada), Mr. Ra’cz (Hungary), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr. Djalal (Indonesia),
Mr. Al-Ali (Iraq), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait),
Mr. Kittikhoun
(Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic), Mr. Muntasser (Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya),
Mr. Ould Sid’Ahmed
(Mauritania),
Mr. Dashtseren
(Mongolia),
Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Bendaiia Rodriguez (Nicaragua),
Mr. SUlaiman (Oman), Mr. Naik (Pakistan),
Mr. Medina
(Portugal),
Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr, Allagany (Saudi
Arabia),
Mr. Sarre’ (Senegal), Mr. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Mr. Abdalla (Sudan), Mr. Kravets (Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic),
Mr. Al-Qasimi
(United
Arab Emirates), Mr. Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam), Mr. Mubarez (Yemen) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber;
Mr. Terzi {Palestine Liberation
Organization) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2330)

1.

of the agenda

was called to order at I I .45 a.m.

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
I should like, at the very outset of this meeting, to
extend, on behalf of the members of the Council, a
very warm welcome to the new representative of
France, Mr. Luc de la Barre de Nanteuil. We look
forward to working closely with him and assure him
of our full co-operation.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

__

was adopted.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
(6) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/14848, which contains the text of a draft resolution
sponsored by Jordan.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
In accordance
with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2322nd to 2325th and 2327th and 2328th
meetings],
I invite the representative of Israel and
the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to
take places at the Council table; I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Bulgarb?, Burundi,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic
Yemen, the German Democratic Republic, Greece,
Grenada, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Nicaragua,
Oman, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Ukrainian

4. I should like to draw the attention of members
of the Council to document S/14849, which contains
the text of a note verbale dated 25 January from the
Mission of Cuba to the President of the Council,
5. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): It gives me great
pleasure at the outset to extend a sincere welcome to
the new representative of a permanent member of the
Council, a distinguished
diplomat and statesman,
Mr. Luc de la Barre de Nanteuil of France, a country
with which Jordan is proud traditionally to have very
warm relations. The Council will benefit greatly from
his wisdom and from France’s rational, objective and
knowledgeable appraisals of world issues.
1

6. On 20 Januarv 1982 12329th meeting], the Council
convened to continue its deliberations on the item on
its agenda entitled “The situation in the occupied Arab
territories: (a) Resolution 497 (1981); (b) Repbrt of the
Secretary-General
(S/14821)“. At the same meeting,
the Council voted on the draft resolution submitted
under this agenda [S/I4832/Rev.l].
Regrettably and in
consequence of a negative vote by one permanent
member, the United States of America, there occurred
a lack of unanimity among the Council’s permanent
members which prevented the Council from exercising
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Hence, draft resolution
S/14848 of 26 January has been presented by Jordan
to the Council. The operative paragraph of that draft
resolution reads:
“Decides to call an emergency special session of
the General Assembly to examine the question
contained in document S/Agenda/2329/Rev, 1”.
7. The draft resolution is as self-explanatory as it is
impelling in our common efforts towards the preservation of international peace and security. It is likewise of universal concern since it impinges on the
security and sovereign independence of every Member
State of the United Nations. The outright annexation
by the reckless Israeli occupying authorities of an
integral part of the Syrian Arab Republic, a sovereign
independent State, tears to shreds the basic tenets of
the charter of the United Nations in which humankind has placed so many of its hopes and aspirations
for survival, collective security and a rational international order based on the innermost core of the
Charter. Because of Israel’s adamant and publicly
declared refusal to heed Council resolution 497 (198 I),
unanimously adopted on 17 December 1981, which
demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind
forthwith its decision, Member States find themselves compelled to consider the item which affects
them all and to decide what appropriate measures to
take to restore and maintain international peace and
security.
8. Mr. President, since the item has been discussed
at length over the past month and a half, I request
that the draft resolution before us today, contained in
document S/l4848 of 26 January 1982, be put to the
vote.
9. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtcrtion’ j?orn Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom I now call,
10. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset
I should like to associate myself with your words of
welcome to the new representative of France, Mr. Luc
de la Barre de Nanteuil.
11, I should like also, on behalf of the Government
of Israel, to express our very best wishes to the Governments of Italy and the United States, as well as to
the family of General James Dozier, on the rescue of

General Dozier. This marks an important development
in the struggle of the forces of law and decency against
international
terrorism. The people of Israel, who,
together with the Jewish people around the world, have
been singled out as one of the major targets of international terrorism, are gratified that the determination
to stand up to this scourge of our time has been so
dramatically rewarded.
12. Council ,has before it the Jordanian draft resolution, contained in document S/14848, which requests
the convening by the Council of an emergency special
session of the General Assembly.
1.3. As members of the Council will recall, at its
105th meeting, on 18 December 1981, the thirty-sixth
session of the General Assembly was suspended and
is due to resume at a date or dates to be announced.
The thirty-sixth session is thus still in progress and has
not been concluded. What is more, its agenda includes
the matter under discussion here and it has already
adopted a resolution [r’esofution 36/226 B], which was
mentioned
in the preamble of the Jordanian. draft
resolution [S/14832], that failed to be adopted in the
Council last week. Incidentally,
that General Assembly resolution too was adopted in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, more specifically of
Article 12, paragraph 1, thereof, as I had already
occasion to point out at the 103rd meeting of the
General Assembly on 17 December 1981. I
14. In these circumstances, the question arises as to
whether there is any need and whether it would be
proper for an emergency special session to be convened simultaneously
with the existing regular session. In addressing himself to this question of principle, the President of the General Assembly at the
time of the first emergency special session pointed out
that the overlapping of an emergency special session
with a regular session
“would be contrary to the provisions for the convening of emergency special sessions, which are
held solely because the General Assembly is not in
regular session. Those who’ drew up the provisions
for emergency meetings certainly did not intend that
such meetings should be held when the General
Assembly was in regular session and hence fully
capable of dealing with the items before it.“*
15. The legal opinion of the Secretariat of the United
Nations of 25 August 1967, published in the United
Nations Juridical Yearbook for 1967,” also relied on the
view that
“holding
simultaneous
sessions would be contrary to the basic purpose of emergency special
sessions, as a device for speedily convening the
Assembly when it is not ilready in session.”
16. It is thus evident that there is no basis now for
convening an emergency special session even if one

n

were to assume that an emergency situation does
exist. The rules of procedure of the General Assembly
certainly would not prevent any further discussion of
that item by the regular session of the General Assembly if so decided by the required majority.

ready to proceed to vote on the draft resolution which
is before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put
it to the vote..There being no objection, it is so decided.
22. I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in document S/14848.

17. We know that the enemies of Israel, in indulging
their obsession with my country, ride roughshod
over the Charter, the rules of procedure and the
ejementary
norms of parliamentary
and diplomatic
propriety.
Given the arithmetical
situation in the
Organization,
there is very little to stop them from this.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour: China. France, Guvana, Ireland, Jap&
Jordan, Panama Pdland, Spain, ?‘ogo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire.

18. It is also evident that the Soviet bloc and its
satellites
and adjuncts again find it convenient to
exploit the Arab fixation with Israel in order to deflect
attention
from the real threats to international peace
and security around the world and in particular from
the steadily deteriorating situation in Poland which, in
the real world, has been the major source of international
concern in recent weeks. In their desire to
divert attention from Poland and other trouble spots
around the world where Soviet involvement,
direct
and indirect, is so obvious, these countries have abused
the Council by staging a procession of speakers on
the Golan issue m recent weeks. They are now determined to abuse in a similar fashion the General Assembly
by manipulating
the device of emergency
special sessions in order to create an artificial atmosphere of false emergency. Little does it matter to them
that the device of emergency special sessions is rooted
in General Assembly resolution 377 A (V), which was
violently
denounced and rejected by the Soviet Union
and its supporters at the time of its adoption.

None.

Against:

United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, United States of America.

Abstnining:

Northern

The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions
[resolution 500 (1982)].

23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntionjlom
Russ&z):
I shall now call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
24. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): First, I should like to associate myself with the
remarks already made and with the warm welcome
extended to the new representative of the Government
of France to the United Nations and in the Council.
My country looks to France and all its representatives
as examplars of the rule. of reason in human affairs.
25. I should also like to thank the representative of
Israel for having commented on the near-miraculous
rescue of General Dozier. We look to him, his Government and the people of Israel as exemplars of the
principle of not merely enduring in the face of terrorism
in all its forms but, indeed, of prevailing. I thank him
on behalf of the Dozier family and the people of the
United States.

19, The sponsors of the draft resolution which is
before the Council do not take the trouble to maintain
even a semblance of propriety. In requesting an emergency special session they could have been expected
to behave as if they believed that an emergency situation existed. One would have expected them to submit
their request immediately
after the Jordanian draft
resolution
failed of adoption in the Council last week.
Instead,
it took them a whole week and more for
“consultations”
on a variety of questions related to
their phoney emergency including the question as to
the exact timing at which their contrived emergency
would become so urgent as to require this extraordinary
abuse of the United Nations procedure.

26. The United States could not support the resolution which is before us. Certainly the members of
the Council deserve to know and, we hope, to understand the grounds for ‘our abstention.
27. My Government has made clear its view of the
action by Israel that was the effective cause of the
Council’s concern with the Golan issue in the first
instance. Resolution 497 (1981) stands as the United
Nations consensus position on this issue. In December
and again in January there has been ample opportunity
for debate and discussion and deliberation in United
Nations forums. No practical purpose and, more
important, no productive purpose can possibly be
served by yet another debate in an emergency special
session of the General Assembly.

20. It is futile to expect the Arab enemies of Israel
to be swayed by any of these arguments. It is equally
futile to expect the Soviet Union and its supporters
in the Council to be influenced by considerations of
legality and propriety. But it should not be too much
to expect fair-minded States represented on the Council to withhold their support for such a cynical abuse
and perversion of the emergency mechanism provided
for under rule 8 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.

28. We fear that such a debate will almost certainly
be an exercise in futility. We fear it will issue in more
and more inflammatory invective. We fear the cause of

21. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretation
Porn Russinn): It is my understanding that the Council is now
3

peace
pects

will in no way be advanced. Worse, the prosfor peace in the Middle East-fragile
at bestwill, in our judgement, be diminished. A third round of
debates will make the process of unconditional
negotiation between the parties to conflict in the region
less, rather than more, likely and recourse to the
framework of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
more, rather than less, difficult.

constructively
with other members
for such an outcome.

29. We fear that, instead of serving as an instrument
of conflict resolution, the uniquely valuable forum of
the United Nations will once again be made an instrument of conflict extension and conflict exacerbation.

34. Mr. de la BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France)
(inttqwtntion
j?orn French): Mr. President, I should
like first to thank you for the words of welcome that
you have extended to me on your behalf and on behalf
of the Council. I am naturally deeply grateful and I am
well aware of how important it is to represent. one’s
country in the Council. Since a number of speakers
have expressed words of welcome to me and, through
me, words of friendship for my country, I should like
to thank each of them briefly.
35. The representative of Jordan spoke about the
friendly and warm relations of his country with mine.
I should like to use the same terms in thanking ‘him.
The representative of Israel expressed kind words to
me and, through me, to my Government and, on
behalf of my Government, I should like to thank him
also. The representative of the United States even
extended his praise to the policies of the French
Government
and to the entire French diplomatic
corps, if I understood him correctly, and the representative of the United Kingdom praised my predecessor who, at the same time, is my successor.
I should like to thank each member for having used
such kind words.

30. My Government is gripped neither by a hopeless
idealism nor by the absence of all hope. The problems
of conflict in the Middle East are immensely difficult
and, it sometimes seems, unyielding. Yet the process
of good-faith negotiation and of reconciliation
has
begun. It has worked and it still is working.
31. We ask whether the vote being recorded today
will in fact advance the purposes of the United Nations
and the Charter. Is it our purpose in this body to
contribute affirmatively to the containment and resolution of conflict, or to extend and deepen and exacerbate conflict? Are we to engage in hate-filled polemics
or in the long, arduous search for peace?

36. I should like to turn now to the explanation
of
our position. France holds the United Nations and its
principal organs, in particular the Security Cquncil
and the Genera1 Assembly, in great respect, as we
have indicated on many occasions. We consider that
the decision taken by Israel to impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration
in the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights is a particularly serious matter which
deserves to be placed before the appropriate bodies
of the Organization.
It seems proper to us that the
interested parties should be allowed to put their positions forward in those various bodies. In voting for
the procedural decision set forth in the draft resolution prepared by the non-aligned members of the
Security Council, we wish to express clearly our
agreement to the holding of a far-ranging debate in the
General Assembly on the question of the Golan. The
French Government is prepared to reiterate its position in the course of that debate. In so doing, it will
adhere to the principle which it consistently maintains in all forums, irrespective of the parties involved.

32. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
First, I should like, on my own behalf and on behalf
of my whole delegation, to express a very, very warm
welcome to our new colleague from France. Our two
delegations have worked extremely closely together
during my time here and that of my old friend and
colleague, Jacques Leprette, and I am fully convinced
that this co-operation will continue under his most
distinguished successor.

.

of the Council

33. My delegation abstained in the vote on the draft
resolution just adopted. I could rehearse legal arguments about the appropriateness
or otherwise of
holding emergency special sessions or special sessions
while the regular session of the General Assembly
is still in being, but I shall not. My delegation is concerned more with substance than with procedure. We
are not convinced that to proceed immediately
to a
further discussion of the issue in the General Assembly will help to achieve the objective, which we
share, of getting Israel to rescind its decision and to
refrain from any similar action in the future. We fully
agree on the seriousness of the matter, We have made
plain both our deep concern at and strong condemnation of the Israeli decision. But, as I explained to the
Council on 20 January [2329th meeting], we continue
to believe that it can deal most effectively with the
problem by seeking to build on its earlier unanimity
as expressed in resolution 497 (1981). We should,
therefore, prefer to see the Council make a further
effort to reach agreement on a resolution which it
could adopt. My Government remains willing to work

37. The French Government is prepared to join in
appropriate measures designed to express the fact that
the aforesaid Israeli law is null and void and to ,draw
all the consequences in the relations of Member States
with Israel as regards the occupied Syrian Golan. But
it cannot support provisions which contravene the
rules of competence which apply to the Security Council and the Genera1 Assembly as set forth in the
Charter of the United Nations.
38. The French Government will oppose, in particular, any draft resolution of the General Assembly
4

involving
sanctions. It reserves the right to evaluate
the drafts which will be examined by the Assembly in
emergency
special session, in the light of those principles.
39. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jwm
RUSsinn): I call on the representative of Poland, who has
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
40.
Mr, WYZNER (Poland): Mr. President, I should
like first to associate myself with your warm welcome
to our new colleague, the representative of France,
Mr. Luc de la Barre de Nanteuil. We hope to cooperate closely with him in the months to come.
41.
The representative
of Israel has once again
engaged in his well-known diversionary tactics, mentioning in that context the name of my country. While
firmly
rejecting his totally unfounded utterances,
I shall not dwell further on that matter, which was
clearly
intended by the representative of Israel to
divert the attention of the Council from the serious
and important question which is on its agenda.

42. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation ,fiom Russian):
The representative of Israel has asked to speak. I call
on him.
43. Mr, BLUM
(Israel): The circumstances that
impelled the representative of Poland to make his
statement are well understood by ail of us and therefore need no reply on my part.
44. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcltion~orn
Russian):
There are no more speakers on my list. Accordingly,
the Security Council has concluded the present stage
of consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting row at 12.20 p-m.

NOTES
1 Official
Records
of the General
Ass~~mhly,
Thirty-sixth
Session, Plenary
Meetings,
103rd meeting, para. 321.
2 Ibid.,
First
Emergency
Special
Session,
Plenary
Meetings
and Annexes,
512nd meeting, para. 28.

J United Nations publication, Sales No. E.69.V.2, p. 324, para. 18.

HOW TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les librairies et les agences dtpositaires du
monde entier. Informewous
auprbs de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en libretias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas paftes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

884jo989-April

198~-2w
