A /75/PV.19*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

19th plenary meeting

Monday, 2 November 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Kadare
(Albania), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 75 (continued)
Report of the International Criminal Court
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/324 and
A/75/324/Corr.1)
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/321
and A/75/323)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.5)
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): At the outset, I
would like to express my sincere appreciation to President
Chile Eboe-Osuji, President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his comprehensive presentation of the
report (see A/75/324). My delegation also commends
the joint efforts of the Presidency, Chambers, Office of
the Prosecutor and Registry of the Court in helping to
end the impunity of the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We cannot overemphasize the significant role that
the ICC has played in sustaining the three pillars of the
United Nations, namely, peace and security, development
and human rights. Ensuring criminal justice for the
perpetrators of heinous crimes is part and parcel of
the rule of law, which provides a solid basis for the
successful implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 16. Recognizing the remarkable progress that the

ICC has made, I would like to discuss some points on
which my delegation places great emphasis.
First, as an international court, the ICC cannot
sustain itself without the active cooperation of multiple
stakeholders, especially the States parties to the Rome
Statute, at each and every step of the process. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea welcomes the execution
of the ICC arrest warrant and transfer this year with
the cooperation of the related States and entities. It
demonstrates the accomplishment of the general efforts
to strengthen cooperation and reduce non-cooperation
with the ICC.
Secondly, as we all recognize the necessity to
further strengthen the cooperation between the ICC
and the States parties, the Republic of Korea would like
to underscore that the ICC itself should be represented
from a geographically balanced perspective. The efforts
for a balanced geographical representation not only are
an initiative for individual underrepresented States, but
also form the basis for strengthening cooperation with
related States parties from all over the world.
Thirdly, the success of our fight against impunity
hinges not only on adequate cooperation but also on
the universal application of the Rome Statute. The
wider participation of States in the Rome Statute would
undoubtedly lead to stronger support for the Court.
New ICC members would be investing not only in
the protection of their territories and their people but
also in the protection of future generations and the
creation of a more just world. In that regard, we also
need to raise awareness with regard to the fact that the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-29476 (E)

*2029476*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 29 April 2021

A/75/PV.19

ratification of the Rome Statute does not equate to a
concession of sovereignty in the light of the principle of
complementarity of the Rome Statute.
Last November, we all welcomed the accession of
Kiribati to the Rome Statute, and we hope that new
members will continue to join our common efforts
for global justice. The Republic of Korea has been,
and will continue to be, committed to enhancing the
universality of the Rome Statute, especially in the AsiaPacific region. Moreover, my delegation looks forward
to more efforts by the ICC to enhance its efficiency.
In that regard, my delegation would like to note with
appreciation the Group of Independent Experts’ report
on the review of the ICC presented in September. The
report could serve as a starting point for efforts to
improve the ICC from various perspectives.
Last but not least, we have an important election
to choose the next ICC Prosecutor. The consultation
process, led by Mr. O-Gon Kwon, President of the
Assembly of States Parties, in consultation with the
Bureau, is being undertaken to identify a consensus
candidate among States parties and civil society. The
Republic of Korea hopes that close cooperation among
the States parties, under Mr. O-Gon Kwon’s leadership,
ahead of the nineteenth session of the Assembly of States
Parties will lead to the election of a highly competent
Prosecutor by consensus. We would once again like to
emphasize the importance of consensus in the election
of a new Prosecutor. Consensus is indispensable in
order to enable the new Prosecutor to address all the
challenges ahead.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea has been a
staunch supporter of the ICC since its inception. We
will continue to be an important part of the concerted
efforts of the international community to ensure that the
ICC as a responsible, universal and efficient institution
for ending impunity for the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes against humanity.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to deliver
this statement on behalf of Mr. Anton Korynevych,
member of the delegation of Ukraine and Permanent
Representative of the President of Ukraine in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Ukraine.
My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union (see
A/75/PV.18). We would like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.
2/26

02/11/2020

At the outset, I would like to thank the President
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) for the
comprehensive presentation of the Court’s annual
activities (see A/75/324). We note that, despite the
challenges caused by the restrictions on travel and
physical meetings related to the coronavirus disease,
the Court made important progress during the reporting
period, including in preliminary examinations
conducted by the Office of the Prosecutor.
We note with appreciation the fact that following
the activation of the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime
of aggression, States parties continue to ratify that
amendment. It is important that, in these extraordinary
times, the Court continue to receive cooperation
from the United Nations on a wide range of issues.
However, let me underline the direct linkage between
the cooperation, assistance and support of States
parties and the effectiveness of the Court’s activities,
from ongoing investigations to judicial activities.
Providing that cooperation is an additional contribution
to preventing the most serious crimes and combating
impunity for them.
As one of the first States to support the idea of
establishing a permanent treaty-based international
criminal tribunal, Ukraine actively participated in the
Preparatory Committee on the Establishment of an
International Criminal Court and became a signatory
to the Rome Statute in 2000. Ukraine was also among
the first non-State parties to ratify the Agreement on
the Privileges and Immunities of the ICC.
In its firm belief in this court of last resort, on
17 April 2014 the Government of Ukraine lodged a
declaration under paragraph 3 of article 12 of the Rome
Statute accepting the ICC’s jurisdiction over crimes
committed on its territory between 21 November
2013 and 22 February 2014. Furthermore, on
8 September 2015, the Government of Ukraine lodged
a second declaration under the same article of the
Statute accepting the exercise of the ICC’s jurisdiction
in relation to crimes committed on its territory as of
20 February 2014, that is, from the beginning of the
Russian military aggression against Ukraine and
onwards, with no end date. Let me reiterate that the
second declaration was made for an indefinite duration.
The ICC will therefore be able to exercise its jurisdiction
over the crimes committed on the territory of Ukraine
since 21 November 2013.
20-29476

02/11/2020

The ICC will also therefore be able to exercise
its jurisdiction over such crimes regardless of the
nationality of their perpetrators, even if they are
citizens of third States.
We appreciate the fact that during the reporting
period, the Office of the Prosecutor continued to
focus its analysis on crimes in Crimea and eastern
Ukraine with a view to defining potential cases for
investigation. For its part, the Government of Ukraine
continues to submit further information to the Court
and cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor with
regard to the preliminary examination, both through
consultations at the Court and during its missions
to Ukraine, including its ninth mission, which took
place from 17 to 21 February. In particular, Ukrainian
law-enforcement agencies, in cooperation with civilsociety organizations and human rights defenders, have
continued to document and provide the Court with
additional information, facts and evidence related both
to the nature of the existing armed conflict in Ukraine
as an international armed conflict caused by a foreign
armed aggression and to the numerous war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by the aggressor
State’s armed forces and its occupation authorities,
personnel and proxies in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine. We appreciate the work done by
the Office of the Prosecutor and look forward to the ICC
report on preliminary examination activities in 2020
and the finalization of the admissibility assessment
within the preliminary examination of the situation in
Ukraine and the opening of an investigation.
The demands of the people of Ukraine for justice
and for the prosecution and holding to account of all
perpetrators of grave crimes committed in Ukraine
remain unwavering, as does our support in general for
the ICC.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): My delegation appreciates
the reports of the Secretary-General (A/75/321
and A/75/323) submitted to the General Assembly
in accordance with article 6 of the Relationship
Agreement between the United Nations and the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We are also
grateful to Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji, President of the
International Criminal Court, for the report before us
for consideration today (see A/75/324). We applaud the
Court for its ability to cope with the heavy workload
during the reporting period, especially at a time when
the world is grappling with the deadly coronavirus
disease pandemic.

A/75/PV.19

Nigeria commends the United Nations on the
fifteenth anniversary of the entry into force of the
Relationship Agreement on 4 October 2019. My
delegation hopes that the United Nations will continue
to work closely with the Court in order to further
strengthen its relationship with the Court and to ensure
the effective implementation of the Agreement.
Furthermore, my delegation supports the continued
efforts made by the United Nations to refrain from
any actions that would frustrate the activities of the
Court and its various organs, including the Office of
the Prosecutor, or undermine the authority of their
decisions. Nigeria is appreciative of the tireless efforts of
the Court in carrying out its mandate as an independent
judicial institution, charged with investigating and
prosecuting individuals for the most serious crimes of
international concern, namely, genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
We are deeply committed to the ICC, whose
establishment we recognize as one of the great
advances of international law. The Court’s function of
ensuring accountability for grave crimes is vital to the
maintenance of lasting international peace and security.
To strengthen its ability to effectively discharge that
most important responsibility, the Court relies on the
cooperation of States, international organizations and
civil society, in accordance with the Rome Statute and
international agreements concluded by the Court. That
cooperation is critical to ensuring proper investigations,
the execution of outstanding arrest warrants, the
surrender of persons, the protection of witnesses, the
enforcement of sentences and the enhancement of
the Court’s credibility as an effective tool for ending
impunity and helping to prevent future crimes.
The Nigerian delegation considers victims a critical
component of the justice system and believes that
efforts must be made to bring about healing if they are
to have the necessary closure. In that regard, Nigeria
continues to commend the Trust Fund for Victims,
which was created in 2004 by the Assembly of States
Parties pursuant to article 79 of the Rome Statute to
support and implement programmes that address harm
resulting from genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and crimes of aggression.
A cursory look at the Court’s journey since its
establishment unquestionably shows that the Court has
come a long way. It has also endured numerous difficult
times and challenges, many of which have threatened

20-294763/26

A/75/PV.19

its existence as an international court. However, we
commend the Court and its States parties for their
capacity to weather all the storms that the Court has
gone through during those years and for the fact that
it has recorded such tremendous achievements despite
all the odds. Those achievements include the number of
cases that the Court has handled and is still handling,
the number of high-profile convictions that it has
recorded to date and the recourse to justice that it has
provided for victims of atrocity crimes worldwide.
Also worthy of commendation is the reminder that
the Court has consistently sent to States parties that
so many of the ugly events of the twentieth century,
including those that took place during the two World
Wars, no longer have a place in the international legal
order and that those who ignore the warnings and
stubbornly perpetrate evil with impunity will have
nowhere to hide. Indeed, the fight against impunity and
the commission of atrocity crimes is still far from being
won. The sanctity of human life is still being desecrated
and banned weapons are still being used to commit mass
murder, while perpetrators go unpunished. Meanwhile,
victims’ lives are ravaged and their peaceful communal
coexistence is truncated.
It is understandable that the tasks ahead of the
Court are enormous and daunting. Nigeria renews its
unwavering commitment to cooperating unconditionally
and continually with the Court to ensure that the
perpetrators of heinous crimes have no hiding place
and are expeditiously brought to justice. It is on record
that Nigeria has fully cooperated, and will continue to
cooperate, with the Court in its efforts to unravel the
alleged conduct of members of Boko Haram and the
Nigerian security forces, in line with the principle of
complementarity. Nigeria has demonstrated beyond an
iota of doubt that it is capable and willing and indeed
is arresting, investigating, prosecuting and convicting
perpetrators of heinous crimes, where the facts of the
cases warrant it, in fulfilment of our primary national
jurisdiction over crimes under the Rome Statute.
Several meetings have been held between officials
of the federal Government of Nigeria and the team
from the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC, where
questions were asked and answered and documents,
including classified documents, were submitted in line
with our obligation under the Rome Statute’s article 86,
on cooperation. Consequently, Nigeria will continue
to work to safeguard the integrity of the Rome Statute
and its cornerstone principles. Nigeria also commits
4/26

02/11/2020

to strengthening and defending the ICC’s judicial and
prosecutorial independence, including by ensuring a
proactive, fair, informed and transparent search and
selection process for the next ICC Prosecutor. In that
connection, the July 2018 visit of the President of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria to The Hague to take part in
celebrations of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Rome Statute, as well as our unprecedentedly
formidable delegation, which included senior military
officers, to the seventeenth session of the Assembly
of States Parties, are testimony to the importance that
Nigeria attaches to the Court.
Nigeria is still battling with terrorism. It should
be noted that the fight against terrorism anywhere in
the world is unconventional and asymmetrical, unlike
conventional warfare, in which enemies can be easily
distinguished by their uniforms. Many members of the
Nigerian military have made, and are still making, the
supreme sacrifice in that fight due to its difficult nature.
Nevertheless, the Nigerian military has strict rules
of engagement, and its armed forces are adequately
briefed on them. The Government takes all allegations
of human rights and other violations against military
personnel extremely seriously and thoroughly
investigates them, and, when they are credible, has
brought some members of the military to trial. We
therefore wish to reassure the Court and States parties
that we remain fully committed to our obligations
under the Rome Statute.
In conclusion, as the 2018 African Union
Anti-Corruption Champion in Africa, Nigeria was
called on to champion the course of exploring the
possibility of subsuming cross-border corruption
within the ambit of article 5 to make it a crime under
the Rome Statute. The proponents of the idea argue
that cross-border corruption is as serious a crime as
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the
crime of aggression. They argue that more people have
probably been killed by cross-border corruption than
as a result of the other crimes mentioned in articles
5, 6, 7 and 8 of the Rome Statute. This idea is in line
with the Nigerian President’s speech on the issue at
the twentieth-anniversary celebration of the adoption
of the Rome Statute in The Hague in July 2018, and
Nigeria takes it very seriously. That request deserves to
be properly examined, since it has the potential to stem
the tide of cross-border corruption.
20-29476

02/11/2020

Mr. Mavroyiannis (Cyprus): My remarks today
are complementary to the statements delivered this
morning by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Germany on behalf of the States
parties to the Rome Statute (see A/75/PV.18).
I would like to thank President Eboe-Osuji for
presenting the report of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) (see A/75/PV.18) and to express our appreciation
and recognition for the Court’s important progress in
its investigative, prosecutorial and judicial activities
during the reporting period despite the practical
challenges caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic
at a time when the Court was seized of more than 10
cases at different stages of proceedings. We would also
like to welcome the final report of the Independent
Expert Review, which is an important development and
a significant step in enhancing the performance and
effectiveness of the ICC.
The very existence of international criminal justice
is predicated on the urgent need to eradicate impunity for
the perpetrators of the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community. As we celebrate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
should recall the first international criminal tribunals at
Nuremberg and Tokyo seven decades ago, which laid the
groundwork for modern international criminal law and
for the international legal order that we have today, as
well as for the notion of supranational criminal justice.
Twenty-two years after the establishment of the Rome
Statute of the ICC, the Court has established itself as
a mature institution and, with 123 States parties from
all around the globe, today it represents the organized
international community’s stance against impunity for
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
the crime of aggression. Furthermore, under the Rome
Statute, a referral by the Security Council to the Court
remains the best means of ensuring accountability for
persons accused of the gravest crimes.
Cyprus has always been a strong supporter of the
Court, and, along with other States parties, we have
been striving to consolidate it as an independent and
impartial judicial institution of the highest quality. We
add our voice to those of the Member States that today
expressed their commitment to defending and preserving
the integrity of the Rome Statute, undeterred by any
measures or threats against the Court, its officials and
those cooperating with it. Despite the persistent external
challenges that the ICC has faced, the Court remains
a mechanism of great value to humankind, since it is

A/75/PV.19

the only permanent international judicial institution
that ensures criminal accountability for individuals
and that can deliver justice to the victims of the most
serious crimes when all other avenues fail. However, we
should also recall that the Court unavoidably depends
on the States themselves for the implementation of
its functions, including the arrest and surrender of
suspects, and we all need to always assume our own
responsibilities and assist the Court to the best of our
abilities. We further stress the importance of steadily
enhancing the invaluable relationship between the ICC
and the United Nations, based on their Relationship
Agreement and their mutually reinforcing mandates.
Effective cooperation between the two organizations is
critical to the Court’s ability to fulfil its functions.
This is an important year for the Court for the
additional reason that six new judges and the Court’s
new Prosecutor will be elected at the nineteenth
session of the Assembly of States Parties. We welcome
the efforts and achievements of the Court to date,
and we acknowledge that coping with the challenges
ahead requires hard work and a sustained effort. If we
genuinely believe that international criminal justice
and the promotion of the rule of law at the international
level are an attainable goal, all States parties, as well as
the broader international community, must do their part
to support the Court in fulfilling its mandate, including
through the United Nations.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): In commemorating
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
have shown a strong and unequivocal commitment to
multilateralism and the rule of law, with the Charter of
the Organization as one of its most important pillars.
Today’s debate gives us the opportunity to include one
of the finest achievements of multilateral treaty-making
in our commitment to the rule of law — the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
negotiations resulting in its adoption were commenced
at the United Nations. The project found strong support
from the United Nations system, whose SecretaryGeneral serves as the depositary of the Rome Statute,
and the conclusion of the Relationship Agreement
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Court was one of the first big steps taken
by the Court after the treaty entered into force. The
ICC has since worked in support of some of the key
purposes of the United Nations and has been joined by
almost two thirds of the membership of the General
Assembly. For more than two years, its jurisdiction has

20-294765/26

A/75/PV.19

02/11/2020

also complemented the Charter’s provisions prohibiting
the use of force between States.

by the Independent Expert Review report forward and
do our part to make the Court a stronger institution.

In two instances, the Security Council has referred
situations to the Court. In the case of Darfur, the Court’s
activities have proved to be essential to reconcile the
principles of peace and justice in the Sudan despite the
Council’s failure to enforce cooperation with the Court
and the fact that many years have elapsed since the
Court issued its indictments. Resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Human Rights Council routinely
and frequently reference the ICC and its important role
with respect not only to various situations, but also to
thematic areas. For victims of mass atrocity crimes
worldwide, the ICC has stood out as a beacon of hope
as the first-ever permanent independent international
court with jurisdiction over the most serious crimes
under international law. Through its sheer existence, the
ICC has changed the dynamic with respect to the role
of accountability in international affairs. It stands in
the most powerful manner possible for the message that
there can be no impunity for the worst crimes known to
humankind. That has increased the pressure on national
justice systems to fulfil their domestic responsibility in
accordance with the principle of complementarity and
has had a strong impact on national peace processes,
such as in Colombia. It has also helped the Assembly
to become active and innovative with respect to
accountability, most prominently through the creation
of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism four years ago.

The ICC is the institution that stands for
accountability and equality before the law. The Rome
Statute states in unequivocal terms that nobody is
beyond the reach of the law, irrespective of official
function. At a time when international organizations and
their independence are undermined in furtherance of
national political agendas, a strong message in support
of accountability is bound to be met with resistance.

That is not to say that the ICC is a perfect
institution — it is not. We share frustration with aspects
of its work: lengthy and cumbersome procedures,
management deficiencies and inconsistencies in its
jurisdiction. The Court does need fresh impulses to
make meaningful change, to become more effective and
more persuasive in its central role in the international
fight against impunity.

Our biggest challenge, however, remains the
upcoming decisions that are essential for the future of
the Court — be it our choices on the future leadership
of the Court or the decisions in follow-up to the
Independent Expert Review. Our work must be done
together with the Court, with full respect for its judicial
and prosecutorial independence and the integrity of the
Rome Statue and through a dialogue that is based on a
genuine common purpose. We expect those discussions
to be transparent and inclusive and respectful of the
views of all States parties and civil society.

We are grateful to the independent group of experts,
guided very ably by Justice Richard Goldstone, who have
authored the report of the Independent Expert Review of
the International Criminal Court and the Rome Statute
System, which offers a rich menu of recommendations
for how to bring about such meaningful change. This
opportunity comes at the right moment — for the Court
itself where it has independent authority and for States
parties where improvement measures require action by
them. We have to carry the positive momentum created
6/26

We were among the States who joined the earlier
statement read out by Germany that rejects the
unprecedented measures taken against the Court.
Those attacks are in stark violation of the most basic
notions of the rule of law and are therefore aimed
at multilateralism as a whole, not just the ICC. For
everyone who is willing to stand up for multilateralism,
that should be enough reason to join the calls for those
measures to be revoked. For ICC States parties in
particular though, this must serve as a wake-up call
and make us come together in a manner that takes us
beyond making joint statements.
We are encouraged by steps under consideration by
States parties, in particular the host State of the Court,
as well as regional organizations, to explore possible
avenues to support the Court, including measures to
shield it from the effects of measures they consider to
be contrary to international law.

We need to get these important decisions right,
as seldom since the founding of the United Nations
itself has such a globally recognized institution been
established to carry forward the principles of peace,
justice and human rights. The ICC is more necessary
than ever and we are committed to making it stronger
and more effective as it enters its third decade.
20-29476

02/11/2020

I have the honour to deliver the following joint
message on behalf of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Ireland,
Luxembourg, Portugal, Sierra Leone, Slovenia,
Spain, Switzerland, Sweden and my own country,
Liechtenstein — States parties to the Rome Statute that
are strong supporters of the ICC and its mission to end
impunity for the worst crimes known to humankind.
Our support for the ICC as an independent and
impartial judicial institution is unwavering. We stand
by our obligation to cooperate with the ICC and are
committed to defending and preserving the integrity of
the Rome Statute undeterred by any measures or threats
against the Court, its officials and those cooperating
with it.
Our delegations have joined consensus on draft
resolution A/75/L.5 because it includes many important
points that correspond to our strong belief in the work
of the ICC and because we wish to clearly express
our commitment to the Rome Statute system at a time
when the fight against impunity is more important than
ever. As the Court enters its third decade, it remains
the centrepiece of the international effort to ensure
accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law and to upholding the rule of law — a
vision it shares with the Charter of the United Nations.
On this basis, in 2004, the Court and the United
Nations concluded a Relationship Agreement, under
which the ICC and the United Nations recognize each
other’s mandates and status and agree to cooperate and
consult with each other on matters of mutual interest.
We wish to place on the record our regret that it was
not possible to make factual updates to that text, while
we understand the need for a technical rollover this
year due to the extraordinary circumstances related to
the coronavirus disease pandemic. We therefore wish to
highlight a number of relevant developments that have
taken place in recent years and are not reflected in the
text before us.
Since 17 July 2018, the ICC has been able to
exercise jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, a
competence that complements the prohibition of the
Charter of the United Nations on the use of force. States
parties have also decided, by consensus, to add several
new war crimes to the Rome Statute, including on the
intentional starvation of civilians in non-international
armed conflicts.

A/75/PV.19

We would also have liked to see references to the
important cooperation between the ICC and recently
established United Nations accountability mechanisms
reflected in the text. Such progress in the area of the
international criminal justice illustrates the value of the
Rome Statute, which close to two thirds of the United
Nations membership have ratified — far more than the
number of States that have accepted the International
Court of Justice’s compulsory jurisdiction.
Again, we understand that the exceptional
circumstances related to the pandemic this year made a
technical rollover of this resolution largely unavoidable,
but we expect the text to include the necessary updates
next year.
Having said that, my delegation, Liechtenstein,
would also like to co-sponsor draft resolution A/75/L.5,
entitled “Report of the International Criminal Court”.
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico thanks the President of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Judge Chile
Eboe-Osuji, for briefing the General Assembly on
the annual report on the activities of the Court (see
А/75/324). We also acknowledge his leadership and
assure him of Mexico’s full support.
As a State party to the Rome Statute since 2006,
Mexico is an active participant in different forums
promoting the work of the Court and the effective
consolidation of the criminal justice system created
by the Statute. Within the Organization, for example,
my country has co-sponsored the draft resolution we
will be adopting today (A/75/L.5) and is a member of
the Group of Friends of the ICC. In addition, we are a
member of the Bureau of the Assembly of States Parties
and we chair the Working Group on Amendments,
which as mentioned by other delegations, has produced
good results in recent years.
At the regional level, in the Organization of
American States, Mexico is the penholder of the
resolution presented and adopted biennially by the
General Assembly of that organization to encourage
States of the Americas to ratify the Rome Statute,
implement its provisions at the national level and
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Mexico’s support for the Court has not diminished
over time. On the contrary, the new challenges facing the
Rome Statute system demand a steadfast commitment
to international criminal justice, the fight against

20-294767/26

A/75/PV.19

impunity and the protection and respect of human rights.
Mexico notes with satisfaction the efforts undertaken at
the institutional level to strengthen the capabilities of
the Court, especially in a year when decisions that are
so important for its future will be taken.
At the Assembly of States Parties, which will
take place at the end of the year, we will conclude two
processes, which are worth mentioning: the election of
the next prosecutor and the election of six judges.
The smooth functioning of the Court requires that
its members have excellent credentials in criminal
law and relevant areas of international law, given the
challenges of analysing both the political and mediarelated aspects of the situations brought before them.
Moreover, the Court’s judgments not only determine
specific legal outcomes but also establish significant
precedents for the development of international criminal
law, in terms of substance and procedure. Therefore,
the election of the members of the Court has an impact
beyond their term of office.
Mexico is proud of the fact that it has a female
candidate with a stellar record and qualifications who
is able to assume that important responsibility.
The International Criminal Court is not alone in its
mandate. It is appropriate to recall that, in accordance
with the Rome Statute and the intention of the States
that negotiated it, the work of the Court is essentially
complementary. The primary obligation to pursue and
sanction those responsible for committing the crimes
outlined in the Rome Statute continues to rest with
States through their sovereign jurisdictions.
The agenda of the Court, moreover, coincides in
several areas with that of other organs and agencies of
the United Nations, whose purposes are essentially the
same as those of the Organization. The rule of law at
the national and international levels, the protection of
human rights and the existence of clear and humane
legislation to reduce human suffering in times of war are
some of the issues on which the International Criminal
Court and the United Nations can work together to
strengthen their capacities and avoid overlap.
With regard to States parties, we must close ranks
around the Court. The conduct of its work and its
success in fulfilling its mandate depend on its ability
to act, in both investigations and legal proceedings,
with independence and impartiality. The States that are
parties to the Rome Statute must defend those conditions
8/26

02/11/2020

and build confidence that the Court can complete its
work without interference from either States parties or
non-State parties.
In conclusion, war crimes, genocide, crimes
against humanity and the crime of aggression affect
humankind as a whole. Unfortunately, we live in a world
in which such atrocities continue to be committed. We
take this opportunity to call on all States that have not
yet done so to join in the Franco-Mexican initiative to
restrict the use of the veto by the permanent members
of the Security Council in situations where mass
atrocities have been committed, which already has
105 signatories. Moreover, we call on the international
community to redouble its support for the criminal
justice system based on the Rome Statute, while always
bearing in mind that we must remain accountable to the
victims of those crimes.
Mr. Aung (Myanmar): At the outset, I would
like to state that my delegation dissociates itself from
draft resolution A/75/L.5, entitled “Report of the
International Criminal Court”. I am obliged to reiterate
my delegation’s rejection of the continued illegitimate
action to assert the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) over citizens of States which are
not parties to the Rome Statute, including Myanmar.
No provision in the Rome Statute stipulates that the
Court has jurisdiction over a non-State party. Paragraphs
43 to 48 of the ICC report contained in document
A/75/324 provide an account of the illegitimate exercise
of the Court’s jurisdiction over Myanmar through an
investigation into alleged deportation.
The Government of Myanmar strongly rejects the
Pre-Trial Chamber III decision of 14 November 2019
to commence an investigation into the Rakhine issue
and the ICC’s ruling of jurisdiction over Myanmar
as a whole. The ICC Prosecutor’s attempt to exercise
the Court’s jurisdiction over the Rakhine issue is a
blatant contravention of established international law
principles, including the Rome Statute and the 1969
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The attempt
is also contrary to the principles ensured in the Charter
of the United Nations. Moreover, it is a deliberate
act to override the principles of respect for national
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States and to act in contravention
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which are recalled in the preamble of the charter of the
Rome Statute.
20-29476

02/11/2020

It is also vital that the principles and legal essence
enshrined in the Rome Statute should not be hijacked or
abused by a State or group of countries for their political
agenda or interests. Such actions will only jeopardize
the legitimacy and integrity and tarnish even further the
image of the ICC within the international community.
Myanmar will never recognize the discriminatory,
selective, biased, politically motivated and illegitimate
ruling of the ICC concerning its jurisdiction. We will
never lend our support or cooperation or confer any
form of legitimacy to the ICC. Instead, my delegation
strongly protests the ICC’s unjust prosecution, which
is directly challenging and threatening Myanmar’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the interests of its
entire people.
The humanitarian crisis and the displacement
of people from Rakhine are the result of massive,
coordinated armed attacks on Myanmar’s security
forces by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
(ARSA) terrorist group in October 2016 and August
2017. We must not forget or ignore the well-documented
brutal killings and atrocities committed by the ARSA
terrorists on its own Muslim people, as well as other
ethnic minorities, including hundreds of innocent
Hindus, in Rakhine state.
Unfortunately, the ARSA terrorist presence is not
only a threat to security but also a hindrance to the
bilateral repatriation process. They have been trying
to hamper the repatriation process through killings,
abductions, threats and intimidation, violence and
harassment against those willing to return to Myanmar.

A/75/PV.19

The Government of Myanmar has repeatedly
stated that it will not condone violations of human
rights. We believe in the rule of law and stand firm
on the principles of international law. Any allegations
supported by sufficient evidence will be investigated
and legal actions will be taken against transgressors
according to the law. The Union Attorney General is
investigating allegations against civilian perpetrators
contained in the report of the Independent Commission
of Enquiry.
On or the military side, the Office of the Judge
Advocate General had completed two court martials for
the two incidents. A third court martial has been set up
to investigate another incident contained in the report.
The domestic legal process must be allowed to take
its course without outside interference, intervention
or politicization. The integrity of those independent
investigations should not be compromised by
international actors’ interests or political manipulation.
In conclusion, I wish to firmly state that my
delegation’s participation in this meeting and the
comments made herein shall not in any way be construed
as Myanmar’s recognition of the International Criminal
Court or of the Court’s jurisdiction over my country,
Myanmar, which is not a party to the Rome Statute.
Moreover, my delegation strongly deplores and firmly
rejects unlawful calls for Myanmar’s referral to the ICC
by some States Members of the United Nations.

Recently, Bangladesh sent more troops to the
refugee camps owing to the fighting between rival drug
gangs. The Dhaka Tribune, on 7 October, published
an Agence France-Presse news article in which one
activist from the camp was quoted as saying, “ARSA
has claimed responsibility for the killing of four people,
who are relatives of a Rohingya gang leader.” Another
youth leader also said, “ARSA is behind all the killings
over the past week. They want to impose their total
control over the camps.”

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks the
President of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for his presentation of the annual report to the United
Nations (A/75/324). Brazil commends the judges of the
ICC for their role in fighting impunity and contributing
to the rule of law. As one of the founders of the ICC,
Brazil recognizes its value as the first permanent
tribunal conceived to fight impunity for the most
serious international crimes. Ensuring that those
accused before it are judged with fairness and full
respect for their rights, the Court is an instrument for
justice and peace.

While Bangladesh handed over the list of 7,883
displaced persons for the first batch and 22,432
displaced persons for the second batch to be repatriated
to Myanmar, a total of 180 persons were found to be
terrorists. Myanmar’s side shared details of these
terrorists with Bangladesh between March and
November 2018 and September 2019.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Court more than 20 years ago epitomized the impact that
values and ideas can have in the real world. Based on
notions of human dignity, the fight against impunity and
international justice, nations from all regions worked
together to build an institution aimed at investigating
and punishing the most serious international crimes.

20-294769/26

A/75/PV.19

Like any human endeavour, the ICC has experienced
both accomplishments and shortcomings. Let us
celebrate the achievements — such as the granting
of reparations to victims and the successful outreach
activities — and at the same time reflect on how we
may overcome current challenges.
The ICC has maintained a heavy workload in the
reporting period, despite all the limitations caused by
the pandemic. It has been seized of more than 10 cases,
with continued judicial activity. Brazil welcomes the
fact that the Court has managed to quickly implement
arrangements to mitigate the effects of the coronavirus
disease on its operations. We also note with satisfaction
that one suspect, whose first arrest warrant has been
outstanding for more than 13 years, has been transferred
to the custody of the Court.
Another encouraging development relates to the
work of the Trust Fund for Victims, whose reparations
mandate is instrumental to promoting victim’s rights to
justice. Aiming at reconciling retributive and restorative
justice, the Rome Statute contains an innovative set of
provisions on victims’ rights, which allows them to both
participate in proceedings and apply for reparations. It
is encouraging to see reports about ongoing projects
and the Fund’s engagement with victims, their families
and affected communities.
Brazil also welcomes that, as reported, the Registry
and the Office of the Prosecutor have continued their
efforts to assist with national proceedings. Indeed,
complementarity stands as a cornerstone of the Rome
Statute. States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute perpetrators of international
crimes and enabling them to do so remains an essential
component of the fight against impunity.
Positive complementarity activities may also
give meaning to an integral view of the Rome Statute
system, which is built upon a positive relationship
between the Court and States parties. It goes beyond
punishing individuals and rests on empowering victims
and affected communities in order to allow them
to establish their priorities and generate their own
mechanisms for accountability, thereby helping to
ensure that the crimes punishable by the Rome Statute
never happen again.
All States parties have the responsibility to
work continuously for the improvement of the Rome
Statute system, addressing challenges and extending
their support when needed. One important challenge
10/26

02/11/2020

relates to universality, which is instrumental to
overcome perceptions of selectivity in the application
of international criminal justice. I am pleased to recall
not only that all South American countries are parties
to the Rome Statute, but also that Latin American and
Caribbean States represent the second-largest regional
group among States parties, after the African Group.
Another challenge relates to the relationship between
the ICC and the United Nations. Brazil reiterates its
long-standing concern about the financing of Security
Council referrals. The greater involvement of the United
Nations with the ICC should be accompanied by greater
responsibility of the United Nations in providing the
means for the work of the Court.
We reiterate our call for the implementation
of article 13 of the Relationship Agreement and of
subparagraph (b) of article 115 of the Rome Statute,
so that costs from Security Council referrals are met,
at least partially, by funds provided by the United
Nations. As laid out in article 17 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the General Assembly has the exclusive
responsibility to consider and approve the budget of the
Organization. The proper funding of Security Council
referrals would enhance the credibility of both the
Court and the United Nations. The current situation is
neither fair nor sustainable.
Perhaps the most pressing challenge to the ICC and
its States parties is to adopt the necessary changes to
the Rome Statute system to bring it closer to the ideals
of its founders. The report of the group of independent
experts warrants serious consideration and should not
be taken lightly.
In moving forward, Brazil stresses the need to
conduct open, inclusive and transparent negotiations
on the framework in order to discuss and potentially
implement the recommendations contained in the report.
If created, a standing coordination or working group to
follow up the report should have clear procedures and
be open to all States parties and organs of the Court.
The upcoming Assembly of States Parties happens
at a critical juncture for the International Criminal
Court. The Assembly will be responsible for electing six
new judges, a new Bureau and the next Prosecutor. At
a moment when the Court needs the utmost support, it
is crucial to ensure that the decision-making processes
of the Assembly are legitimate and in full compliance
with the Rome Statute and its rules of procedure.
The challenging environment for organizing the next
20-29476

02/11/2020

Assembly calls for flexibility from all stakeholders, but
cannot serve as an excuse to set aside the transparency
and inclusiveness needed in the preparations for
the meeting.
The quest for peace and justice is always
challenging and this challenge is inherent to the search
for a more just and cooperative world order. Let us not
fall into the trap of operating with false dichotomies
that seem to oppose peace to justice, as both values
complement each other. They form part of the shared
values that have made the first permanent, treaty-based
International Criminal Court a reality. Brazil remains
firm in its commitment to the Rome Statute system and
the values that motivated its creation.
Mr. Guerra Sansonetti (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is grateful for the report of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) (see A/75/324),
presented by Judge Chile Eboe-Osuji’s. We are grateful
to him for his leadership of the Court.
We take note of the Court’s judicial activities,
as evidenced by the cases currently in process,
the conclusion of some cases and the start of new
investigations, all of which reflect the fulfilment of
its mandate and the consolidation of the principle of
international criminal justice.
Venezuela is committed to the fight against
impunity regarding the most serious crimes of
international concern, because this is without a doubt an
important step in the maintenance of peace and the rule
of law at the international level. For that reason, we will
continue to respect our obligations to cooperate with
the Court pursuant to the Rome Statute, and we urge all
States to do the same so that the Court can discharge its
important mandate to ensure justice for the victims of
the most serious crimes of international concern.
Let us not forget that the ICC is a court of last
instance. Indeed, this establishes a system of justice
for serious international crimes that have come up from
national courts. National authorities have the primary
responsibility for investigating and prosecuting crimes
covered by the Rome Statute, and the Court intervenes
only when States are unwilling or unable to undertake
national procedures.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela referred
to the Court the situation of the unilateral coercive
measures that were imposed primarily by the United

A/75/PV.19

States of America, which have had an impact on the
people of our country. Those measures contravene
the provisions of international law that protect States
from foreign interference in their internal affairs.
Consequently, those measures have done tremendous
harm to the people of our country and have contributed
to significantly increasing child mortality for both boys
and girls as well as adults. They have also undermined
a wide range of other human rights, including the right
to food, health care and education.
Those unilateral coercive measures are of an
unprecedented scale and constitute a widespread,
systematic attack on the civilian population, which
in itself constitutes one of the most serious crimes of
international concern enshrined in the Rome Statute. A
similar crime is the crime of extermination, classified
in article 7, paragraph 1, of the Rome Statute.
Venezuela, as a State party to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, reaffirms its
unwavering support for the Court as an independent
and impartial judicial institution and reiterates its
commitment to upholding the principles and values
enshrined in its norms. We will also seek to preserve its
integrity without allowing ourselves to be intimidated
by any measure or threat against the Court, its officials
or those who cooperate with it.
We condemn the unilateral coercive measures
imposed by the Government of the United States of
America against the International Criminal Court
and its members, which constitutes a grave attack
on multilateralism and the independence of the
international judiciary.
Moreover, we reject the preliminary investigation
undertaken by the Prosecutor of the Court against the
Constitutional President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. That investigation was opened at the
request of a number of countries that have through
various channels stated that they seek to overthrow the
Constitutional President of our country. The argument
put forward was one of supposed systematic violations
of the human rights of protesters during the violent
opposition protests staged in April 2017.
We believe that that investigation represents a
legal overstep because it attempts to undermine the
work of national courts in investigating, prosecuting
and condemning those allegedly responsible for
crimes committed during the protests. Nevertheless,
our country reaffirms its commitment to cooperating

20-2947611/26

A/75/PV.19

with the Prosecutor by providing the information that
she requires in order that she can see that our judicial
system has been investigating these facts since they
came to its attention.
Venezuela supports the work of the Court and
endorses its activities so long as these strictly adhere
to the Rome Statute, which will prevent it from being
instrumentalized for purposes that run counter to its
work. The application of justice must be depoliticized,
transparent and non-selective on the part of any Power
or its subordinates.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for the Court
and recognize it as the only international tribunal that
can combat impunity and prosecute those who commit
the most serious crimes when a State cannot or does not
act within its own jurisdiction. Moreover, we support
the universalization, independence, integrity and
transparency of the Court in order to ensure that those
responsible for such crimes are prosecuted regardless
of their nationality.
Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union and that of the States
parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). I also align myself with everything said by
the representative of Liechtenstein a few minutes ago.
I shall be brief. This year we celebrate the seventyfifth anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations, which gave rise to a rules-based international
order. The International Criminal Court is the first
permanent international criminal court and represents
one of the most important steps forward in the
development of international criminal justice and in the
fight against impunity for the most grave crimes: the
crime of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
and crimes of aggression. The International Criminal
Court is one of the main pillars of this multilateral
system based on rules and the rule of law. However, this
global order, of which the Court is a crucial component,
is being sorely tested.
Luxembourg is deeply concerned by the imposition
of sanctions against the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and a member
of her Office. These measures could compromise the
independence of the Court and make its job more
difficult or even impossible. It is in that context of the
continued and unacceptable attacks against the Court
that Luxembourg would like to underscore once again
12/26

02/11/2020

its unwavering support for the Court and its staff.
Attacks against the independence of the Court are
attacks against the multilateral system itself.
Luxembourg supports the crucial work of the ICC
to put an end to impunity and deliver justice for the
victims of the most serious crimes of international
concern. The fight against impunity is not only a
question of justice and accountability but is also a
key element that contributes to social and political
reconstruction in post-conflict situations.
I shall conclude by saying that Luxembourg will
continue to work towards the universal promotion of
the Rome Statute.
Mr. Caballero Gennari (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Paraguay is grateful for the presentation
of the annual report of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) (see A/75/324) and commends the Court
and the Prosecutor on the work done during the
period 2019-2020.
Traditionally, our delegation co-sponsors the draft
resolution on the report of the International Criminal
Court (A/75/L.5) as a demonstration of its confidence
in the system that the international community agreed
to in its attempt to strengthen international justice.
For Paraguay, the existence of the International
Criminal Court represents a crucial milestone in the
collective efforts undertaken to eradicate impunity
in the cases of the most heinous crimes and to ensure
justice and redress for the victims of international
crimes within the framework of international law and
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Paraguay’s Constitution accepts the fundamental
principles of international law; it recognizes a
supranational legal order that, just as it does in other
States, guarantees the relevance and respect and
enforcement of human rights; it also declares that the
crimes of torture, genocide, the forced disappearance of
persons, kidnapping and homicide for political reasons
are not subject to statutes of limitations.
Paraguay believes that the Court is a cornerstone
of efforts to combat impunity and deliver justice for the
victims of violations of international law, bearing in
mind the complementarity of the Rome Statute system.
It is important to remember that the ICC is a court of last
instance that establishes a system of justice for grave
international crimes that have come up from national
20-29476

02/11/2020

courts. It intervenes only when States are unwilling or
unable to undertake national procedures.
Paraguay supports the strengthening the principle
of the judicial independence and impartiality of the
Court. That is one of the pillars of the rule of law at
both the national and international levels.
That principle, according to which the work of the
judges of the Court must not be obstructed in any way,
is crucial for the prosecution of individuals guilty of the
most serious crimes of international concern, just as it
is for the smooth functioning of the ICC.
For that reason, we appeal to all States, regardless
of whether they are parties to the Rome Statute or its
amendments or not, and all actors of the international
community to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court to ensure its independence and impartiality and
to facilitate its investigations and enforce its decisions
regarding the prosecution of those accused.

A/75/PV.19

Belgium deplores the imposition of sanctions on the
Court, specifically on its Prosecutor and the members
of her Office, and the ongoing threats on the part of the
American authorities. Those attacks hinder the proper
functioning of the Court, undermine its integrity and
threaten its independence. To attack the International
Criminal Court is to attack our core values and interests.
That is unacceptable.
Along with our partners, we stand ready to respond
and to come to the assistance of the Court in order to
counter the effects of those measures in a concrete and
practical manner, and we call on the United States to
lift them.

Finally, we value the work of non-governmental and
civil-society organizations and those of the academic
world in order to raise awareness about the virtues of a
multilateral international criminal justice system.

Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): The
Government of the Republic of Honduras, as a State
party to the Rome Statute, reiterates its support for
the International Criminal Court (ICC) within the
framework of its remit and within the boundaries
delineated by the Statute, which is in line with the legal
model established by the International Court of Justice,
where, in accordance with the jurisprudence, doctrine
and practice of the Court, the Court has jurisdiction
only over States that have expressly or tacitly accepted
its compulsory jurisdiction.

Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium aligns itself, as it does each time, with the
statement made by the European Union in the framework
of this debate (see A/75/PV.18). My delegation also aligns
itself with the statements made by the representatives
of Germany (ibid.) and Liechtenstein, respectively, on
behalf of several States parties to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC).

The Government of the Republic of Honduras
supports the Declaration of the Parties to the Rome
Statute in support of the International Criminal Court
made today, on the occasion of the ICC’s report to
the General Assembly (see A/75/PV.18). However, we
wish to issue a reservation on one paragraph of that
declaration in which an attempt is made to openly
stigmatize a State that is not a party to the Rome Statute.

Belgium would, however, like to once again
express its firm and unwavering support for the
International Criminal Court, which is a pillar of the
fight against impunity and, more generally, of the rule
of law. It is vital to reiterate our support whenever
possible, especially when the Court is under threat, so
fundamental is its mission.

In accordance with article 4, paragraph 2, of the
Rome Statute,

Is it even still necessary to recall that its primary
mission is to ensure justice for the victims of the
most heinous crimes, who deserve their cases to be
heard and merit reparation to the extent possible. That
mission complements the work of national criminal
jurisdictions, which have the main responsibility for
prosecuting grave crimes under international law. It is
a mission that should unite us all, not divide us.

“The Court may exercise its functions and
powers, as provided in this Statute, on the territory
of any State Party and, by special agreement, on
the territory of any other State”.
Pursuant to that provision, it is inappropriate to
criticize and internationally condemn a State that is not
party to the Rome Statute and that is simply exercising
its sovereign competencies on its own territory, in
accordance with international law.
The Government of the Republic of Honduras
believes that in addition to the United States of
America, there are other States that zealously exercise
their sovereign competencies with relation to treaties to

20-2947613/26

A/75/PV.19

02/11/2020

which they are not a party, including the Rome Statute.
That position must be respected so long as they do not
accede to the Rome Statute or allow the Court to exercise
its functions on their territory. Those States include
three permanent members of the Security Council.

Peru endorsed the joint declaration championed by
Germany in support of the Court in the framework of
this debate (see A/75/PV.18). We urge all States parties
to continue to cooperate with the Court in order to
ensure its smooth functioning.

Against that backdrop, the Government of the
Republic of Honduras issues a reservation on the
paragraph of the Declaration of the Parties to the Rome
Statute in which inappropriate attempts are made to
stigmatize a State that is not party to the Rome Statute;
this is clearly not in line with the provisions of the
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, articles 29
and 34.

Moreover, we acknowledge the fact that the Court
has continued its work even in the current context of
the coronavirus disease. We underscore the fact that the
Court has continued to hear cases and hold hearings
by video-teleconference in order to ensure respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. My delegation
takes note of the important judicial progress made by the
Court under the current unprecedented circumstances.

Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by expressing my gratitude for the
report of the International Criminal Court outlining
its activities in 2019/20 (see A/75/324), as well as for
the report on the implementation of article 3 of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court.

We reiterate the importance of the proper financing
of the Court. We must find ways of ensuring that the
Court has predictable financing, which will enable it to
give adequate consideration to all cases submitted to its
jurisdiction. This is a vital aspect of the quest for the
promotion of justice within the international community.

Peru, as a State party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to international law, the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Moreover, we are committed to the rule of law, because
we believe that those are basic precepts for achieving
peaceful and inclusive societies.
We firmly believe in a rules-based international
order, and we are aware that access to justice and
accountability are vital to the maintenance of
international peace and security. That is why my
country supports all initiatives aimed at ensuring that
the perpetrators of grave violations of human rights and
of international humanitarian law are held accountable.
Against a backdrop characterized by conflict and
humanitarian emergencies, the Court, as the first and
only permanent international criminal court in the
world, requires the strong support of the international
community and determined cooperation on the part of
the States parties.
At a time when a number of States are questioning
the role of the Court, Peru firmly believes in its
relevance and acts in a manner that makes that position
very clear. The institutions of the International Criminal
Court must be strengthened, as must its legitimacy. It
is imperative to prevent the norms established by the
Rome Statute from being undermined. Consequently,
14/26

Ensuring the appointment of a new Prosecutor
is also of utmost importance to ensuring the smooth
functioning of the Court. In that respect, we are
prepared to work to garner consensus regarding
the candidate who will have to continue the work of
the current Prosecutor. The appointment of a new
Prosecutor means that we must be united in the process
of finding an official with recognized experience and
an outstanding record at a time at which it is so vital
to defend the proper functioning of the Rome Statute
system and ensure its effectiveness.
I wish to conclude by reiterating our belief that
the International Criminal Court plays a crucial role in
preventing impunity and in supporting the prosecution
of those responsible for the worst atrocities committed
throughout the world. Peru has learned first-hand that
the enforcement of accountability mechanisms is the
best way of preventing the recurrence of grave violations
of human rights and of international humanitarian law,
as well as of achieving lasting peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): Let me start by thanking
the International Criminal Court (ICC) for its annual
report to the United Nations (see A/75/324) and the
President of the ICC for presenting the main points
in the report as well as highlighting the history that
underlies the establishment of this important Court. We
20-29476

02/11/2020

also express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report and for the efforts to coordinate with
the Court and facilitate its work. We salute the Court
for pursuing its important work despite the challenges
posed by the pandemic.
In the wake of the horrors of the Second World War,
including the Holocaust, humankind elaborated the
United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Geneva Conventions. However,
it was not able to live up to the fundamental idea that
beyond formulating principles and rules for States to
observe, it was necessary to hold accountable those who
commit the gravest breaches of those rules when States
are unwilling or unable to do so. We certainly all can
agree that the gravest breaches of these rules are crimes
of aggression, genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
When it became obvious that there were certain
crimes that were so horrendous that impunity for their
perpetrators would be unbearable, the victors decided
to create the first international criminal courts;
however, unfortunately, they made sure that only
the vanquished would be punished for their crimes.
That meant, for example, that nobody was ever held
accountable for the horrific bombings of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki — a selective justice based on the outcome of
the war. Decades later, confronted with new horrors,
humankind recalled that important and fundamental
idea and once again created international criminal
courts, but only for particular conflicts — a selective
justice based on geography and the protagonists of a
given conflict. How do we justify denying justice to
victims based on where crimes took place, or because
their country was on the losing side of a war?
True justice demanded the creation of a permanent
and universal criminal court that would act whenever
States failed to against all perpetrators of crimes,
without distinction. The ICC was the first attempt at
honouring that idea and establishing a court with a true
universal calling. It is a path full of challenges, and
some are quick to highlight the Court’s shortcomings,
but that should be an argument for more efforts to
ensure its success, not serve as a pretext to precipitate
its doom.
It was only a matter of time until a non-State party
would consider that it enjoyed immunity, ignoring the
fact that if crimes were committed on the territory of a
State party, it had always been foreseen that the Court

A/75/PV.19

would be competent, regardless of the nationality of the
perpetrators. But the United States not only criticized
the Court, it decided to enact sanctions against its
officials with the stated objective of deterring the
Court from fulfilling its mandate. It is appalling to
see such measures, usually adopted against terrorists
and those allegedly responsible for grave violations of
international law, used against those entrusted with
upholding international law. It is appalling to see such
actions, which are aimed at deterring justice instead of
deterring crimes. It is appalling to see the ICC Prosecutor
and judges attacked and war criminals shielded.
We stand by the Prosecutor, the judges and all Court
officials and reiterate, as stated today in the statement
delivered by the representative of Germany on behalf
of 71 States parties (see A/75/PV.18), our commitment
to upholding and defending the principles and values
enshrined in the Rome Statute and to preserving
its integrity and independence, undeterred by any
measures or threats against the Court, its officials or
those cooperating with it.
The President took the Chair.
Those sanctions reflect a misplaced sense of
superiority, whereby justice can be delivered as long
as it spares the powerful. But justice that suffers
double standards is no justice at all. We oppose denied
justice. How could it be otherwise? Palestinian victims
have been denied justice for more than 70 years. We
oppose delayed justice. How could it be otherwise,
when our people still await, seven years after joining
the Court, the opening of investigations? We oppose
selective justice. How could it be otherwise, when the
situation in Palestine is one of the rare cases in front
of the Court where some States parties called on the
Court to consider itself incompetent, even when that
means that Palestinians would remain the victims of
recurrent crimes and that their perpetrators continue to
enjoy immunity?
The State of Palestine is informed by its own
experience and its own ordeal when it speaks of the
cost of impunity, and that is why it is a firm believer
in accountability.
We call on the Prosecutor, in line with her own
assessment of the situation in the State of Palestine and
of her mandate as per the Rome Statute, to immediately
open investigations into the crimes committed on our
territory against our people.

20-2947615/26

A/75/PV.19

02/11/2020

We call on States parties to stand united against all
efforts to obstruct or politicize the work of the Court,
and to pursue accountability, regardless of the identity
of the victims and of the identity of the perpetrators.
We need to continue acting collectively to ensure
accountability, providing justice for the victims of past
crimes but also, and as importantly, sparing possible
victims of future crimes. In that regard, the State of
Palestine calls on all States to join the Rome Statute
and to cooperate with the Court. The ICC is a court of
last resort, delivering justice where and when no one
else can. We also call on all States parties that have not
yet done so to ratify the Kampala Amendments on the
crime of aggression.
Finally, the State of Palestine supports the
elaboration of a convention on crimes against humanity
based on the recommendations of the International
Law Commission.
In closing, the Court has a primary responsibility
not to us, the States parties, but to victims everywhere.
It has a duty to advance justice, relentlessly. It has the
obligation to be a power to hold perpetrators accountable
and to be a force for deterrence. The State of Palestine,
including as a member of the ICC bureau, will continue
to support it in delivering on that sacred mandate.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.5, entitled “Report of the International
Criminal Court”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.5: Albania,
Andorra, Australia, Austria, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cyprus, Ecuador, France, the
Gambia, Georgia, Ghana, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Mexico, Montenegro, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and Uruguay.
16/26

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.5?
Draft resolution A/75/L.5 was adopted (resolution
75/3).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States has historically been and will continue to be a
strong supporter of meaningful accountability and
justice for victims of atrocities through appropriate and
legitimate mechanisms. Perpetrators of atrocities must
face justice, but we must also be careful to recognize
that there is a right and effective tool for each situation.
The United States reiterates its continuing, longstanding principled objection to any attempt to assert
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) over nationals of States that are not parties to the
Rome Statute, including the United States and Israel,
absent a Security Council referral or the consent of
such a State.
The United States Government seeks to protect
United States personnel from unjust and illegitimate
prosecution by the ICC, which threatens United States
sovereignty, purports to judge our highly robust and
transparent national judicial system without our consent
and, we believe, poses a danger to the United States and
our allies and partners.
The ICC’s past conduct, including its disregard
for the sovereignty of non-parties to the Rome Statute
and its ingrained institutional weaknesses, have led
the United States to conclude that major changes are
needed, such as an amendment to the Rome Statute
regarding jurisdiction.
I have heard the remarks of fellow representatives
with interest, frustration and sadness. Let me tell
everyone that the United States remains a leader in
the fight to end impunity and supports justice and
accountability for international crimes, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The
United States respects the decision of those nations that
have chosen to join the ICC. In turn, we expect and
demand that our own national decision not to join and
not to place our citizens under the Court’s jurisdiction
also be respected.
20-29476

02/11/2020

Since the ICC has flagrantly disregarded our
position, the United States disassociates itself from
consensus on this resolution.
Mrs. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation does not support the technical
rollover of the text of resolution 75/3 on the report
(A/75/324) of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and dissociates itself from consensus.
The frozen state of the text for yet another year
does not reflect the woeful situation within and around
the ICC. In that connection, a legitimate question
arises: what is the objective of an annual ICC report
to the General Assembly? In any case, this structure
is not a part of the United Nations system, nor is the
Organization responsible for it.
We are currently seeing attempts by States parties
to the Rome Statute to reform the ICC. It was decided to
engage auditors to analyse its work. From their report,
we can see that its investigations are being conducted
by people who do not understand the specificities of
countries and situations that they have been tasked to
consider. They have never visited the territories of the
countries concerned and do not have sufficient legal
training, nor are they familiar with the provisions of
the Rome Statute.
Moreover, independent experts describe the
situation at the staff level of the ICC, including the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Trial Chambers, as a
culture of fear. References have been made to bullying
and harassment, including by judges who flaunt their
privilege. From the report, we can see that judges do not
always participate in the process of preparing rulings,
instead farming the process out to ordinary staff.
This state of affairs at the Court is no surprise;
it could have been foreseen upon consideration of the
judicial investigations of this body. It is our impression
that the ICC is not delivering justice but rather executing
political agendas. One of the most egregious examples
of that is Libya, where the ICC is focusing its work on
some of the forces in the conflict and ignoring others.
The work of the ICC in the Sudan also raises more
questions than it answers. Similarly, the decision of the
ICC on the immunity of heads of State runs counter to
the practice of opinio juris of States, which is formed
by customary law.
The ICC is groundlessly broadening its jurisdiction
by dragging into its orbit States that are not party to

A/75/PV.19

the Rome Statute. A case in point is the situation of
the alleged deportation of the Rohingyas, in which the
Trial Chamber peremptorily authorized the start of an
investigation. At the same time, the investigation of the
situation in Afghanistan has again been halted, with an
evident link to the restrictions imposed by the United
States authority concerning several staff members in
the Office of the Prosecutor.
Our country was one of the main initiators and
founders of the Nuremberg tribunal, the father of
international justice. On 20 November, the international
community will note the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the adoption of the Charter of the International Military
Tribunal and the start of its work. The Tribunal made an
enormous contribution to justice following the horrors
of the Second World War.
The contribution of contemporary international
judiciary bodies to the fight against impunity is a matter
of dispute. The time for romanticizing and idealizing
them — largely due to the activities of the ICC — has
passed. These institutions have become instruments
for exerting pressure on the Governments of selected
countries and interfering in their internal affairs.
We have observed how some countries welcome
the activities of the ICC but gloss over instances of
unprofessionalism, politicization and bias in its work.
However, when the fight against impunity affects their
own direct interests, reforms of the Court are launched
and sanctions are applied to its staff. A clear example
of this double standards policy may be observed in the
consideration of the Afghanistan case.
With regard to today’s discussion in the General
Assembly, I would like to make two points. Many
delegations today have opposed sanctions for Court
officials, citing the need for them to work independently.
At the same time, many of those same countries have
supported unilateral sanctions or imposed them on
States. Clearly, they do not see the need for the same
type of independence for States in their actions. The
question of when these sanctions are legitimate is
therefore rhetorical, because every State judges for
itself. And now we are leaving aside the question of the
legitimacy of unilateral sanctions as a whole.
In addition, a number of States have used our
discussion to express their political statements,
including with regard to our country, which have no
bearing on reality. We would advise those delegations
to focus their efforts on establishing the real picture

20-2947617/26

A/75/PV.19

before the Court. The numerous crimes committed in
Odessa and the Donbas by the Government of Ukraine,
as well as crimes committed in South Ossetia by the
Saakashvili regime, clearly demand the attention of the
justice system.
Ms. Ma’udi (Israel): As in previous years, Israel
has decided to disassociate itself from the consensus
on this resolution — not because we do not support the
noble goals for which the International Criminal Court
(ICC) was founded, but rather because we do.
Israel was an early advocate of the establishment
of an international criminal court that would hold
accountable the perpetrators of the mass atrocities that
have deeply shocked the conscience of humankind.
Our position today is a way to give voice to growing
concerns, which we know are widely shared today by
many States parties and non-State parties, regarding
the ICC and the crisis of legitimacy it faces.
We note that some of those concerns were
highlighted in the recent report of the group of
independent experts established to review the work
of the ICC. That report underlined that the Court
faces key problems that require fundamental reform,
including mismanagement; inefficiency; inconsistent
and sometimes incoherent jurisprudence; and other
disturbing findings related to the workplace culture
within the Court.
The findings in the report reflect a dramatic gap
between the expectations of the international legal
institution and the way that it is performing in practice.
They are a call to action for anyone who wishes to see
the Court succeed and be true to its calling — to serve
as a judicial institution with broad legitimacy that lives
up to its original mandate, does not misuse its resources
and is not exploited for political ends.

02/11/2020

and future depend on engaging in a critical process
of reform. Such reform is essential in order to ensure
the Court’s proper administration within the terms of
its original mandate and end the legally unsustainable
overreach that squanders its resources and opens its to
charges of politicization.
Without aligning the ICC’s actual functioning
with the principles, objectives and scope determined
by its founders, the Court cannot have a claim to the
international legitimacy and judicial integrity that is so
central to advancing the important goals for which the
Court was established.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
Two delegations have requested to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first statement and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Uddin (Bangladesh): Bangladesh is taking
the floor in exercise of its right of reply with regard
to the statement made by Myanmar. Bangladesh
strongly rejects the allegation of Myanmar regarding
the presence of terrorist elements inside the territory
of Bangladesh. Such claims are totally baseless, false
and fabricated. They are intended solely to divert
attention from Myanmar’s own failure to fulfil its
State obligations.
The internal security elements of Myanmar are
Myanmar’s own creation. They have been fighting their
own people for decades. It is Myanmar’s own policy of
exclusion and discrimination that turned its ethnic and
persecuted people towards terrorism and extremism.

Granting the Court uncritical and unwavering
support in the light of that situation only harms the
ideals underpinning the Court’s establishment rather
than advance them. As many supporters of the ICC have
themselves stated, the Court needs more international
legitimacy, not more controversial and politicized cases.
That is not selective justice; it is the proper and correct
functioning of the Court, in line with the jurisdictional
requirements of its own statute.

Bangladesh would like to reiterate that we maintain
a zero-tolerance policy against terrorism and do not
allow any terrorist or foreign dissident groups to use
our soil for subversive activities against neighbouring
countries, including Myanmar. Bangladesh has shown
exemplary success in countering terrorism through
effective counter-terrorism operations carried out
by its law enforcement agencies. Bangladesh is also
addressing violent extremism and radicalization
through effective preventive measures.

We urge States, especially those that are
strong supporters of the Court, as well as other key
stakeholders, to recognize that the ICC’s legitimacy

On the other hand, Myanmar’s track record in
countering terrorism has been confined to uprooting
hundreds and thousands of civilians from their homes

18/26

20-29476

02/11/2020

and blaming other countries for their own failures.
Bangladesh is currently hosting more than 1.1 million
Myanmar nationals, the Rohingyas, who are the victims
of Myanmar’s policy of persecution. Accountability
is critical to ensuring a sustainable solution to this
problem. In that respect, we welcome the investigation
of the Prosecutor of the ICC.
As a party to the Rome Statute, Bangladesh
remains fully committed to the mandate and authority
of the International Criminal Court and continues to
fully support the Court and its officials in discharging
their responsibilities.
We would like to emphasize once again that the
Rohingya problem originated in Myanmar and its
solution lies in Myanmar. By virtue of being Myanmar’s
neighbour, we have become victims of their internal
policies and actions, resulting in more than 1 million of
their nationals taking shelter in our land, Bangladesh.
Credible international and media reports
have disclosed why the Rohingya took shelter in
Bangladesh — they fled for their lives in the face of
the carnage unleashed by the Myanmar junta in August
2017, in the name of a clearance operation. Tens of
thousands of innocent Rohingyas, a large majority of
whom are women and children, fled to escape burning
homes and villages, rapes and murders.
In the face of such savagery, we remain steadfastly
committed to a peaceful solution. Within three months
of the exodus of the Rohingya people to Bangladesh,
we entered into bilateral agreements with Myanmar for
the safe and sustainable return of the Rohingya to their
homes in Myanmar.
Three years have elapsed and not a single Rohingya
has volunteered to return under the bilaterally agreed
mechanism. Myanmar is currently under control of the
far right. The Rohingya want to return home and see
the perpetrators held accountable through an open and
credible mechanism. It is Myanmar’s responsibility to
ensure that justice is served for the Rohingya victims.

A/75/PV.19

by the representative of Bangladesh with regard to the
displaced persons in Rakhine state and the humanitarian
situation there. During my earlier intervention on the
report (A/75/324) of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), I clearly stated that the current humanitarian
situation took place due to massive, coordinated armed
attacks on Myanmar’s security forces by the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist group in October
2016 and August 2017.
Our Government shares the concerns of the
international community about the situation in
Rakhine. In order to resolve the issue, the Government
of Myanmar has focused on the humanitarian
situation, repatriation, resettlement, reconciliation
and development in Rakhine state. Those efforts were
highlighted in the statements made by Myanmar’s
Union Minister for the Office of the State Counsellor at
the general debate of the General Assembly (see A/75/
PV.14).
We signed a bilateral agreement with Bangladesh
in November 2017 for the repatriation of the displaced
persons and we are ready to receive verified displaced
returnees in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner, in
accordance with the bilateral agreement.
Our Government is also engaging with
various stakeholders in order to create a conducive
environment in Rakhine state for the prospective
returnees from Bangladesh. Our Government extended
the trilateral agreement with the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees until June 2021 so as to
facilitate the implementation of our bilateral agreement
with Bangladesh.

We therefore ask Myanmar to abandon its policy
of shifting the onus and burden onto others and,
instead, to take responsibility and cooperate with the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court in its investigation. That would be a first step in
that direction.

It is disappointing to witness the approach pursued
by Bangladesh at the various forums regarding the issue
of displaced persons. Instead of solving the problem
bilaterally in an amicable manner, as a neighbour,
Bangladesh consistently seeks international punitive
action against Myanmar. That kind of attitude towards
Myanmar will not contribute to our agreed objective of
solving the issue of displaced persons in a peaceful and
sustainable manner. We wish to see the sincere political
will of Bangladesh to cooperate fully by adhering to
the terms of the bilateral agreement. It is the only way
to effectively commence the repatriation. Pressuring
Myanmar will not solve the problem.

Mr. Aung (Myanmar): My delegation is compelled
to take the floor to respond to the intervention made

Meanwhile, I wish to reiterate our Government’s
policy to maintain friendly relations with all its

20-2947619/26

A/75/PV.19

neighbours, including Bangladesh. As the world
faces unprecedented challenging circumstances due
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
the adverse socioeconomic effects have increased
and further aggravated the structural and economic
weaknesses of all developing countries. It is therefore
of paramount importance that our actions and
expressions not undermine our much-needed collective
efforts to foster greater international cooperation and
engagement, especially in this time of the COVID-19
pandemic, during which efforts should aim to unite
rather than divide.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 74
Report of the International Court of Justice
Report of the International Court of Justice
(A/75/4)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/313)
The President: The General Assembly will consider
agenda item 74, entitled “Report of the International
Court of Justice”. In connection with this item, the
Assembly has before it the report of the International
Court of Justice, covering the period from 1 August
2019 to 31 July 2020, contained in document A/75/4,
and the report of the Secretary-General, circulated in
document A/75/313.
I will now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the General Assembly.
As we reflect on the 75 years of existence of
the United Nations, I would like to recognize the
significant role that the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) — the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations — has played, including through its contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
by settling disputes peacefully and strengthening the
international rule of law.
The Court is the only principal organ of the United
Nations that is not based here, in New York. The physical
distance between the General Assembly and the Court
has been overcome by solid exchanges throughout the
years, including the ICJ report that has been submitted
to the General Assembly every year since 1968.
20/26

02/11/2020

A founding principle of the United Nations is to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
including through the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Court has played a crucial role in that area. Since
1945, the increasing number and breadth of dispute
submissions from Member States from around the
world, including throughout the period under review,
clearly demonstrates the trust that Member States have
placed in the Court to settle the legal disputes submitted
to it in accordance with international law.
I warmly welcome the Court’s continued operation
throughout the coronavirus disease pandemic, thus
ensuring the continuity of its mandate and the discharge
of its judicial functions. Respect for the Court’s
decisions, judgments and advisory opinions is critical
to upholding the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and to consolidating the success of
the international justice system built after the Second
World War.
Currently, 74 States have made a declaration to
accept the jurisdiction of the Court as compulsory.
Through its resolutions, the General Assembly has
repeatedly encouraged States that have not yet done so
to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court, in
accordance with its statute.
In addition to supporting the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Court’s judgments
and advisory opinions contribute to the development
and clarification of international law and reinforce the
rule of law across the world. The impact of the Court
on the progressive development of international law
cannot be overstated, particularly through its efforts to
develop a greater understanding of rules and principles
at various levels.
This year, the General Assembly and the Security
Council will elect five judges to the Court. It is
important that, despite the challenges that we still
face with regard to in-person meetings here in New
York, we find solutions to ensure that the election is
not delayed. As President of the General Assembly, I
am collaborating with the Security Council and the
Secretariat to that end.
Strengthening the role of multilateralism is a priority
for me at this session and the international legal order
underpins the multilateral system. I therefore pledge
my strong support at this session to the International
Court of Justice as part of the international legal order.
20-29476

02/11/2020

My team and I stand ready to work closely with one and
all in that regard.
In accordance with General Assembly decision
75/506 of 13 October 2020, I now introduce the
pre-recorded statement of Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed
Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see A/75/613).
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): On behalf of the Visegrád
Group, comprising the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Slovakia and my own country, Poland, I would like
to thank the President of the International Court of
Justice, Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, for presenting
the Court’s report (A/75/4) for the year from 1 August
2019 to 31 July 2020. I have the honour to present our
common position with respect to the Court.
The Visegrád Group supports the International
Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations. We commend the Court for its role in
the peaceful settlement of international disputes and its
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Court is an important component of
the rule of law at the international level. The Visegrád
Group acknowledges with appreciation the contribution
of the Court, through its adjudicatory and advisory role,
to upholding respect for international law.
During the reporting period, the Court delivered
three judgments as well as orders on provisional
measures. Currently 15 cases remain on the Court’s List,
which engages States from all regions of the world. We
notice the diversity of issues that are to be adjudicated
by the Court, ranging from territorial and maritime
disputes to human rights protection. That demonstrates
that the Court is a truly universal judicial body.
In that context, we would like to highlight the
significance of cases concerning human rights law.
As there is no world human rights court, we commend
recourse to the Court for disputes concerning the
observance of human rights treaties. The inter-State
disputes currently before the Court, which concern, inter
alia, the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of 21 December
1965 and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 9 December
1948, provide yet another opportunity for the Court
to contribute, through its interpretation, to a better
understanding of those fundamental instruments.

A/75/PV.19

In the difficult times of the fight against the
coronavirus pandemic, we commend the Court for
amending the rules of procedure to enable it to continue
operating through virtual meetings.
The mission of the Court cannot be entirely
fulfilled without the full commitment of all United
Nations Member States to comply with their
obligations concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Respect for and compliance with the Court’s
decisions — both judgments and orders — are the
fundamental prerequisites for the effectiveness of
the system of international justice. The obligation of
the parties to a dispute to implement in good faith
the Court’s decisions is crucial to the concept of the
peaceful settlement of international disputes.
Ms. Maille (Canada) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak today on behalf of Australia, New
Zealand and my own country, Canada (CANZ).
As the United Nations celebrates its seventyfifth anniversary, it is important to remember that
a rules-based international order is our best hope to
bring about peace and security. The CANZ countries
strongly believe that respect for international law is
the foundation of that order. International law provides
rules agreed and developed by States for our mutual
and collective benefit, in support of the goals set out
75 years ago in the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations: to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war; reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person and of nations large and small; promote social
progress and better standards of life; and establish the
necessary conditions to maintain justice and respect for
the obligations arising from treaties and other sources
of international law.
The CANZ group is convinced that, as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations and the
only international court with general jurisdiction in
international law, the Court of International Justice is
the most appropriate forum to promote those objectives,
which remain relevant today.
On behalf of the CANZ group, I thank the President
of the International Court of Justice, Judge Abdulqawi
Ahmed Yusuf, for presenting his report (A/75/4) on the
work of the Court over the past year.
Our countries support the initiative, discussed in the
report to establish a trust fund for the Judicial Fellows

20-2947621/26

A/75/PV.19

Programme of the Court. The programme, which
enables its fellows to gain professional experience at
the Court, would promote the geographic and linguistic
diversity of the legal practitioners participating in it.
The CANZ countries have always fully supported
the Court and its independent role in resolving legal
disputes submitted to it by States, as well as in
providing advisory opinions on the legal questions
placed before it. Moreover, our countries’ acceptance
of its compulsory jurisdiction attests to our confidence
in it.
Our three countries also support the calls of the
General Assembly on those States that have not yet
done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice in accordance with
its Statute. We believe that, if more States accept its
jurisdiction, the Court will be able to better fulfil its
role, as that will reduce the number of jurisdictional
issues and thereby enable it to deal more quickly with
the merits of disputes.
We would also like to emphasize that the
enforcement of the Court’s decisions is essential to the
final resolution of disputes and the strengthening of the
judicial system for the benefit of all Member States.
We look forward to the contributions of the judges that
the General Assembly and the Security Council will
appoint, or reappoint, to the International Court of
Justice later this year.
We also take this opportunity to thank the members
of the Court for their dedication and commitment to the
institution. Our countries recognize the challenges that
the coronavirus disease pandemic has placed on the
Court’s regular operations.
(spoke in English)
We commend the resilience of the Court and its
ability to mitigate disruption by adopting measures to
contain the spread of the virus and safeguard the health
and the well-being of its judges, staff and their families,
while ensuring the continuity of activities within the
Court’s mandate.
We expect that the work programme of the Court
in the year ahead will remain full as States continue
to demonstrate their confidence in the institution.
We are aware that the Court’s caseload continues
to be demanding and are grateful for its continued
contribution to the peaceful settlement of international
legal disputes.
22/26

02/11/2020

Meeting our international obligations is behind
many of our great successes — both nationally and
globally. We underline that the willingness of States
to turn to the International Court of Justice to resolve
their differences must be encouraged as an important
means to ensure our continued support for the rulesbased international order.
As we turn to the future to tackle challenges that
were not necessarily envisioned 75 years ago, we remain
committed to multilateralism and its institutions, such
as the International Court of Justice. Bringing people
together is at the heart of international law and the work
of the Court.
Mr. Fialho Rocha (Cabo Verde): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the States members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP): Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial
Guinea, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe,
Timor-Leste and my own country, Cabo Verde.
I want to highlight the relationship between the
CPLP and United Nations dating back to 1999, which
is periodically reviewed, most recently in resolution
73/339. The CPLP is governed, among others, by the
principles that have enshrined the primacy of peace,
democracy, the rule of law, human rights and social
justice. The rule of law plays an important role in
the Constitution and progress of the CPLP and the
Community and its member States remain committed
to those principles.
The members of the CPLP could not agree more
with statement made by Judge Yusuf at the celebration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
“With the establishment of the United Nations in
1945, a decision was made by States participating
at the San Francisco Conference to replace the
rule of force by the rule of law. That decision has
made all the difference for humanity in the past
70 years” (A/75/PV.3).
I would like to express our gratitude to the
President of the International Court of Justice for the
comprehensive report (A/75/4) on the work of the Court
during the judicial year from 2019 to 2020. The CPLP
countries also recognize the important role played by
the Court during the past 70 years in promoting the rule
of law and the peaceful settlement of disputes at the
international level. In that regard, I would like to make
the following points.
20-29476

02/11/2020

First, the importance of the International Court of
Justice stands on its universal character, empowerment
with general jurisdiction and the crucial role that it plays
as the judicial body of the international legal system,
which has been increasingly recognized and accepted.
Secondly, the Court has often recalled that
everything it does is aimed at promoting the rule
of law. This is indeed so. It is worth mentioning the
outstanding contribution of the International Court
of Justice to the development and clarification of
international law, including on topics concerning
the use of force, territorial and maritime disputes,
international responsibility, compensation for harm,
self-determination and the immunity of States and their
agents, among others.
The high rate of compliance with the Court’s
judgments throughout its history is very encouraging,
as it demonstrates the respect and trust of States in the
independence, credibility and impartiality of the world
court. We acknowledge that there is frequently tension
between law and power. The obligation of States to
settle their disputes in a peaceful manner and the need
for sovereign consent to resort to such mechanisms
are sometimes hard to harmonize. However, it is our
firm belief that the Court is an institutional pillar of
international society that is capable of working towards
a more balanced and peaceful future.
Thirdly, the heavy workload and wide range of
subjects that the Court has ruled upon over the years
only confirm its success and vitality. Indeed, the
Court’s cases come from all over the world, relate to a
great variety of matters and have a high level of factual
and legal complexity, which reaffirms the universal
character of the Court, the expansion of the scope of its
work and its growing specialization.
Fourthly, we welcome the widening scope and
cooperation of international law, as the Court’s
judgments and advisory opinions have inspired other
international decision-making bodies. Similarly, it is
commendable that the Court is also paying due regard
to the work of other international courts and tribunals.
That positive trend should be encouraged, as it lends
greater coherence and legal certainty to the international
system as a whole and enhances the international legal
order through dialogue and cross-fertilization.
The States members of the CPLP have pledged
their strong support for the Court in continuing to
play a fundamental role in settling disputes among

A/75/PV.19

States and strengthening the international rule of law
for justice and peace, taking into consideration the
situation of peoples and individuals. The CPLP member
States remain confident that the Court will continue to
overcome the challenges and meet the expectations that
will increasingly have an impact on it. The diversity,
complexity and relevance of the cases submitted to the
Court confirm the trust that States place in it.
Lastly, on behalf of the nine States members of the
CPLP, I would like to convey our sincere appreciation
and thanks for the work of the International Court
of Justice.
Mr. Jensen (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark. The Nordic countries would
like to thank the President of the International Court
of Justice for his report (A/75/4) on the Court’s work
over the past year and his presentation today. The large
amount of cases indicate the trust and confidence that
States place in the Court by referring disputes to it
for resolution.
The Nordic countries would in particular like
to note the case concerning the Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (Gambia v. Myanmar), in which the
Court indicated provisional measures on 23 January. In
addition to its importance owing to the gravity of the
issues that the Gambia’s application seeks to address,
the case is also an opportunity for the Court to develop
its jurisprudence regarding obligations erga omnes and
erga omnes partes. All States parties share an interest
in compliance with the obligations under the Genocide
Convention by all States parties.
We applaud the Court and its personnel for
continuing to discharge its judicial functions, as
described by the President in his report, despite the
difficult circumstances following the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
As the President notes in his report, the Court is a
key part of the mechanism for the peaceful settlement
of inter-State disputes and of the system for maintaining
international peace and security. Furthermore, as he
notes, everything the Court does is aimed at promoting
and reinforcing the rule of law. Indeed, the Court, as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, stands as
the cornerstone of the rules-based international order.
That role has, in our view, never been more important
than today, when multilateralism faces new challenges.

20-2947623/26

A/75/PV.19

02/11/2020

We urge all States to engage actively and constructively
in international cooperation to support the rulesbased international order, of which the Court forms an
integral part.

the peaceful settlement of international disputes in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and the Statute of the Court, in particular Articles 33
and 94 of the Charter.

The Nordic countries look forward to the upcoming
election of five new judges. We encourage all States
to cast their votes based on merit. It is our view that
ensuring gender balance, as well as the representation
of diverse legal systems, cultures and languages,
contributes significantly to the quality and acceptance
of the Court’s work.

Noting the fact that the Security Council has not
sought any advisory opinion from the International
Court since 1970, the Non-Aligned Movement urges
the Security Council to make greater use of the Court,
the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, as
a source of advisory opinions and interpretation of
international law.

In closing, we would like to highlight the vital role
that young people play in promoting the rule of law
in developed and developing countries alike. In line
with our commitment to the rules-based international
order, we therefore welcome the particular interest that
the Court takes in young people, giving students from
various backgrounds a chance to familiarize themselves
with the Court.

In that regard, at the ministerial meeting of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in Caracas in July 2019, the Ministers of the
Movement decided to encourage those in a position to
do so to make greater use of the International Court
of Justice and to consider holding consultations among
the States members of the Movement, as and when
appropriate, with a view to requesting advisory opinions
of the Court, including in cases in which unilateral
coercive measures that are not authorized by relevant
organs of the United Nations and are inconsistent with
the principles of international law or the Charter may
undermine international peace and security.

Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): It is an honour for the
Republic of Azerbaijan to take the floor on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in connection
with the consideration of agenda item 74, entitled
“Report of the International Court of Justice”, to which
we attach great importance.
At the outset, allow us to thank the President of
the International Court of Justice for his presentation
of the report (A/75/4) to the General Assembly on the
activities of the International Court from 1 August
2019 to 31 July 2020, as requested by this body last
year, of which we have taken due note.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms and
underscores its principled positions concerning the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the non-use
or non-threat of use of force. In that context, the
International Court of Justice has a significant role to
play in promoting and encouraging the settlement of
international disputes by peaceful means, as reflected
in the Charter of the United Nations, and in such a
manner that international peace and security, as well as
justice, are not endangered.
At their eighteenth Summit, held in Baku in
October 2019, the Heads of State or Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement agreed to endeavour to
generate further progress to achieve full respect for
international law and, in that regard, commend the
role of the International Court of Justice in promoting
24/26

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to invite the General Assembly, other organs of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies that are
duly authorized by the General Assembly to request
advisory opinions of the International Court of
Justice on legal questions arising within the scope of
their activities. Moreover, the States members of the
Movement reaffirm the importance of the Court’s
advisory opinion issued on 8 July 1996 on the Legality
of the threat or use of nuclear weapons (A/51/218,
annex). In that matter, the International Court of Justice
concluded unanimously that there exists an obligation
to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control.
In conclusion, we continue to call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to fully respect the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the Legal consequences of the construction of a wall
in the occupied Palestinian territory (A/ES-10/273).
We call on all States to respect, and ensure respect
for, the provisions therein for the realization of the end
of the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the
20-29476

02/11/2020

independence of the State of with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the statement made on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries by the
representative of Azerbaijan, and I am making the
following statement in my national capacity.
Cuba reiterates its commitment to the strict
application of international law and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. In recognizing
the work of the Court of International Justice since its
establishment, we believe that its decisions and advisory
opinions have been of special importance, not only
with regard to the cases submitted for its consideration,
but also for the development of international law. In
that regard, the Republic of Cuba is thankful for the
presentation of the report (A/75/4) of the International
Court of Justice for the period from 1 August 2019 to
31 July 2020.
The volume of cases brought before the Court,
many of which deal with issues in Latin American
and the Caribbean, demonstrates the importance that
the international community attaches to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Cuba values the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with Article 33.1
of the Charter of the United Nations and has voluntarily
submitted to the Court’s jurisdiction.
Cuba regrets the fact that the judgments of the
Court have not been enforced, in clear violation of
Article 94 of the Charter, which provides that each
Member of the United Nations undertakes to comply
with the decision of the International Court of Justice
in any case to which it is a party.
In that regard, we are concerned that the
effectiveness and implementation of Court judgments
are being undermined because some countries disregard
judgments that are unfavourable to them. The refusal
of those countries to comply with the judgments made
and their defiance of the United Nations mechanisms
responsible for enforcing them, by resorting to the
veto privilege in the Security Council, demonstrates
the imperfection of the Court’s mechanisms for
implementing its decisions.
Cuba believes that there is a need for a serious
review by the Court to examine its relations with the
organs of the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council. That situation also demonstrates the necessity

A/75/PV.19

of moving ahead with the reform of the United
Nations system so as to provide greater guarantees to
developing countries, which would then be extended to
the International Court of Justice.
All the work of the International Court of Justice
plays a vital role in strengthening the rule of law at the
international level. Through its rulings and advisory
opinions, the Court helps to clarify international law.
Cuba would like to thank the Court for the
publications made available to the States Members
of the United Nations and for its online resources,
which provide valuable material for the dissemination
and study of public international law, above all for
developing countries, some of which often find
themselves deprived of information on the progress
made in international law. This is especially the case
for my country, given the obsolete and absurd policy of
the economic, trade and financial blockade imposed by
the United States despite its overwhelming rejection by
the international community.
We reiterate once again that the Republic of Cuba
is a peaceful country that respects international law
and we have always firmly upheld our international
obligations under the treaties to which we are party.
Several relevant cases have been heard by the
International Court of Justice. Cuba believes that
advisory opinion issued unanimously on 8 July 1996
on Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons is
crucial. Furthermore, Cuba urges full respect for the
advisory opinion of 9 July 2004 on Legal Consequences
of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and calls on all States to respect
and guarantee respect for the decisions of the Court on
that important issue.
Lastly, Cuba also draws attention to the importance
of adhering to the advisory opinion issued by the Court
on the 22 April 1988 on Applicability of the Obligation
to Arbitrate under Section 21 of the United Nations
Headquarters Agreement of 26 June 1947. The Court
concluded that the United States, as a party to the
Headquarters Agreement, must comply with Section 21
of the Agreement and submit to arbitration to resolve
disputes between that country and the United Nations. It
also recalls the fundamental principle that international
law supersedes domestic law.
Cuba also attaches considerable importance to
the allocation of the necessary budgetary resources to

20-2947625/26

A/75/PV.19

the Court to enable it to adequately conduct its work
towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts under its
jurisdiction. Cuba calls on States to ensure the timely
and adequate disbursement of those resources to
the Court.
Lastly, my delegation wishes to underscore the
fact that events in recent years clearly demonstrate the

26/26

02/11/2020

Court’s importance as an international judicial body,
acting peaceably and in good faith in accordance with
international law, to resolve disputes with the greatest
impact on the international community.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

20-29476
