S/PRST/2005/14

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 March 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5157th meeting of the Security Council, held on 31 March 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recognizes some progress made in some areas in
Guinea-Bissau, including the electoral process, and urges all political actors in
the country to show unequivocal commitment to a peaceful electoral process,
leading to peaceful, transparent, free and fair elections, by refraining from
inspiring or promoting any sort of ethnic or religious hostilities, particularly
with a view to obtaining political gains. In this regard, the Council strongly
condemns any attempts to incite violence and to impede ongoing efforts
towards peace, stability and social and economic development.
“The Security Council expresses its growing concern at recent political
developments in Guinea-Bissau, in particular the decision by the ‘Partido da
Renovação Social’ — PRS — to select ex-President Koumba Yala as its
presidential candidate. Any decision, such as this, which challenges the
Transitional Charter has the potential to jeopardize the successful conclusion
of the transitional process and forthcoming presidential elections.
“The Security Council expresses also its deep concern at the fact that
peace efforts have not yet generated sufficient social and economic benefits for
the population that could discourage the use of force.
“The Security Council stresses, at the same time, the urgent need for
international support to the electoral process. It recalls previous appeals for
increased international assistance to Guinea-Bissau, including to the
forthcoming presidential elections, as part of an urgently needed peacebuilding
strategy in that country.
“The Security Council calls upon Guinea-Bissau’s international
development partners, including all concerned agencies of the United Nations
system, to cooperate fully with the Government of Guinea-Bissau, which has
been fully engaged in the implementation of the Transition Charter and in
efforts to promote transparency and good governance. It welcomes, in this
regard, the holding on 11 February 2005, in Lisbon, of the ‘Meeting of
Guinea-Bissau’s Partners to prepare for the Roundtable Conference’ and

05-29191 (E) 310305

*0529191*

S/PRST/2005/14

stresses the importance of strong participation in the Donor Roundtable
Conference scheduled for October 2005.
“The Security Council welcomes initial measures taken by the Chief of
General Staff regarding the process of reform of the Armed Forces and the
promotion of reconciliation among the military. The Council further
encourages full inclusiveness and renewed commitment to reconciliation in the
Armed Forces, and development of constructive civilian-military relations
based on the Armed Forces as an institution subordinated to the elected
civilian authorities. In accordance with its mandate in resolution 1580 (2004),
it reaffirms UNOGBIS’s role in encouraging and supporting national efforts to
reform the security sector.”

2
