66

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

cerning the question of South Africa, 28 with a view to
blocking the existing loopholes in the arms embargo, so as
to render it more effective and prohibiting, in particular,
all forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
I0. Demands once again that South Africa submit
forthwith all its nuclear installations and facilities to
inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency;
11 . Requests the Secretary-General to follow very
closely South Africa's evolution in the nuclear field and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth ses­
sion.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

39/62. Prohibition of the development and manufac­
ture of new types of weapons of mass destruc­
tion and new systems of such weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3479 (XXX) of 11 December
1975 , 31/74 of10 December 1976 , 32/84 A of12 Decem­
ber 1977 , 33/66 B of 14 December 1978, 34/79 of 11
December 1979 , 35/149 of 12 December 1980, 36/89 of9
December 1981 , 37177 A of9 December1982 and38/182
of 20 December 1983 concerning the prohibition of new
types of weapons of mass destruction,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 39 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the Gen­
eral Assembly,26 according to which qualitative and quan­
titative disarmament measures are both important for
halting the arms race and efforts to that end must include
negotiations on the limitation and cessation of the qualita­
tive improvement of armaments, especially weapons of
mass destruction, and the development of new means of
warfare,
Recalling the decision contained in paragraph 77 of the
Final Document to the effect that, in order to help prevent
a qualitative arms race and so that scientific and techno­
logical achievements might ultimately be used solely for
peaceful purposes, effective measures should be taken to
prevent the emergence of new types of weapons of mass
destruction based on new scientific principles and achieve­
ments, and that efforts aiming at the prohibition of such
new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruc­
tion should be appropriately pursued,
Expressing once again its firm belief, in the light of the
decisions adopted at the tenth special session, in the
importance of concluding an agreement or agreements to
prevent the use of scientific and technological progress for
the development of new types of weapons of mass destruc­
tion and new systems of such weapons,
Noting that in the course of its session in1984 the Con­
ference on Disarmament considered the item entitled
"New types of weapons of mass destruction and new sys­
tems of such weapons: radiological weapons",
Convinced that all ways and means should be utilized to
prevent the development and manufacture of new types of
weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such
weapons,
Taking into consideration the report of the Conference
on Disarmament relating to this question, 29
I. Requests the Conference on Disarmament, in the
light of its existing priorities, to intensify negotiations,
28 See Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-fifth Year, Supple­
ment for July, August and September 1980, document S/14179.
29 Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 27 (A/39/27), sect. Ill.Ci. paras. 118 and 121-124.

with the assistance of qualified governmental experts, with
a view to preparing a draft comprehensive agreement on
the prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new sys­
tems of such weapons, and to draft possible agreements on
particular types of such weapons;
2. Once again urges all States to refrain from any
action which could adversely affect the talks aimed at
working out an agreement or agreements to prevent the
emergence of new types of weapons of mass destruction
and new systems of such weapons;
3. Calls upon the States permanent members of the
Security Council as well as upon other militarily significant
States to make declarations, identical in substance, con­
cerning the refusal to create new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons, as a first
step towards the conclusion of a comprehensive agreement
on this subject, bearing in mind that such declarations
would be approved thereafter by a decision of the Security
Council;
4. Calls again upon all States to undertake efforts to
ensure that ultimately scientific and technological achieve­
ments may be used solely for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all documents relating to the
consideration of this item by the General Assembly at its
thirty-ninth session;
6. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to submit
a report on the results achieved to the General Assembly
for consideration at its fortieth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the devel­
opment and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass
destruction and new systems of such weapons: report of
the Conference on Disarmament".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

39/63. Review and implementation of the Conclud­
ing Document of the Twelfth Special Session
of the General Assembly
A
WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN: ACTIONS AND
ACTIVITIES

The General Assembly,
Aware of the growing public concern at the dangers of
the arms race, particularly the nuclear-arms race, and its
negative social and economic consequences,
Noting with satisfaction the successful implementation
of the World Disarmament Campaign, launched by the
General Assembly at its twelfth special session, 30 the sec­
ond special session devoted to disarmament, and its posi­
tive impact on the mobilization on a large scale of world
public opinion on behalf of peace and disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions 36/92 J of 9 December 1981 ,
37/100 Hof13 December1982 and38/73 F of l5 Decem­
ber 1983 , as well as the report of the Secretary-General on
world-wide action for collecting signatures in support of
measures to prevent nuclear war, to curb the arms race and
for disarmament, 31
JO Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session,
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13. document A/S-12/32, annex V.
11 A/S-12/15 and Add. I.

III.

Welcoming the voluntary contributions made to the
World Disarmament Campaign Voluntary Trust Fund to
carry out the objectives of the Campaign,
Taking into account the report of the Secretary-Gen­
eral32 on the progress in the implementation of the pro­
gramme of activities of the World Disarmament Cam­
paign during 1984 and on the activities contemplated for
1985,
Convinced that the United Nations system, Member
States, with respect for their sovereign rights, and other
bodies, in particular non-governmental organizations, all
have their role to play in achieving the objectives of the
Campaign,
Taking into account the great number of various activi­
ties carried out within the framework of the Campaign,
including actions for collecting signatures in support of
measures to prevent nuclear war, to curb the arms race and
for disarmament,
1. Reaffirms the usefulness of further carrying out
actions and activities which are an important manifesta­
tion of the will of world public opinion and contribute
effectively to the achievement of the objectives of the
World Disarmament Campaign and thus to the creation of
a favourable climate for making progress in the field of dis­
armament with a view to achieving the goal of general and
complete disarmament under effective international con­
trol;
2. Urges the Governments of all States, especially the
nuclear-weapon States and other militarily significant
States, in formulating their policies in the field of disarma­
ment, to take into account the main demands of the mass
peace and disarmament movements, in particular, with
regard to the prevention of nuclear war and curbing the
nuclear-arms race;
3. Reaffirms the importance of carrying out the World
Disarmament Campaign in accordance with the priorities
in the field of disarmament established in the Final Docu­
ment of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assem­
bly,33 the first special session devoted to disarmament, tak­
ing into account that the adoption of effective measures for
nuclear disarmament and prevention of nuclear war has
the highest priority;
4. Invites once again Member States to co-operate with
the United Nations to ensure a better flow of accurate
information with regard to the various aspects of disarma­
ment as well as actions and activities of the world public in
support of peace and disarmament, and to avoid dissemi­
nation of false and tendentious information;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in implementing
the programme of activities of the World Disarmament
Campaign, to give wider publicity to the work of the Gen­
eral Assembly in the field of disarmament, paying due
attention, in particular, to the proposals of Member States
and the action taken thereon;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report annu­
ally to the General Assembly on the implementation of the
provisions of the present resolution.

97th plenary meeting
I 2 December 1984
32 A/39/492.

67

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

33 Resolution S-10/2.
34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twe/�h Spaia/ Sessum.
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 13. document AIS-12132.

B
UNITED NATIONS PROGRAMME OF FELLOWSHIPS
ON DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 108 of the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the Gen­
eral Assembly, 33 the first special session devoted to dis­
armament, to establish a programme offellowships on dis­
armament, as well as its decisions contained in annex IV
to the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Ses­
sion of the General Assembly,34 the second special session
devoted to disarmament, in which it, inter alia, decided to
continue the programme and to increase the number offel­
lowships from twenty to twenty-five as from 1983,
Noting with satisfaction that the programme has already
trained one hundred and thirty public officials from sev­
enty-seven countries, most of whom are now in positions
of responsibility in the field of disarmament affairs within
their Governments or Permanent Missions to the United
Nations, or representing their Governments at interna­
tional disarmament meetings,
Recognizing the fact that the programme of studies and
activities as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations programme of fellowships on dis­
armament35 has continued to expand and intensify,
Believing that existing facilities within the Secretariat for
implementing the programme offellowships can be further
utilized to promote expertise in disarmament,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Sec­
retary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
the Federal Republic of Germany, Japan, Romania, Swe­
den and the United States of America for inviting fellows
to their countries in 1984 to study selected activities in the
field of disarmament, thereby contributing to the fulfil­
ment of the overall objectives of the programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To devise a system of evaluating the research
papers prepared by the fellows with a view to identifying
those that are outstanding;
(b) To publish such papers in an annual issue of an
appropriate publication to be devoted to the programme
of fellowships on disarmament;
(c) To submit proposals for further utilization of the
existing capacity within the Department for Disarmament
Affairs for training in the field of disarmament;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the operations
of the programme and the implementation of the present
resolution.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

C
NUCLEAR-ARMS FREEZE

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Final Document of the Tenth Spe­
cial Session of the General Assembly,33 the first special ses35 Al 39/56 7.

68

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

sion devoted to disarmament, adopted in 1978 and unani­
mously and categorically reaffirmed in 1982 during the
twelfth special session of the General Assembly,34 the sec­
ond special session devoted to disarmament, the Assembly
expressed deep concern over the threat to the very survival
of mankind posed by the existence of nuclear weapons and
the continuing arms race,
Recalling also that, on those occasions, it pointed out
that existing arsenals of nuclear weapons are more than
sufficient to destroy all life on earth and stressed that man­
kind is therefore confronted with a choice: halt the arms
race and proceed to disarmament, or face annihilation,
Noting that the conditions prevailing today are a source
of even more serious concern than those existing in 1978
because of several factors, such as the deterioration of the
international situation, the increase in the accuracy, speed
and destructive power of nuclear weapons, the promotion
of illusory doctrines of "limited" or "winnable" nuclear
war and the many false alarms which have occurred owing
to accidental reasons,
Noting also that at the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, it was declared that
the renewed escalation in the nuclear-arms race, both in its
quantitative and qualitative dimensions, as well as reli­
ance on doctrines of nuclear deterrence, had heightened
the r i sk of the outbreak of nuclear war and led to greater
insecurity and instability in international relations,36
Bearing in mind that in their Joint Declaration, issued
on 22 May 1984, the Heads of State or Government of six
States Members of the United Nations, coming from five
different continents, urged the nuclear-weapon States as a
necessary first step to halt all testing, production and
deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery sys­
tems,j7
Believing that it is a matter of the utmost urgency to stop
any further increase in the awesome arsenals of the two
major nuclear-weapon States, which already have ample
retaliatory power and a frightening overkill capacity,
Believing also that it is equally urgent to initiate or
resume negotiations for the substantial reduction and
qualitative limitation of nuclear arms,
Considering that a nuclear-arms freeze, while not an end
in itself, would constitute the most effective first step for
the achievement of the above-mentioned two objectives,
since it would encourage the initiation or resumption of
negotiations and prevent the continued increase and quali­
tative improvement of existing nuclear weaponry during
the �riod when the negotiations would take place,
Firmly convinced that at present the conditions are most
propitious for such a freeze, since the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the United States of America are
now equivalent in nuclear military power and it seems evi­
dent that there exists between them an overall rough par­
ity,
Conscious that the application of the systems of surveil­
lance, verification and control already agreed upon in
some previous cases would be sufficient to provide a rea­
sonable guarantee of faithful compliance with the under­
takings derived from the freeze,

Convinced that it would be to the benefit of all other
States possessing nuclear weapons to follow the example of
the two major nuclear-weapon States,
I. Urges once more the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America, as the two
major nuclear-weapon States, to proclaim, either through
simultaneous unilateral declarations or through a joint
declaration, an immediate nuclear-arms freeze, which
would be a first step towards the comprehensive pro­
gramme of disarmament and whose structure and scope
would be the following:
(a) It would embrace:
(i) A comprehensive test ban of nuclear weapons and
of their delivery vehicles;
(ii) The complete cessation of the manufacture of
nuclear weapons and of their delivery vehicles;
(iii) A ban on all further deployment of nuclear weap­
ons and of their delivery vehicles;
(iv) The complete cessation of the production of fis­
sionable material for weapons purposes;
(b) It would be subject to appropriate measures and
procedures of verification, such as those which have
already been agreed by the parties in the case of the SALT
138 and SALT 1139 treaties, and those agreed upon in princi­
ple by them during the preparatory trilateral negotiations
on the comprehensive test ban held at Geneva;
(c) It would be of an initial five-year duration, subject
to prolongation when other nuclear-weapon States join in
such a freeze, as the General Assembly urges them to do;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics has already submitted the report40
requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 38/73
E of I 5 December 1983;
3. Hopes that the other major nuclear-weapon State
will find it possible to comply also with the request of the
General Assembly before the closure of its thirty-ninth ses­
sion;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session an item entitled "Implementation of Gen­
eral Assembly resolution 39/63 C on a nuclear-arms
freeze".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

36See N38/132-S/15675 and Corr.I and 2, annex, sect. I, para. 28.

39 ··Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms" (see CD/
SJ; Appendix l[)ivol. I. document CD/28)
4n See A/391623

37 See N39/277-S/16587, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records

of the Security Council, Thirty-ninth Year, Supplement for April, May and
June /984, document S/16587, annex.
38 "Interim Agreement between the United States of America and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on certain measures with respect to the
limitation of strategic offensive arms" (United Nations. Treaty Senes. vol
944, No. 13445, p. 3).

D
WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in paragraph I 5 of the Final Document of
the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,33 the
first special session devoted to disarmament, it declared
that it was essential that not only Governments but also
the peoples of the world recognize and understand the
dangers in the present situation and stressed the impor­
tance of mobilizing world public opinion on behalf of dis­
armament,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/152 I of 12 December
1980, 36/92 C of 9 December 1981, 37/100 I of 13

69

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

December 1 982 and 38/73 D of 1 5 December 1 983, as
well as the reports of the Secretary-General of 1 7 Septem­
ber 1 98 1 ,4 1 1 1 June 1 982,4 2 3 November 1 98243 and 30
August 1 983,44

Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of

3 October 1 984 32 on the implementation of the pro­
gramme of activities of the World Disarmament Cam­
paign during 1 984 and the activities contemplated for
1 985, as well as its main financial aspects.

Having also examined the part of the report of the Secre­
tary-General of 4 October 1 984 dealing with the activities
of the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies relating to
the implementation of the World Disarmament Cam­
paign, 4 5 as well as the Final Act of the 1 984 United
Nations Pledging Conference for the Campaign,46 held on
24 October 1 984,
1 . Commends the manner in which, as described in the
above-mentioned reports, the World Disarmament Cam­
paign has been geared by the Secretary-General in order to
guarantee "the widest possible dissemination of informa­
tion and unimpeded access for all sectors of the public to a
broad range of information and opinions on questions of
arms limitation and disarmament and the dangers relating
to all aspects of the arms race and war, in particular
nuclear war";47
2. Recalls that, as was also agreed by consensus at the
twelfth special session of the General Assembly, the sec­
ond special session devoted to disarmament, it is likewise
an essential requisite for the universality of the World Dis­
armament Campaign that it receive "the co-operation and
participation of all States";47
3. Endorses the statement made by the Secretary-Gen­
eral on the occasion of the I 984 United Nations Pledging
Conference for the World Disarmament Campaign48 to the
effect that such co-operation implies that adequate funds
be made available and that consequently the criterion of
universality also applies to pledges, since a campaign with­
out world-wide participation and funding will have diffi­
culty in reflecting this principle in its implementation;
4. Regrets that most of the States which have the larg­
est military expenditures have not so far made any finan­
cial contribution to the World Disarmament Campaign;
5. Decides that at its fortieth session there should be a
third United Nations Pledging Conference for the World
Disarmament Campaign, and expresses the hope that on
that occasion all those Member States that have not yet
announced any voluntary contribution may do so;
6. Reiterates its recommendation that the voluntary
contributions made by Member States to the World Dis­
armament Campaign Voluntary Trust Fund should not be
earmarked for specific activities inasmuch as it is most
desirable that the Secretary-General enjoy full freedom to
take the decisions he deems fit within the frall'lework of the
Campaign previously approved by the General Assembly
and in exercise of the powers vested in him in connection
with the Campaign;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give permanent
character to his instructions to the United Nations infor­
mation centres and regional commissions to give wide
4 1 A/36/458.
42 A/S- 1 2/27.
43 A/3 7/548.
44 A/38/349.
4 5 A/39/549, sect. 1 1.B.
46 AJCONF. 1 27 / 1 .

publicity to the World Disarmament Campaign and,
whenever necessary, to adapt, as far as possible. United
Nations information materials to local languages;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report covering
both the implementation of the programme of activities of
the World Disarmament Campaign by the United Nations
system during 1 98 5 and the programme of activities con­
templated by the system for 1 986;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "World Disarmament
Campaign".

97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984

E
CONSIDERATION OF GUIDELINES FOR CONFIDENCE­
BUILDING MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/73 A of 1 5 December 1 983
on confidence-building measures,
Taking note of the views expressed and the useful work
accomplished during the 1 983 and 1 984 sessions of the
Disarmament Commission,49
A ware of the heightened importance of confidence­
building measures as well as of measures of disarmament
in the present international situation,
Expressing its regret that, notwithstanding the progress
already achieved, the guidelines for appropriate types of
confidence-building measures and for the implementation
of such measures on a global or regional level could not be
elaborated fully within the allotted time frame,
I . Reiterates its invitation to all States to encourage
and assist all efforts designed to explore further the ways in
which confidence-building measures can strengthen peace
and security and promote disarmament;
2. Urges all States to consider the widest possible use
of confidence-building measures in their international rela­
tions, taking into account the views expressed during the
work of the Disarmament Commission;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission, at its 1 986
session, to continue and conclude its consideration of the
item "Elaboration of guidelines for appropriate types of
confidence-building measures and for the implementation
of such measures on a global or regional level";
4. Further requests the Disarmament Commission to
submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session a
report containing such guidelines;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Consideration of guide­
lines for confidence-building measures".

97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984
4 7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session.
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 1 3, document A/S- 1 2/32, annex V. para. 4.
4 8 See A/CONF. 1 27/SR. l
49 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Supplement No. 42 (A/38/42): and ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement
No 42 !A/39/42).

70

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

F

H

REGIONAL DISARMAMENT

CONVENTION ON THE PROHIBITION OF THE USE OF
NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/1 00 F of 13 December 1982
and 38/73 J of 15 December 1983 on regional disarma­
ment,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 50
I . Requests the Secretary-General to submit a further
report to the General Assembly at its forty-second session
on the implementation of resolutions 37/100 F and 38/73
J;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Regional disarma­
ment: report of the Secretary-General".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984

G
FREEZE ON NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 37/100 A of 13 December 1982
and 38/73 B of 1 5 December 1983 concerning a freeze on
nuclear weapons,
Convinced that in this nuclear age lasting world peace
can be based only on the attainment of the goal of general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Further convinced that the highest priority objectives in
the field of disarmament have to be nuclear disarmament
and the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction,
Recognizing the urgent need to halt the arms race, par­
ticularly in nuclear weapons,
Recognizing further the urgent need for a negotiated
reduction of nuclear-weapon stockpiles leading to their
complete elimination,
Noting with deep concern that nuclear-weapon States
have not so far taken any action in response to the call
made in resolutions 37/100 A and 38/73 B,
I . Once again calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to
agree to a freeze on nuclear weapons, which would, inter
alia, provide for a simultaneQus total stoppage of any fur­
ther production of nuclear weapons and a complete cut-off
in the production of fissionable material for weapons pur­
poses;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Freeze on nuclear weap­
ons".
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984
so A/39/48S.

The General Assembly,
Alarmed by the threat to the survival of mankind and to
the life-sustaining system posed by nuclear weapons and
by their use, inherent in concepts of deterrence,
Conscious of an increased danger of nuclear war as a
result of the intensification of the nuclear-arms race and
the serious deterioration of the international situation,
Convinced that nuclear disarmament is essential for the
prevention of nuclear war and for the strengthening of
international peace and security,
Further convinced that a prohibition of the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons would be a step towards the
complete elimination of nuclear weapons leading to gen­
eral and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control,
Recalling that, in paragraph 58 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,33 it
is stated that all States should actively participate in efforts
to bring about conditions in international relations among
States in which a code of peaceful conduct of nations in
international affairs could be agreed upon and which
would preclude the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that the use of nuclear weapons would be a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and a crime
against humanity, as declared in its resolutions 1653 (XVI)
of 24 November 1961, 33/71 B of 1 4 December 1978, 34/
83 G of 11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December
1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December 1981,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament,
during its session in 1984, was not able to undertake nego­
tiations with a view to achieving agreement on an interna­
tional convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons under any circumstances, taking as a
basis the text annexed to General Assembly resolution 38/
73 G of 15 December 1983,
I . Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarma­
ment to commence negotiations, as a matter of priority, in
order to achieve agreement on an international convention
prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
under any circumstances, taking as a basis the text of the
draft Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear
Weapons annexed to the present resolution;
2. Further requests the Conference on Disarmament to
report to the General Assembly at its fortieth session on
the results of those negotiations.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1 984
ANNEX
Draft Convention on the Prohibition of the Use
of Nuclear Weapons
The States Parties to this Convention,
Alarmed by the threat to the very survival of mankind posed by the exis­

tence of nuclear weapons.
Convinced that any use of nuclear weapons constitutes a violation of the
Chaner of the United Nations and a crime against humanity,
Convinced that this Convention would be a step towards the complete
elimination of nuclear weapons leading to general and complete disarma­
ment under strict and effective international control,
Determined to continue negotiations for the achievement of this goal,

III.

71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Have agreed as follows:

J

Article I
The States Parties to this Convention solemnly undertake not to use or
threaten to use nuclear weapons under any circumstances.

Article 2
This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.

Article 3
I. This Convention shall be open to all States for signature. Any State
which does not sign the Convention before its entry into force in accor­
dance with paragraph 3 of this article may accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by signatory States.
Instruments of ratification or accession shall be deposited with the Secre­
tary-General of the United Nations.
3. This Convention shall enter into force on the deposit of instruments
of ratification by twenty-five Governments, including the Governments of
the five nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with paragraph 2 of this arti­
cle.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are depos­
ited after the entry into force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on
the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or accession.

5. The depositary shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding
States of the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument
of ratification or accession and the date of the entry into force of this Con­
vention, as well as of the receipt of other notices.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the depositary in accordance
with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.

Article 4
This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Rus­
sian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall send duly certified cop­
ies thereof to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.
In witness whereof, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by
their respective Governments, have signed this Convention, opened for
signature at --- on the ___ day of___ one thousand nine
hundred and ___ .

I
CONVENING OF THE THIRD SPECIAL SESSION OF THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY DEVOTED TO DISARMAMENT

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the decision adopted at its twelfth spe­
cial session, the second special session devoted to disarma­
ment, concerning the convening of the third special session
devoted to disarmament, 5 1
Recalling its resolution 38/73 I of 15 December 1983 in
which it decided that the third special session devoted to
disarmament should be held not later than 1988,
Desiring to contribute to the furthering and broadening
of positive processes initiated through the laying down of
the foundations of an international disarmament strategy
at its tenth special session, the first special session devoted
to disarmament,
Decides to set, at its fortieth session, the date of the third
special session of the General Assembly devoted to dis­
armament and to establish the Preparatory Committee for
the third special session.
97th plenary meeting
12 December / 984
51 Official Records of the General A ssembly. Twelfth Special Sessum.
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 1 3 , document A/S- 1 2/32, para. 66.
5 2 Ibid., document A/S- 1 2/32, annex V.

WORLD DISARMAMENT CAMPAIGN

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in paragraph 15 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, 33
the first special session devoted to disarmament, it
declared that it was essential that not only Governments
but also the peoples of the world recognize and understand
the dangers in the present situation and stressed that in
order that an international conscience might develop and
that world public opinion might exercise a positive influ­
ence, the United Nations should increase the dissemina­
tion of information on the armaments race and disarma­
ment with the full co-operation of Member States,
Recalling with satisfaction that the World Disarmament
Campaign, 30 whose first three fundamental objectives are
to inform, to educate and to create understanding and
public support for the objectives of the United Nations in
the field of arms limitation and disarmament, was sol­
emnly launched by unanimous decision of the General
Assembly on 7 June 1982 at the opening meeting of the
Assembly's twelfth special session, the second special ses­
sion devoted to disarmament,
Recalling also its resolutions 37/100 I of 13 December
1982 and 38/73 D of 15 December 1983 on the imple­
mentation of the Campaign,
Taking fully into account the objectives, contents,
modalities and financial implications of the Campaign
defined by the General Assembly at its twelfth special ses­
sion, 52
Reaffirming its conviction that the Campaign should be
carried out under the auspices of the United Nations in all
parts of the world in a balanced, positive and objective
manner and that the universality of the Campaign should
be guaranteed by the co-operation and participation of all
States and the widest possible diffusion of information
relating to it,
Recognizing that, with a view to strengthening the objec­
tive of universality and giving the Campaign the confi­
dence and continuity necessary to ensure its maximum
effectiveness, there may be a need for arrangements at the
regional level, making it possible to develop initiatives,
discuss concepts and take specific action in order to pro­
mote the objectives of the Campaign with the participa­
tion of the countries of the region concerned,
Recalling its resolution 37 / 100 F of 13 December 1982
on regional disarmament,
Having examined the reports of the Secretary-General of
12 September 198450 on regional disarmament and of 3
October 198432 on the World Disarmament Campaign,
Taking note of the Lome Peace Message, adopted by the
National Seminar on Peace and Disarmament, held from
6 to 9 August 1984,5 3
Convinced that the implementation of the recommenda­
tions contained in the aforementioned Peace Message
would contribute significantly to the effective promotion
of the objectives of the Campaign,
Desiring to make the best possible use of the contribu­
tions that have been or may be made by Member States in
the form of local or non-convertible currency and also of
other types of material assistance in the countries or
regions concerned, in order to attain the objectives of the
Campaign in specific countries or regions,
5 3 A/39 '529. annex.

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

72

Emphasizing the need for maximum economy and max­
imum results in the administration of the Campaign,
Recognizing the potential beneficial effects in terms of
results, efficiency and economy in the use of field offices to
carry out all regional or local activities in the context of the
programme of activities of the Campaign,
Reaffirming that the United Nations should furnish the
informational material and should in general co-ordinate
the implementation of the Campaign and that the Depart­
ment of Disarmament Affairs of the Secretariat should
supervise and centralize such co-ordination,
A ware of the specific needs of developing countries with
regard to programmes of information, research and train­
ing in the fields of arms limitation and disarmament,
1 . Requests the Secretary-General to provide assis­
tance to such Member States in the regions concerned as
may request it with a view to establishing regional and
institutional arrangements for the implementation of the
World Disarmament Campaign, on the basis of existing
resources and of voluntary contributions which Member
States may make to that end;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Gen­
eral Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation
of the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984

K
DISARMAMENT AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned over the sharp deterioration in world
affairs characterized by the continued recourse to the use
of force, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
and the escalation of the arms race, particularly in new and
more destructive nuclear weapons, adding to their quan­
tity and quality,
Concerned also over the vast expenditure, amounting to
many billions of dollars, in escalation of the arms race
while millions are dying from famine this year,
Bearing in mind that under Article 26 of the Charter the
Security Council shall be responsible for formulating plans
for the establishment of a system for the regulation of
armaments,
_Considering that in these circumstances, coinciding as
they do with the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations, the international community must cross the
threshold and take a historical decision to bring the arms
race, particularly the nuclear-arms race, to a halt before it
is too late,
I . Ca/ls upon the Security Council to hold a series of
meetings devoted to the consideration of the escalating
arms race - particularly the nuclear-arms race - with a
view to initiating due procedures, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, for bringing it to a halt;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
97th plenary meeting
12 December 1984
54 Resolution S- 1 0/2, para. 89.
55 See Offic,a/ Records of the (ienera/ Assemhly, Twelfth Spena/ Ses.1 1011.
Annexes, agenda items 9 to 1 3 , document AiS- 1 2/32. para. 62

39/64. Reduction of military budgets
A
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned about the ever-spiralling arms race
and growing military expenditures, which constitute a
heavy burden for the economies of all nations and have
extremely harmful effects on world peace and security,
Reaffirming once again the provisions of the Final Doc­
ument of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assem­
bly, the first special session devoted to disarmament.
according to which the gradual reduction of military budg­
ets on a mutually agreed basis, for example, in absolute
figures or in terms of percentage, particularly by nuclear­
weapon States and other militarily significant States.
would contribute to curbing the arms race and would
increase the possibilities for the reallocation of resources
now being used for military purposes to economic and
social development, particularly for the benefit of the
developing countries, 54
Convinced that the freezing and reduction of military
budgets would have favourable consequences on the world
economic and financial situation and might facilitate
efforts made to increase international assistance for the
developing countries,
Recalling that at its twelfth special session, the second
special session devoted to disarmament, all Member States
unanimously and categorically reaffirmed the validity of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session, as well
as their solemn commitment to it, 55
Recalling also that, in the Declaration of the 1980s as
the Second United Nations Disarmament Decade, it is
provided that during this period renewed efforts should be
made to reach agreement on the reduction of military
expenditures and the reallocation of resources thus saved
to economic and social development, especially for the
benefit of developing countries, 56
Reca//ingfurther the provisions of its resolution 34/83 F
of 11 December I 979, reaffirmed in its resolutions 351 1 42
A of 12 December 1980, 36/82 A of 9 December 1 981.
37/95 A of 13 December 1982 and 38/1 84 A of 20
December 1983, in which it considered that a new impetus
should be given to the endeavours to achieve agreements
to freeze, reduce or otherwise restrain, in a balanced man­
ner, military expenditure, including adequate measures of
verification satisfactory to all parties concerned,
A ware of the various proposals submitted by Member
States and of the activities carried out so far within the
framework of the United Nations in the field of the reduc­
tion of military budgets,
Convinced that identification and elaboration of the
principles which should govern further actions of States in
freezing and reducing military budgets could contribute to
harmonizing the views of States and create confidence
among them conducive to achieving international agree­
ments in the reduction of military budgets,
Considering that the identification and elaboration of
the principles which should govern further actions of
States in freezing and reducing military budgets and the
other current activities within the framework of the
United Nations related to the question of the reduction of
military budgets should be regarded as having the funda­
mental objective of reaching international agreements on
the reduction of military expenditures,
<o See resolution 35/40. annex. para . 1 5 .
