UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3303
4 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRD MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 4 November 1993, at 11.30 a.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. LADSOUS
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. KHAN
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Mr. RICHARDSON
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Ms. TRUJILLO

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-87074 (E)

S/PV.3303
2
The meeting was called to order at 12.10 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN CAMBODIA
FURTHER REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF SECURITY
COUNCIL RESOLUTION 745 (1992) (S/26529)
FURTHER REPORTS OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL PURSUANT TO PARAGRAPH 7 OF
RESOLUTION 840 (1993) (S/26546, S/26649 AND ADD.1)
LETTER DATED 28 OCTOBER 1993 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED TO THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL (S/26675)
The PRESIDENT:

In accordance with the decisions taken at the 3287th

meeting, I invite the representative of Cambodia to take a place at the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Australia and Thailand to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ouch Borith (Cambodia) took a place
at the Council table; Mr. Butler (Australia) and Mr. Soonsiri (Thailand) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now resume its consideration

of the item on its agenda.
It will be recalled that the Security Council began its consideration of
the item at the 3287th meeting, on 5 October 1993, when it heard statements by
Cambodia and a number of other speakers.
In addition to the further report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 745 (1992), contained in document
S/26529, members of the Council have before them the further reports of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 840 (1993), documents
S/26546 and S/26649 and Add.1, as well as document S/26675, which contains the
text of a letter dated 28 October 1993 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26687, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.
I should like to draw members’ attention to the following revision to be
made to draft resolution S/26687 in its provisional form.

In operative

paragraph 13, after the words "for a period", the following words should be
added:

"to be agreed upon by the Secretary-General and the Government of

Cambodia".

S/PV.3303
3
(The President)
It is my understanding that the Security Council is ready to proceed to the
vote on the draft resolution before it, as orally revised in its provisional
form.
If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution,

as orally revised in its provisional form, has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 880 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.
Mr. LADSOUS (France) (interpretation from French):

At the outset, I

should like to convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Council and to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil, for the able manner in which he conducted our
work last month.
My delegation - which at the beginning of the Council’s consideration of
this item and in the presence of the two Prime Ministers of that country,
expressed its satisfaction at the successful implementation by the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) of the Paris Agreements on
Cambodia

- welcomes the adoption of this resolution, which marks a transition

from the end of the UNTAC mandate to the return of Cambodia’s full autonomy.
The role of the United Nations in that independent and sovereign country is
returning to its original function.
development activities.

Emphasis should henceforth be on

My delegation expressed its support for maintaining 20

United Nations liaison officers for a period of six months, in response to the
request of the Cambodian Government, as a symbol of the continued interest of
the international community in the process of consolidating peace in that
country and in conformity with the ideas put forward by the Secretary-General in
his "An Agenda for Peace".

France, which welcomed in early September the

International Committee on Reconstruction of Cambodia and committed itself to
significant bilateral cooperation with that country, stresses the vital
importance of continuing the United Nations cooperation programmes in order to

S/PV.3303
4
(Mr. Ladsous, France)
contribute - as provided in the fourth instrument of the Paris Agreements - to
the development and reconstruction of Cambodia.

My country has also noted with

satisfaction the request of the Cambodian Government for a United Nations human
rights presence, and in that connection welcomes the establishment of a Centre
for Human Rights in Phnom Penh.
France welcomed the accession to power of the new Cambodian Government,
demonstrating the success of the national reconciliation process, and assure it
of our country’s continuing support in the task of consolidating peace and
rebuilding its country.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of France for his kind

words addressed to me.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

Let me congratulate you,

Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.

We are looking

forward to your help this month in many of our difficult projects.

I should

also very much like to thank Ambassador Sardenberg for his leadership last
month.
Cambodia has been a shining example of how a United Nations peace-keeping
operation can help restore and rebuild a shattered country.

The United Nations

can take great pride in the role it has played in helping to promote peace,
democracy and national reconciliation in Cambodia.

Free and fair elections have

been held, a new Constitution promulgated and a new Government formed.
In numerous other ways, the United Nations has also played a crucial role
in helping with the reconstruction of the country.

Hundreds of thousands of

refugees have been resettled in their homeland and assisted in starting a new
life.

S/PV.3303
5
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
The United Nations has been active in clearing mines, promoting human
rights, training personnel, rebuilding institutions and rehabilitating the
country’s infrastructure.
However, despite the tremendous progress that has been made, a great deal
remains to be done.

As an old proverb relates, for the want of a nail,

ultimately a kingdom was lost.

After the enormous investment that the

international community has made in Cambodia, it would be a shame and a tragedy
if all the progress that has been achieved were jeopardized by a short-sighted
reluctance to provide appropriate support to the United Nations programmes
needed in Cambodia.
In this regard, we are pleased that this resolution establishes a team of
military liaison officers to report on matters affecting security and deal with
residual military matters relating to the Paris Agreements.

The international

community must remain firmly committed to helping promote peace and security in
Cambodia, particularly in view of the continuing threat posed by the
Khmer Rouge.
The length of time that the military liaison officers should remain depends
on how long they are wanted and needed by the Cambodians.

Thus, we believe that

the international community must be prepared to re-examine and, if necessary and
so requested by the Cambodian Government, to renew this mission after six
months.
The United States is also pleased that in this resolution the SecretaryGeneral is invited to appoint a person to coordinate the United Nations role in
Cambodia.

This is an extremely important task, and we strongly believe that the

position requires a capable and widely experienced individual of considerable
personal and political stature.
As is the case with the military observers, we believe that the tenure of
this office should correspond to the needs on the ground rather than to any
arbitrary time limit.
Finally, the United States strongly endorses the provisions in the
resolution calling on Member States and the United Nations to support Cambodia
in the fields of de-mining, human rights and national reconciliation and
rehabilitation.
The Cambodian people, supported by the international community, have
achieved a great deal through their courage and sacrifice.

Let us all continue

to contribute to ensuring that these sacrifices will not have been in vain and
that Cambodia can look forward to a secure and prosperous future.

S/PV.3303
6

The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United States of

America for her kind words addressed to me.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

I wish to express to you, Mr. President, my

warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council, and
I am confident that your broad diplomatic experience and legal background will
greatly facilitate our work throughout this month.
I should also like to express our thanks to Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil
for his excellent leadership and guidance during the month of October.
The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) has been
successful in fulfilling its mandate, and indeed its peace-keeping efforts and
its contributions to the nation-building process in Cambodia are unprecedented
in the history of the United Nations.

The success of UNTAC demonstrates that,

in this post-cold-war era, the United Nations has a vital role to play in
restoring peace and security in regions of conflict, and the experience derived
from this operation has provided the Organization with useful lessons and
valuable insights into how the effectiveness of peace-keeping operations might
be attained.
Although UNTAC has completed its mission, the reconstruction of Cambodia
has only just begun.

While this is a process to be carried out primarily by the

Cambodian people themselves, it will require the full support and commitment of
the international community until sound financial and institutional bases for
such efforts are developed within Cambodia.

Thus I welcome the intention of the

International Monetary Fund to help resolve the debt problem in Cambodia.
In June 1992, the Government of Japan organized, in Tokyo, the Ministerial
Conference on the Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Cambodia, and, in
September this year, it hosted the International Committee on Reconstruction of
Cambodia.

This coming spring, it plans to hold the second session of the

Committee on Reconstruction in Tokyo, and I hope that many States Members of the
United Nations and relevant multilateral financial organizations will be able to
continue to provide the necessary financial and technical assistance, especially
fast disbursement assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Cambodia.
This support is essential to strengthening the political and social
stability of the country, and it will ensure that the progress made thus far in
restoring peace and towards national reconciliation in Cambodia is irreversible.
The PRESIDENT:
addressed to me.

I thank the representative of Japan for his kind words

S/PV.3303
7

Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

Mr. President,

first of all, I wish to join my colleagues in congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

The

Chinese delegation will actively cooperate with you with confidence that your
remarkable talent and rich experience will provide excellent guidance for our
work this month.
I should also like to express my thanks and admiration to Ambassador
Sardenberg of Brazil for his outstanding performance in guiding the work of the
Council last month.
The Chinese Government and people have all along supported the Cambodian
people in their just struggle to safeguard their sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity, and their unswerving efforts for national reconciliation
and unity.

We also hold that the Cambodian question should be settled by the

Cambodian people themselves. In its activities in Cambodia, the United Nations
should first and foremost fully solicit and respect the opinions of
King Sihanouk and the Cambodian Government.

The Chinese delegation sincerely

hopes that, under the leadership of King Sihanouk and the Cambodian Government,
the Cambodian people will achieve greater success in establishing a country that
has independence, peace, unity, territorial integrity and prosperity.
In the course of the national rehabilitation and reconstruction in
Cambodia, we are in favour of the provision by the United Nations and the
international community of necessary assistance, at the request of the Cambodian
Government, to facilitate its efforts in preserving sovereignty and lasting
peace and in promoting national reconstruction and economic development.

China

has made, and will continue to make, its own contribution to this end.
The Chinese Government is in favour of the sending by the United Nations,
at the request of the Cambodian Government and on the recommendation of the
Secretary-General, of a team of 20 military liaison officers, and of the United
Nations extending the withdrawal period of the Cambodia Mine Action Centre
(CMAC) mine clearance and training unit and of elements of the military police
and medical unit of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia
(UNTAC) .
UNTAC has satisfactorily fulfilled the mission entrusted to it by the
Security Council, and the extension of the withdrawal period for some of its
units and their members is simply for the purpose of ensuring an efficient
transfer of its work and the smooth implementation of the withdrawal plan.

We

S/PV.3303
8
(Mr. LI Zhaoxing, China)
hope that the measures authorized by the Council today will, as indicated by the
Secretary-General, help build up the confidence of the Cambodian people and
further ease the tension, thus contributing to the improvement of the security
situation in Cambodia.
The PRESIDENT:
addressed to me.

I thank the representative of China for his kind words

S/PV.3303
9

Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian):

It

is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the delegation of the Russian Federation, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month.

You will have our full cooperation in respect of

all questions with which the Council has to deal.
I should like also to express our admiration and gratitude to your
predecessor as President - Ambassador Sardenberg, the Permanent Representative
of Brazil - for his extremely effective guidance of the Council’s work during
the month of October.
The delegation of the Russian Federation believes that the adoption of
today’s resolution on Cambodia is highly symbolic, as it is a compelling
reaffirmation of the dedication of the international community, as represented
by the United Nations, to the process of consolidating peace in Cambodia.
As was emphasized at the Security Council’s meeting on
5 October, in which the representatives of the Royal Government of Cambodia the First Prime Minister, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, and the Second Prime
Minister, Mr. Hun Sen - took part, the successful conclusion of the operation in
Cambodia was an important example of the political settlement of a regional
conflict, with the active participation of the United Nations, and was a major
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are convinced that the Cambodian operation, which demonstrates the
importance of following clearly a policy designed to achieve national
reconciliation that embraces all parties to a conflict and of common action
towards achieving that goal, merits thorough consideration and is capable of
being used effectively as an example in the case of other United Nations
operations.
We believe that it is of the greatest importance that the attention paid by
the international community to the problem of Cambodia should not wane now that
life in that country, which for many years has been tormented by conflict, is
returning to normal.
Although we are fully aware of the fact that responsibility for the future
of freedom and democracy in Cambodia rests, first and foremost, on the shoulders
of the Cambodians themselves, we believe that the United Nations cannot leave
the Cambodian people alone with its problems.

It was for precisely that reason

that, in his statement to the General Assembly at its current session, the
Russian Federation’s Minister for Foreign Affairs emphasized the readiness of

S/PV.3303
10
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
our country, together with other members of the international community, to
assist the Cambodians in the re-establishment of their country.

We are ready to

continue mutually beneficial cooperation in the interest of the rebirth of
Cambodian society.

Here, I refer to multilateral efforts through the United

Nations and to efforts through bilateral channels.
Only a few days ago - on 23 October - we marked the second anniversary of
the signing of the Paris Agreements, which represented the culmination of the
International Conference on Cambodia.

We are pleased to note today that the

objectives enshrined in those Agreements have been achieved.
It is the intention of the Russian Federation to give the closest possible
attention to the provision of continuous support and assistance by the
international community with a view to strengthening the peace process and the
process of democracy and promoting development in Cambodia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the Russian Federation

for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

I should like to convey to you, Sir, the

congratulations of the delegation of New Zealand on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current month.
I wish also to thank Ambassador Sardenberg for his guidance of the Council
during the month of October.
New Zealand warmly welcomes the adoption of today’s resolution.
resolution serves two very important purposes.

The

First, it marks the culmination

of the successful United Nations-sponsored process of re-establishing peace and
democratic government in Cambodia.

Secondly, it sends an important signal that

the international community remains committed to Cambodia and to its ongoing
needs and is prepared to make appropriate provision for ongoing assistance in
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Cambodia.
The resolution adopted today has been a long time in preparation.

It was

the subject of widespread consultations, including consultations with the
representatives of the Cambodian Government and of other countries of the
region, over the past couple of months.

We consider that process to have been

very important and to have been of great benefit to Council members in their
consideration of this important issue.
New Zealand is pleased to support the elements of the resolution that
relate to the transitional period following the final withdrawal of the United

S/PV.3303
11
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC).

In particular, we consider

the prominence given to the issue of mine clearing to be especially appropriate.
The presence of literally millions of mines throughout the countryside of
Cambodia poses a grave and ongoing threat to the Cambodian people.

It is

essential, therefore, that the successful operations established under the
Cambodia Mine Action Centre (CMAC) continue.

Accordingly, we welcome the

decision to extend the period for the withdrawal of the Mine Clearance and
Training Unit of UNTAC.

New Zealand, for its part, will give favourable

consideration to the provision of further technical experts and funding to
support CMAC after the final withdrawal of UNTAC.
The establishment of the Human Rights Centre in Cambodia, with United
Nations assistance, is also a matter of real satisfaction to New Zealand.
New Zealand also supports the decision to establish, in response to the
request from the Cambodian Government, a team of 20 military liaison officers
for a period of six months following the withdrawal of UNTAC.

We consider that

the presence of these officers will be an important symbol of the ongoing United
Nations commitment to peace and stability in Cambodia.
Finally, with the conclusion of the UNTAC mandate, most of the elements of
the United Nations presence will move out of the Security Council’s immediate
purview and will come under the Secretary-General and the various agencies of
the United Nations system.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s intention to appoint, in consultation
with the Cambodian Government, a person of appropriate standing to lead the
United Nations presence in Cambodia in the post-UNTAC period.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of New Zealand for his kind

words addressed to me.
Mr. YAÑEZ-BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):

Allow me at

the outset, Sir, to express my delegation’s satisfaction at your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council.
will have our full cooperation.

In the discharge of your duties, you

We are certain that, with your abilities and

professionalism, you will ensure that the Council’s work during the current
month is flawless.
I should like also to express my delegation’s thanks and appreciation to
Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil for his outstanding work as President during the
month of October.

S/PV.3303
12
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
This is an exceptional occasion in the annals of the United Nations and of
the Security Council.

It is not every day that we have an opportunity to adopt

a resolution that brings to fruition - successfully - a United Nations operation
of the importance and complexity that the one in Cambodia has revealed over the
years.

We feel that that success is due to a combination of circumstances.

First, we had the agreement of the parties, as enshrined in the Paris
Agreements.

Then, despite some difficulties and setbacks, we had the

cooperation of those parties and - even more important - the extraordinary
cooperation of the whole Cambodian people in the democratic elections that were
held there.
Secondly, we must emphasize the extraordinary roles played by
His Majesty King Norodom Sihanouk, to whom we pay a well-deserved tribute, and
by the democratically elected leaders in Cambodia - specifically, Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, the First Prime Minister, and Mr. Hun Sen, the Second Prime Minister,
whom we welcomed to this Chamber about a month ago.

S/PV.3303
13
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
Finally, this operation has been successful thanks to the resolute,
determined, consistent support of the international community, which at every
stage has backed the actions of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Mr. Akashi, to whom I would again like to express our thanks and
our congratulations.
The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) will soon be
able to leave Cambodia with the satisfaction of a job well done, providing an
example of what a comprehensive peace-keeping operation should be.

With this

objective achieved, it is now necessary to pursue peace-building, and this is a
good example of what the Secretary-General, in his report "An Agenda for Peace"
(A/47/277), has referred to as the concept of post-conflict peace-building.
That is the aim of the resolution we have adopted today, in which - in keeping
with what is proposed in the Secretary-General’s reports - the Security Council
adopts a series of measures to facilitate the transition from the phase of
peace-keeping through UNTAC to a phase that leads us - in an appropriate way, we
hope - to a normal phase of cooperation between the United Nations and a fully
sovereign Member State of the United Nations.
During this period, which I have described earlier as a kind of
convalescence, the Cambodian people need to know that they can continue to rely
on the help and cooperation of the international community.

To that end, a

series of transitional measures are being set up, always in agreement with the
Royal Government of Cambodia, in order to provide continued assistance with
de-mining, liaison officers in the military sphere, and assistance in
humanitarian and human rights work, as well as in the promotion of the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country.
Consequently, we welcome the proposal of the Secretary-General, in
conformity with the desires of the Cambodian Government, to appoint a
coordinator for United Nations activities in Cambodia during this particularly
sensitive period.
From now on, we can consider that the Security Council has fulfilled its
tasks.

From now on the Secretary-General and the organizations of the United

Nations system must give their full cooperation and assistance to the Cambodian
people, and it will be other major organs of the system - the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council - that will be supervising, supporting and
directing this very important work of peace-building and of post-conflict

S/PV.3303
14
(Mr. Yañez Barnuevo, Spain)
rebuilding of the country.

We hope that the Security Council will not have to

address the situation in Cambodia again, for that would be the best sign that
the Cambodian people had found itself once more on the road to peace, national
reconstruction and national reconciliation.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Spain for the kind words

he addressed to me.
I now call on the representative of Cambodia, who wishes to make a
statement.
Mr. OUCH (Cambodia) (interpretation from French):

Mr. President,

allow me first of all to express to you my warmest gratitude for allowing me to
speak at this formal meeting.

I should like to take advantage of this

opportunity, on behalf of the Government of the Kingdom of Cambodia and the
entire Kampuchean people, once again to extend our profound gratitude to
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the Secretary-General of the United Nations; to his
Special Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi; to the Security Council; and to the
international community, for the timely and impartial assistance that they have
given to the suffering Kampuchean people.
The people of Cambodia, the Royal Government of Cambodia, under the
enlightened guidance of His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Sihanouk, King of
Cambodia, with the valuable assistance of the international community, has gone
down a difficult but glorious path to reach its ultimate objective of national
reconciliation, peace and reconstruction of the country.
I am firmly convinced that the resolution adopted today will assist still
further the consolidation of the peace process and of national reconstruction
and the maintenance of peace, not only for Cambodia but also for the Asian
region and for the entire world.
The PRESIDENT:

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
