S/PV.8759

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8759th meeting

Tuesday, 15 September 2020, 12.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Cedano
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Van Shalkwyk
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2020/809)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-23666 (E)
*2023666*

S/PV.8759

The situation in Afghanistan

sides involved, especially our Qatari friends for their
facilitation of the first round of negotiations.

The meeting was called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2020/809)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Afghanistan to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2020/903, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Germany and Indonesia.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2020/809, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Niger, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
South Africa, Tunisia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Viet Nam
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2543 (2020).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, we would
like to welcome the start of the Afghanistan peace
negotiations in Doha last Saturday. It is a major
achievement, which we have all been awaiting for many
years. We would like to thank and congratulate all
2/7

15/09/2020

Now that the peace negotiations have started, it is
indeed in Afghan hands to define the future path of the
country, just as it should be. The United Nations and
regional and international partners will do their part to
support and facilitate this process. At the same time, it
is essential to send a signal of international unity and
support to the negotiating parties and to all Afghanistan.
In this respect, we welcome today’s unanimity — all 15
countries voting in favour of resolution 2543 (2020).
Germany, as the co-penholder in the Security
Council, is the second-largest donor and the secondlargest troop-contributor but, as a close friend of
Afghanistan’s for many decades, also remains firmly
committed to finally achieving peace. The economic,
social, political and development gains made in the
past two decades, including in the field of human
rights, especially the rights of women, children and
marginalized groups, must be protected and built
upon. Together with our friends from Qatar, Norway,
Uzbekistan and our co-penholder, Indonesia, we will do
our best to facilitate future rounds in the Afghanistan
peace negotiations.
I have said it many times, and I will say it
again — the violence must stop now, in particular now
that the peace negotiations have started. There has to be
a sustainable ceasefire. The lives of innocent civilians,
among them many women and children, must no longer
be at risk. We particularly condemn the recent attack
targeted at the Vice-President of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan, which claimed the lives of at least 10
people. This is an unacceptable assault against the
constitutional bodies of the Republic. But, of course,
any attack targeting civilians or hospital, medical and
humanitarian personnel and facilities is unacceptable.
Our thoughts and prayers are with those who lost family
members and loved ones over the past month.
As all members know, sustainable peace can be
achieved only through an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned
peace process that includes all relevant stakeholders,
including women. Women must be equally and
meaningfully represented at all levels and all stages
of the peace process. In this respect, I must say
that it is worrisome to see from the pictures of the
peace negotiations that there is not a single woman
participating in the process on the Taliban side.
20-23666

15/09/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

The text of today’s resolution is balanced and strong
and the result of very hard collective work by all of us.
It welcomes the start of inclusive Afghanistan peace
negotiations. It includes strengthened references to the
rights of women, youth and minorities, as agreed upon
in last year’s resolution 2489 (2019). It underlines the
importance of international and regional cooperation.
It lays out the threat posed by the coronavirus disease
and that the international community must assist
Afghanistan in tackling the pandemic. It makes us
aware of the terrorist threats and of the important goal
of going after the narcotics trade. Finally, and most
important, the resolution gives the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan a strong mandate
for another crucial year.
As co-penholders, Indonesia and Germany
invested a lot into this resolution. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank my neighbour, Mr. Dian
Triansyah Djani, and the Indonesian delegation for the
wonderful and very good, close cooperation during the
past 20 months.
We have invested a great deal in previous resolutions,
press statements and other Council products. We would
like to take this opportunity to thank all present for
the trust they have placed in us. We will have another
meeting on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in December, but this is presumably the
last time that we will be adopting a resolution together.
It is really a joint effort, and we should be proud of it.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): After hearing the statement
made by my dear brother Christoph Heusgen, it seems
that we are already leaving the Council.
But on a more serious note, I would also like to echo
my fellow co-penholder, Christoph from Germany,
as Indonesia expresses its sincere appreciation to all
members of the Council for their support on resolution
2543 (2020), on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), as well as the support extended to us
as co-penholders. The unanimous adoption of the
resolution renewing UNAMA’s mandate sends a strong
signal of support to the people of Afghanistan from the
Security Council and the international community. The
spirit of cooperation and solidarity shown during the
negotiations on the resolution was profound. We take
pride in this collective effort and the wisdom of the
Council, which has resulted in a comprehensive, robust
and timely renewal of the mandate of UNAMA.

S/PV. 8759

Indeed, this is a critical moment in history. The
peace negotiations started on 12 September in Doha.
It is the start of a process that Indonesia welcomes
with the fervent hope that it will lead to the fulfilment
of the long-awaited aspiration of all Afghans to a
peaceful, prosperous and united homeland. We wish
the negotiators and interlocutors the very best in their
work.
As Afghanistan embarks on this new journey
towards reconciliation and peace, the role of UNAMA
becomes even more important. A number of aspects
of the mandate of UNAMA have been laid out in the
resolution. They all are vital, and hence continued
attention to and support for them will promote conducive
conditions in the country and foster the flow of peace
negotiations. These range, among other things, from
supporting the Government of Afghanistan on future
elections and electoral reform processes to supporting
regional cooperation for peace and stability, as well as
from supporting the Government on the protection and
promotion of human rights, including strengthening
safeguards for children and women, to supporting the
Government in undertaking governance reforms and
development. UNAMA’s contribution will certainly be
essential.
We hope that the Council and other partners will
continue to accord befitting support to Afghanistan and
to UNAMA.
Indonesia is honoured to have been the
co-penholder along with my colleagues from Germany,
and, as a long-standing supporter of peace and wellbeing in Afghanistan, we will continue to do what we
can for our Afghan brothers and sisters, be it though
our multisectoral capacity-building and training
programmes or as a dialogue facilitator to assist them
in realizing the peaceful and prosperous country that
they fully deserve.
Our patience, our undertakings, our support and
our love for the people of Afghanistan have been a
vital part of our contribution during our terms in the
Security Council. Rest assured that Indonesia, during
the remainder of its term in the Council and beyond,
will continue to work tirelessly to garner support for
Afghanistan bilaterally and multilaterally. We are
convinced that the dawn of a new era in which all
people in Afghanistan can once again live in peace and
harmony is nearer than it appears.

20-236663/7

S/PV.8759

The situation in Afghanistan

Before closing, we would also like to commend
our co-penholder, Germany — I was not yet counting,
but he mentioned 20 months, which seems like a
short time — as well as the experts and the political
coordinators, whose contribution and support have
been invaluable.
I thank all the experts who have engaged in the
negotiations constructively, and, as I mentioned earlier,
the resolution before us has been made possible by the
combined and collective wisdom and efforts of the
Council.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to say
to the representatives of Indonesia and Germany that
sometimes it is when there is a stoppage in play that the
best goals are scored.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States commends the penholders for the cooperative
spirit in which they led this process and specifically
both the Ambassadors for their personal commitment
and their teams’ personal commitment to the future of
Afghanistan. We thank them both.
The United States remains deeply committed
to Afghanistan and to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lyons’ work and leadership at the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).
As the Mission sustains support to the people of
Afghanistan during this pivotal period in the country’s
history, and as the parties embark on peace negotiations
on a political solution to end the conflict, the United States
supports the objectives of promoting accountability in
Afghanistan and addressing Afghanistan’s legacy of
large-scale human rights violations and abuses.
Of course, we would have serious concerns if,
contrary to our understanding, UNAMA were to
interpret resolution 2543 (2020) to mandate UNAMA
to support the International Criminal Court’s (ICC)
illegitimate investigation against United States
personnel. The United States reiterates that it is not a
party to the Rome Statute and has consistently rejected
ICC assertions of jurisdiction over United States
personnel. We will not tolerate any attempts to subject
Americans to the ICC’s jurisdiction.
The United States remains committed to the
promotion of accountability, but the ICC and parties
to the Rome Statute must respect the decisions of the
United States and other countries and not subject their
4/7

15/09/2020

personnel to the ICC’s jurisdiction, consistent with the
respect of sovereign prerogatives.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2543
(2020), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and would like to thank Germany and Indonesia for the
efforts they made in their capacity as co-authors of the
resolution. The resolution sends a strong signal as the
peace talks begin.
First, the peace process can be sustainably
successful only if the democratic and human rights
accomplishments of the past 20 years are preserved,
including in particular the full, active and effective
participation of women in the process and the protection
of children.
Secondly, a reduction in the level of violence
is necessary for dialogue. The Taliban must honour
its commitments by publicly cutting their ties with
international terrorist organizations, in particular with
Al-Qaida, as they did with Da’esh, in line with the Doha
agreement of 29 February.
Thirdly, only a combat against the scourge of drug
trafficking coupled with efforts to support in parallel
the country’s economic and social development will
result in the sustainable development of Afghanistan.
Lastly, the peace negotiations, which France stands
ready to support, must take into account the interests
and rights of the victims of the conflict and of terrorism
in Afghanistan. These are the conditions that are
necessary for the lasting stabilization of the country
and for the security of one and all.
Mr. Auväärt (Estonia): Estonia welcomes the
adoption of the resolution on the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We thank co-penholders
Germany and Indonesia for their hard and efficient
work. We believe that resolution 2543 (2020) is well
balanced and highlights the Council’s priorities and
the most important aspects of UNAMA’s present and
future activities.
We welcome the start of intra-Afghan negotiations
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban in Doha on 12 September. This is a groundbreaking moment. It is now more important than ever
for the United Nations, including UNAMA, to fully
support Afghanistan so that the peace negotiations
20-23666

15/09/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

can lead to an inclusive political settlement. A stable,
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan is in all Afghans’
and our interests.
A global ceasefire has been repeatedly called for
by the entire international community, the SecretaryGeneral and the Council. We stress once again that
both parties must fulfil their commitments and work
towards ending the violence in order to save civilian
lives. Afghans need a comprehensive and permanent
ceasefire to accompany the intra-Afghan negotiations.
The fundamental freedoms and human rights
guaranteed by the Afghan Constitution, particularly
those of women and children, are inalienable and
should be of the highest priority on the agenda of the
intra-Afghan negotiations.
The meaningful participation of women and
minorities is important at all levels of decision-making.
The aim should be a country with economic development
and growth providing new opportunities for its citizens,
and where rights are upheld and women, children and
marginalized groups are protected.
Finally, considering the important times ahead
in Afghanistan, Estonia recognizes that UNAMA
has a crucial role to play in supporting Afghanistan’s
way towards peace and security. To that end, it is
important for UNAMA to work closely with all parties
of Afghanistan, the international community and other
international organizations, particularly the European
Union.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has unanimously adopted resolution
2543 (2020), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
which China very much welcomes. As Afghanistan’s
close neighbour, China supports UNAMA in carrying
out its mandated work and sincerely hopes that the war
and violence in Afghanistan will come to an end and the
country will soon achieve development and prosperity.
With intra-Afghan negotiations recently launched,
a major breakthrough was made in the Afghan peace
process. China calls for the parties to the peace talks
to adhere to the basic principles of Afghan leadership
and ownership. We hope that both parties can seize this
opportunity, demonstrate good faith, find an effective
political solution to the Afghan issue as soon as possible
and reach a broad and inclusive future arrangement.

S/PV. 8759

The withdrawal of foreign military forces should
be carried out in a responsible and orderly manner
so as to ensure a smooth transition of the situation in
Afghanistan and avert the emergence of a security
vacuum in the country, which would exacerbate
insecurity and have a spillover effect on neighbouring
countries. UNAMA and the Secretariat need to remain
seized of this matter and report to the Council in a timely
manner. All parties should continue to fight terrorism
in Afghanistan with determination and prevent the use
of Afghan territory for terrorist activities, while strictly
adhering to uniform standards throughout the process.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan cannot be
achieved without a solid socioeconomic foundation.
Integration, regional cooperation and connectivity
are the only way to strengthen the Afghan economy
and improve people’s livelihoods. In accordance with
its mandate, UNAMA should continue to promote
regional cooperation and interconnectivity, support
peaceful reconstruction in Afghanistan, strengthen
coordination and cooperation with regional partners
and help Afghanistan tackle long-term problems, such
as poverty and narcotics.
Through its promotion of the Belt and Road
Initiative, China remains committed to helping
Afghanistan forge closer trade and economic ties with
countries of the region, especially its neighbours. China
supports the Afghan Government in its continued fight
against the coronavirus disease, and endorses the
effective measures taken to ensure the safety and health
of UNAMA personnel.
Lastly, China hopes that the intra-Afghan process
will bear fruit and will continue to be a supporter,
mediator and facilitator of the peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan. In addition, China stands
ready to join the international community in making
unremitting efforts and active contributions to
advancing peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2543 (2020), on the situation in Afghanistan.
We commend the penholders and all members of the
Council for the close collaboration that led to this
result. Today’s resolution sends a strong and important
signal of the commitment of the Council to all parties
in Afghanistan at a critical time, given the start of
intra-Afghan negotiations last weekend.

20-236665/7

S/PV.8759

The situation in Afghanistan

In particular, we welcome the fact that the new
mandate strengthens the capacity of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to
report violations and abuses against children, which
will surely bolster the child protection efforts of all
parties. That is of great importance in the light of the
peace talks under way and the fact that, according to
United Nations reports, the conflict in Afghanistan is
the world’s most violent conflict for children.
We commend the launch of intra-Afghan dialogue
and call for an effective and permanent ceasefire that
will put an end to the intolerable violence against
civilians. We also remind all parties that any agreement
reached must protect the rights of all Afghans, including
women.
In conclusion, I reiterate Belgium’s support of
UNAMA and the Afghan people. The United Nations
must play a key role at this critical time for Afghanistan.
Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): The Dominican Republic welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2543 (2020) because it is a
balanced text that effectively supports the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We commend the penholders for their
excellent work throughout the negotiation process.
At a time when intra-Afghan talks have begun and
efforts for lasting peace in Afghanistan look promising,
it is important that UNAMA continue to play a key
role in maintaining and promoting the economic,
political and social achievements reached thus far. The
success of the peace process in Afghanistan requires
not only political will and the vigorous support of
the international community, but also the leadership
and representation of all sectors of Afghan society,
especially young people.
We reiterate our call for initiatives to eliminate
violence against women, the implementation of the
national action plan in support of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the protection of children’s rights. We hope that, in
a not-too-distant future, the provisions we unanimously
adopted in resolution 2535 (2020), on youth, peace and
security, can be reflected in UNAMA’s mandate.
In conclusion, only a strong resolution, like that
adopted today, can confirm our commitment to peace
in Afghanistan and recognize the sacrifices and
challenges that the entire personnel of UNAMA faces
on a daily basis.
6/7

15/09/2020

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2543 (2020). We
thank Indonesia and Germany, as well as Qatar for
facilitating the peace process. We hope that this is the
beginning of a phase of stability and prosperity for
Afghanistan. We also hope that the role of women and
the protection of children will be enhanced, and that
these will lead to our desired goals.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Afghanistan extends its
appreciation to the Security Council for the adoption
today of resolution 2543 (2020), extending the mandate
of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for another 12 months. The unanimous
adoption of the resolution sends a very clear, strong
and unequivocal message of the Council’s support for
Afghanistan at one of the most critical times in our
contemporary history.
Just a few days ago, the intra-Afghan negotiations
finally began in Doha. We convey our gratitude to our
friends and allies in facilitating the talks, especially
Qatar for hosting the first round. The negotiating teams
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban
sat down to discuss Afghanistan’s long-lasting desire
for peace. We are optimistic that these talks will help
bring an end to a very long period of conflict and result
in a dignified and sustainable peace that protects the
rights of all Afghan citizens, including women and
minorities, as reflected in our Constitution.
We thank the members of the Security Council
for highlighting in the mandate the importance of the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned element in our national
processes, especially the peace process. I would like
to express our gratitude for the Council’s emphasis
on the rights of women, youth and minorities, the
importance of protecting the economic, social, political
and development gains made in the last 19 years, and
an immediate reduction in violence that leads to a
comprehensive and lasting ceasefire.
The Council’s recognition of our Government’s
dedicated efforts aimed at addressing the coronavirus
disease pandemic, and the initiatives taken by the
Afghan President to respond to the immediate
humanitarian needs for those affected are of great
importance at a time when resources are extremely
limited. The Council’s acknowledgement of the brave
decision taken by the Government of Afghanistan
and its strong and commendable efforts towards
implementing confidence-building measures for peace
20-23666

15/09/2020

The situation in Afghanistan

and the start of the intra-Afghan negotiations is noted
with appreciation. Consistent with what I have said
in the Security Council before, the release of 5,000
Taliban prisoners was not a simple and easy decision
for the Government and the people of Afghanistan to
make, but we have accepted this difficult compromise
in order to achieve an end to violence and conflict.
The important role of regional partners, neighbours
and our international allies and friends, especially
the United Nations, is crucial in our peace talks and
in Afghanistan’s sustainable economic development.
Regional cooperation and connectivity are important
for Afghanistan’s prosperity and for fulfilling our vision
of being the central hub of Central and South Asia. Our
fight against narcotics requires a comprehensive and
consolidated approach, with the Afghan Government’s
leadership and ownership, and we know that any postpeace development strategy would be incomplete if this
shared challenge were not addressed.
Resolution 1401 (2002) initiated a strong
relationship between Afghanistan and the United
Nations, which has helped to bring us to this
culmination in our journey as a young democracy. This
collaboration has contributed to the consolidation of
our democracy, the strengthening of the rule of law and
the creation of stronger institutions that will help us to
continue our efforts aimed at achieving self-reliance
and sustainability.
At this time, allow me to also take a moment to
pay tribute to all the United Nations staff members
who have sacrificed their lives for our common dream
of building a peaceful and prosperous nation from the

S/PV. 8759

ground up. Our nation values their sacrifice, and we
will continue to build on their legacy.
Consistently when taking the floor at the Security
Council, I have spoken about the new Afghanistan — a
country that emerged from darkness two decades ago
and which is today being led by Afghans from different
segments of our society, including women and youth,
and which comprises a diversity of ethnic groups that
make up our rich and unique national identity. Through
its pursuit of peace, this new Afghanistan will demand
that our ideals be upheld and that our country become
a thriving nation, a leader and example in our region.
The new Afghanistan is no longer a dream, but
a reality built through the strength and resilience of
Afghans. We pledge to protect this reality during the
negotiations with the Taliban. Afghans want peace — a
peace that maintains the hard-won rights embodied in
our Constitution, a peace that provides freedoms and
opportunities to all Afghans, a peace that preserves
our inclusive and representative republic, our free and
energetic media, and our strong regard for the protection
and promotion of human rights.
Finally, I would like to express my very sincere
gratitude and appreciation for the invaluable hard
work of the delegations of Germany and Indonesia as
the co-penholders who led the Council towards the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2543 (2020) today. We
are grateful for them and for the collaborative spirit of
all members of the Security Council, who unanimously
supported the resolution. We look forward to continuing
to work together towards the fulfilment of our common
aspiration for peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

20-236667/7
