S/PRST/2001/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 July 2001
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4347th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 July 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 2 July 2001 on the activities of the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA) and the situation in the
Central African Republic (S/2001/660).
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, General Amadou Toumani Touré, for the mission he
conducted in Bangui from 9 June to 1 July 2001. It notes with satisfaction that
the mission has contributed to easing tensions in the Central African Republic.
“The Security Council welcomes the appointment of the new
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central African Republic. It
looks forward to his assuming the active leadership of BONUCA at an early
date.
“The Security Council reiterates its condemnation of the recent attempted
coup in the Central African Republic. It recognizes the importance of the
Central African Republic to subregional stability. It expresses its deep concern
at the precarious situation in the country and the persisting acts of violence, in
particular against certain ethnic groups. The Council notes that such a climate
is not conducive to encouraging the continuation of the return home of the
thousands of Central Africans that were displaced or took refuge in
neighbouring countries as a result of the events at the end of May. It calls upon
the Government of the Central African Republic to take urgent steps to bring
an end to all acts of violence.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the killing of the security
coordinator for the United Nations system in the Central African Republic. It
takes note of the condemnation of this act by the Central African authorities
and of their intention to carry out an investigation and urges them to bring
those responsible to justice.
“The Security Council calls for respect for human rights, national
reconciliation and political dialogue in the spirit of the 1998 National
Reconciliation Pact (S/1998/219, appendix).
01-46014 (E) 170701

*0146014*

S/PRST/2001/18

“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to submit to it by
30 September 2001 recommendations on how the United Nations might further
contribute to the recovery of the Central African Republic, paying particular
attention to the following questions:
(a) Strengthening BONUCA, in particular in areas such as human
rights monitoring, assistance to the judicial system and capacity-building, and
enhancing the effectiveness of its early-warning capacity;
(b) Exploring with the Government of the Central African Republic, in
cooperation with the relevant institutions, the provision of expertise in the area
of public administration and finances, in particular by making available
experts in such matters;
(c) The continued and improved restructuring of the Central African
armed forces and the implementation of an effective arms-collection
programme.
“The Security Council expresses its willingness to study, in cooperation
with the relevant institutions, particularly the International Monetary Fund and
World Bank, the recommendations of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council stresses that an enhanced international effort will
be necessary to help in the recovery of the Central African Republic. It urges
all States that made pledges at the special donor meeting in New York in May
2000 to fulfil them. It calls on the Bretton Woods institutions to take into
account the specific nature of the situation in order to conclude programmes
with the Central African authorities at an early date. The Council stresses the
crucial importance of poverty eradication, debt payment and payment of
arrears of salary for civil servants which requires in the long term heightened
efforts on the part of the Government of the Central African Republic in the
management of public finances and administration.
“The Security Council again recalls that responsibility for national
reconciliation, stability and the reconstruction of the country lies primarily
with the political leaders and the people of the Central African Republic. It
emphasizes in this regard that the full effectiveness of the assistance of the
international community depends on the implementation in parallel of
appropriate structural reforms.”

2
