54

General A8sembly-Twentieth Session

Noting the attitude of the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland that a
unilateral declaration of independence for Southern
Rhodesia would be an act of rebellion and that any
measure to give it effect would be an act of treason,
1. Condemns any attempt on the part of the Rhodesian authorities to seize independence by illegal means
in order to perpetuate minority rule in Southern
Rhodesia;
2. Declares that the perpetuation of such minority
rule would be incompatible with the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples proclaimed in
the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960;
3. Requests the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and all Member States not to
accept a declaration of independence for Southern Rhodesia by the present authorities, which would be in the
sole interest of the minority, and not to recognize any
authorities purporting to emerge therefrom;
4. Calls upon the United Kingdom to take all possible measures to prevent a unilateral declaration of
independence and, in the event of such a declaration, to
take all steps necessary to put an immediate end to the
rebellion, with a view to transferring power to a representative government in keeping with the aspirations
of the majority of the people;
5. Decides to keep the question of Southern Rhodesia under urgent and continuing review during the
twentieth session and to consider what further steps
may be necessary.
1357th plenary meeting,
12 October 1965.

2022 (XX). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to Southern Rhodesia, 1
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1747 (XVI) of 28 June 1962, 1760 (XVII)
of 31 October 1962, 1883 (XVIII) of 14 October
1963, 1889 (XVIII) of 6 November 1963, 1956
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and 2012 (XX) of
12 October 1965, the resolutions adopted by the Special
Committee on 22 April 1965 2 and 28 May 1965,3 and
Security Council resolution 202 (1965) of 6 May 1965,
Considering that the administering Power has not implemented the above resolutions and that no constitutional progress has been made,
Noting that the increasing co-operation between the
authorities of Southern Rhodesia, South Africa and
Portugal is designed to perpetuate racist minority rule
in southern Africa and constitutes a threat to freedom,
peace and security in Africa,
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I) (A/5800/Rev.1), chapter
III; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter III.
2 lbid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
'.tern 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), chapter III, para. 292.
3 Ibid., para. 513.

Noting with grave concern the manifest intention of
the present authorities in Southern Rhodesia to proclaim independence unilaterally, which would continue
the denial to the African majority of their fundamental
rights to freedom and indeprndence,
Deeply concerned about the explosive situation in
Southern R ho<lesia,
1. s'lpprovcs the chapters of the reports of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
1rnplrmentation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Southern Rhodesia and endorses the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the right of the people of Southern
Rhodesia to freedom and independence and recognizes
the legitimacy of their struggle for the enjoyment of
their rights as set forth in the Charter of the United
~ ations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countrits and Peoples contained in General
Assernhly resolution 1514 (XV):
3. Solcnznlv warns the present authorities in South
ern Rhodesia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and K orthern Treland, in its capacitv as administering
Power, that the United Nations will oppose anv clt'Claration of independence wliich is not based on 1i11ivers;1 I
adult suffrage;
4. Condemns the policies of racial discrimination
and segregation practised in Southern Rhodesia, which
rnnstitutf' a crime against h11111anitv:
5. Condemns any support or assistance rendered by
any State to the minority regime in Southern Rhodesia :
6. Calls upon all States to refrain from rendering
any assistance whatsoever to the minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
7. Requests that the administering Power C'ffect
immediately:
(a) The release of all political prisoners, political
detainees and restrictees,
( b) The repeal of :di repressive and discriminatorv
legislation and, in particular, the Law and Ordf'r
(Maintenance) Act and the Land Apportionment Act;
( c) The removal of al) restrictions on African political activity and the establishment of fol) dt'mocratic
freedom and equality of political rights;
8. Requests once more the Government of the United
Kingdom to suspend the Constitution of 1961 and to
ea]) immediately a constitutional conference in which
representatives of all political parties will take part,
with a view to making new constitutional arrangements
on the basis of universal adult suffrage and to fixing
the earliest possible date for independence;
9. Appeals to all States to use all their powers
against a unilateral declaration of independence and,
in any case, not to recognize any government in· Southern Rhodesia which is not representative of the majority
of the people;
10. Requests all States to render moral and material
help to the people of Zimbabwe in their struggle for
freedom and independence;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to employ all necessary measures, including
military force, to implement paragraphs 7 and 8 above;
12. Draws the atfrntion of the Security Council to
the threats made by the present authorities in Southern
Rhodesia, including the threat of economic sabotage

Reeolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

against the independent African States adjoining
Southern Rhodesia;
13. Further drmt•s the attention of the Security
Council to the explosive situation in Southern Rhodesia
which threatens international peace and security, and
decides to transmit to the Council the records and resolutions of the twentieth session of the General Assemblv
on this question;
•
14. Decides to keep the question of Southern Rhodesia under urgent and continuing review.
1368th plenary meeting.
5 NovPmbfr 1965.

2023 (XX). Question of Aden
The General Assembly,
Having considered the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
J ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Aden, 4 which includes in
addition to Aden, the Eastern and Western Aden
Protectorates as well as the J slands of Perim. Knria
Muria, Kamaran and other off-shore islands,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 and 1949 (XVJTI) of 11 December 1963, and
the resolutions adopted by the Special Committee on
9 April 1964,5 11 May 1964 6 and 17 May 1965, 7
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Having taken note of the declarations of the reprt>sentative of the administering Power,
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situation which is threatening peace and security in the
area, arising from the policies pursurd hy the administering Power in the Territory,
1. Approves the chapters of thr reports of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on thr Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory of Adrn :incl endorses the concl11sions
and recommendations of the Sub-Committee on Aden;
2. Endorses the resolutions adopted by the Special
Committee on 9 April 1964. 11 May 1964 and 17 May
1965;
3. Deplores the refusal of the administering Power
to implement the resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Special Committee;
4. Further deplores the attempts of the administering
Power to set up an unrepresentative regime in the
Territory, with a view to granting it independence
contrary to General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV)
and 1949 (XVIII), and appeals to all States not to
recognize any independence whirh is not based on the
wishes of the people of thr Territory freely expressed
through elections held under universal adult suffrage ;
5. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Territory to self-determination and to freedom from
colonial rule and recognizes the legitimacy of their
efforts to achieve the rights laid down in the Charter
4 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
( A/5800/Rev.1 ), chapter VI; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes,
addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter VI.
5 Ibid., Nineteenth Session. Annexes, annex No. 8 (part n
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter VI. para. 166.
6 Ibid., para. 202.
7 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), c-bapter VI, 'para. 300.

55

of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Consid<;rs that the maintenance of the military
bases in the Territory constitutes a major obstacle to
the liberation of the people of the Territory from
colonial domination and is prejudicial to the peace
and security of the region, and that the immediate and
,nmplete removal of these bases is therefore essential;
7. Notes with deep concern that military operations
;1ga inst the people of the Territory are sti11 being
carrird out by the ;1dministering Power;
8. Urges the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern J re land immediately to:
(a) Abolish the state of emergency;
( h) Repe:il all laws restricting public freedom;
( c) Cease all repressive actions against the people
of the Territory. in particular military oprrations;
( d) Release all political detainees and allow the
return of those people who have heen exiled or forhidden to reside in the Trrritory hec;i11se of political
aC'tivities;
9. Reaffirms paragraphs 6 to 11 of resolution 1949
1 XVTTJ) and urges the :idministrring Power to implc:ment them immediately;
10. A ppcals to all Member States to render all possible assistan,e to the people of the Territory in their
l'fforts to attain freedom and independence;
11. Draws the attention of the Security Council to
the dangerous situation prevailing in the area as a result
of British military action against the peoplr of the
Territory;
12. Requests the 1.foited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. the specialized agencies and the
internationc1 I relief organizations to offer all possible
:issistance to the people who are suffering as :i result
nf the milit;-iry operations in the Trrritory:
13. R eqHPsfs the Secret:irv-General to take such
action :is he may deem expcd1ent to ens1tre the implemrntation of the present resolution. and to rrport
thereon to the Spccial Committee;
14. Requests the Special Committee to rxamine
again the situation in the Territory and to report
ther~on to the Grneral A!-sembly at its twenty-first
sess10n;
15. Dccidrs to maintain this item on its agenda.
1368th plenary meeting,
5 November 1965.

2024 (XX). Question of Southern Rhodesia
ThP General Assembly,

r onsidering the explosive situation created in Southern Rhodesia following the unilateral declaration of
independence,
·
Noting the measures taken by the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
lreland,
1. Condemns the unilateral declaration of independence made bv the racialist minority in Southern
Rhodesia;
•
2. Invites the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to implement immediately the relevant
resolu~ions adopt~cl hy the General Assembly and the
Sernnty Council m order to put an end to the rebellion
by the 11nlawfnl authorities in Southern Rhodesia;
