S/PV.7853

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7853rd meeting

Friday, 23 December 2016, 2 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-46301 (E)
*1646301*

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 2.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/1100, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Malaysia, New Zealand,
Senegal and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela .
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting at such short notice. Malaysia,
together with New Zealand, Senegal and Venezuela as
sponsors of draft resolution S/2016/1100, on the issue of
illegal Israeli settlements, have called for this meeting
to put the draft to a vote. As representatives of various
regional groupings at the United Nations — the Group
of Asia-Pacific States, the Group of Western European
and other States, the Group of African States and the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States — we
are bound by similar aims and a sense of responsibility
to take effective action on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, especially on the issue of settlements.
In numerous Council meetings on Palestine, and at
the Arria Formula meeting on settlements in October,
we listened to the repeated calls of Council members,
the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and representatives of
2/18

23/12/2016

civil society and other United Nations Member States
for urgent Council action to halt settlement activities
and reverse the negative trends that are threatening
peace and the viability of the two-State solution. The
latest, unprecedented attempt of the Israeli Parliament
to legalize outposts on private Palestinian lands added
further urgency to the need for the Council to send
a clear signal on the issue of settlements. Malaysia
acknowledges the efforts made by Egypt and the
Arab League to engage in consultations with Council
members over the past two months on this issue. We
fully support their efforts, and we share their aim for
Council action. We have also observed an emerging
consensus among Council members on the issue of
settlements. We thus believe that it is urgent for the
Council to seize the opportunity for effective Council
action without any further delay.
The draft resolution being put to the vote today
(S/2016/1100) calls for the cessation of all Israeli
settlement activities and for affirmative steps to reverse
the negative trends on the ground that are endangering
the two-State solution. It also calls for immediate
steps to prevent all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, and calls for accountability. The
text further urges all parties to intensify their efforts to
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East and to end Israeli occupation.
On the implementation of the draft resolution, the
text is requesting the Secretary-General to report the
Council every three months.
We realize that some Council members may have
legitimate concerns as to the short period of time in
which the draft was officially circulated, put into
blue and submitted for adoption. In normal and ideal
circumstances, we, too, would have preferred a more
transparent and inclusive process. However, we realize
that this is anything but a normal situation and that
we need to tread carefully in view of the sensitivity of
the issue.
Exceptional circumstances require bold action and
exceptional measures. Ultimately, our aim is to bridge
the gap in the respective positions of Council members
in order to reach a consensus. The last time the Council
adopted a resolution on settlements was more than 36
years ago. Since then, the situation on the ground has
worsened to the point where the very prospect of a twoState solution is now in question. There is no doubt
that this falls under the responsibility of the Security
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council under the United Nations Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
We thus appeal to all Council members not to lose
this opportunity for peace and to exercise our legal,
political and moral responsibility to vote in support of
the draft resolution, which is based on previous Council
resolutions and the values and principles of the United
Nations Charter, international law and international
standards of human rights. The time for action is now,
to prove our long-held commitment and to reinforce
the fact that the two-State solution is not merely an
empty slogan.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
has made no secret of its frustration that it has been
almost eight years since the Security Council adopted
a resolution on the Middle East peace process. New
Zealand has worked hard over the past two years to try
to advance a resolution on this issue, which we consider
to be one of the most pressing unaddressed issues on
the Council’s agenda.
New Zealand has floated its own ideas for a more
comprehensive draft than the one that is before us today
(S/2016/1100), and we are grateful for the willingness of
other Council members to engage with us on the text. It
became apparent to us, however, that the balance of the
Council wished to focus on the more pressing issue of
the settlements, which, as my colleague from Malaysia
has said, is threatening the viability of the two-State
solution. This message was very clearly delivered to us
in the last Quartet report and in regular reports of the
Secretary-General.
For these reasons, we supported the text circulated
on Wednesday and joined the group calling for a vote
on that text today, in order to ensure that the Council
had a chance to consider it.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important vote
on a draft resolution (S/2016/1100) that well may well
be historic as a contribution to peace. Our country,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, together with
Malaysia, New Zealand and Senegal, decided to
co-sponsor and call for a vote on this draft resolution
on the peace process in the Middle East, especially on
the issue of the illegal Israeli settlements.
The decision to present this draft resolution to
the Council responds to the pressing, urgent need for

S/PV.7853

this body to speak out on the worrying situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories as a result of the
continued illegal expansion of Israeli settlements,
which today represent the most serious threat to the
possibility of the political solution of two States.
When we submitted this proposal, we were
motivated by the firm commitment to reverse this
dangerous trend in order to safeguard the interests of
the Palestinian people and the viability of their State
and to revitalize the peace process, which has been at a
standstill for more than 20 years. It is high time for the
Security Council to shoulder the great responsibility it
has in the origin and the continuation of this conflict.
I believe that the draft resolution is a balanced text
that reaffirms the right of both countries to coexist
peacefully within the internationally secure pre-1967
borders, pursuant to resolution 242 (1967) and the
norms of international law, and bearing in mind the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 9 July 2004 (see A/ES-10/273).
At the same time, this proposal objectively addresses
with the problem of settlements and their destabilizing
effects on the region, and condemns the violence against
the civilian population, no matter who the perpetrators
might be and regardless of their motives.
Venezuela acknowledges the efforts made by the
Council to hold this meeting, especially on the part of
those countries that have called an for open, transparent
and frank discussion in this body and for action by the
Council that would revitalize the peace process, as well
as the countries that have presented initiatives aimed at
emerging from the stalemate.
Special mention must be made of the tireless
efforts of Egypt and the support of the Arab League
in achieving effective progress in dealing with the
Palestinian question. We also wish to thank and
acknowledge the Spanish presidency of the Security
Council for its continued availability to facilitate the
holding of this meeting, and New Zealand, for having
been the driving force that enabled this draft resolution
to be submitted before the end of the year.
The proposing countries represent diverse regions
of the world. We felt encouraged because of the
emerging consensus on the issue of settlements. All
member countries recognize that illegal settlements
are an obstacle to the peace process and a threat to
the two-State solution. Our actions are also a response

16-463013/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the many calls of the members of the Council, the
Secretary-General himself, the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, the Quartet, other
member States and prominent stakeholders, in the
framework of overcoming the obstacles facing the
Palestine–Israel peace process.
We are on the threshold of a historic decision,
which could represent the beginning of a new phase in
the peace process after almost four decades of failed
attempts. That is why the Council, as a representative
of the international community and the guarantor of
international peace and security, must act in a spirit of
unity, approving the text submitted today.
Today the world has its eyes on the Security
Council. It has placed its hopes in its members working
for peace, aware that history will judge our actions with
gratitude if we can contribute, even in a small way, to
relaunch a political process. We are opening the path
for new generations of Israelis and Palestinians to have
the opportunity to build a peaceful world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
None
Abstaining:
United States
The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 14
votes in favour, none against and 1 abstention. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2334 (2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Since the
beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1948 and the
wait for the Palestinian people to exercise their right to
an independent sovereign State and their inherent right
to a life of dignity and freedom, despite the resounding
silence of the international community and dozens of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions that
4/18

23/12/2016

continue to be unimplemented, Egypt has shouldered
and is shouldering great responsibilities and confronted
major challenges. Egypt has gone through many wars
and diplomatic batteles at all levels to defend Palestinian
rights and to push towards creating an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
the framework of achieving a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East.
Resolution 2334 (2016) on Israeli settlements,
which was adopted today, undoubtedly expresses the
painful reality resulting from the illegal settlement
policy. It is also born from the policy of the
confiscation of Palestinian land that runs contrary to
an established principle endorsed by the international
community — the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by armed force.
However, the peace process, with its complexities
and details, requires all of us to be wise and politically
realistic in taking up this issue without manoeuvring
on the part of any party, as we witnessed during
our deliberations in the Council on this resolution,
particularly on the issue of settlements, which is directly
linked to one of the most important components of the
final peace settlement — borders.
The circumstances related to consultations on the
resolution and the timing of the vote over the past several
hours have demonstrated that it might limit the ability
of some international parties that want to intervene
directly in order to resolve the question of Palestine
comprehensively and definitively, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 446 (1979).
To work towards providing an opportunity to future
international movements in no way means abandonment
of or retraction from constants and basics of the policy
related to the question of Palestine, including the issue of
settlements, as those constants and basics are provided
for in previous international resolutions of the security
council, as well as the positions of international parties
directly involved in the question of Palestine.
Today, Egypt felt compelled to withdraw its own
draft resolution procedurally, in light of the manoeuvres,
encountered since the text was presented in blue; that
amounted to a warning from some members of the
Security Council. That is utterly unacceptable in form
and substance in view of Egypt’s firm positions, which
cannot be questioned, pertaining to the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians. It should also be noted that
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

those manoeuvres were carried out while Egypt was
conducting political consultaions at all political levels
with the concerned parties, around the clock; since the
draft was presented.
In spite of all this, Egypt, in order to preserve the
legitimate Palestinian rights through a just and lasting
settlement in accordance with relevant international
resolutions, voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016),
adopted minutes ago, based on our firm, principled and
unequivocal positions, which we do not allow to be put
into question or subject to manoeuvres or bargaining
by any party. Egypt was the first to bear arms to defend
the legitimate Arab and Palestinian rights. Egypt was
the first to make peace with Israel, believing in the
feasibility peace rather than armed conflict. Egypt has
been and continues to be one of the strongest believers
in the possibility of achieving a comprehensive and
just peace in the Middle East based on the principles
of a two-State solution and land for peace, as has been
internationally acknowledged.
Ms. Power (United States): Let me begin with
a quote,
“The United States will not support the
use of any additional land for the purpose of
settlements during the transitional period. Indeed,
the immediate adoption of a settlements freeze by
Israel, more than any other action, could create
the confidence needed for wider participation in
these talks. Further settlement activity is in no
way necessary for the security of Israel and only
diminishes the confidence of the Arabs that a final
outcome can be free and fairly negotiated.”
This was said in 1982 by President Ronald Reagan.
He was speaking about a new proposal that he was
launching to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. While
ultimately, of course, President Reagan’s proposal was
not realized, his words are still illuminating in at least
two respects.
First, it is because they underscore the United States’
deep and long-standing commitment to achieving a
comprehensive and lasting peace between the Israelis
and the Palestinians. That has been the policy of every
Administration, Republican and Democrat, since
before President Reagan to the present day. Secondly, it
because President Reagan’s words highlight the United
States’ long-standing position that Israeli settlement
activity in territories occupied in 1967 undermines
Israel’s security, harms the viability of a negotiated

S/PV.7853

two-State outcome and erodes prospects for peace and
stability in the region.
Today the Security Council reaffirmed its
established consensus that settlements have no legal
validity. The United States has been sending the message
that the settlements must stop privately and publicly
for nearly five decades through the Administrations
of Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard Nixon,
Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George
H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush and currently
Barak Obama, Indeed, since 1967, the only President
who had not had at least one Israeli-Palestinian-related
resolution adopted during his tenure is Barak Obama.
Our vote today, therefore, is fully in line with the
bipartisan history of how American Presidents have
approached both the issue and the role of this body.
Given the consistency of this position across
United States Administrations, one would think that
it would be a routine vote for the United States to
allow the passage of a resolution with the elements in
resolution 2334 (2016), thereby reaffirming the longstanding position of the United States on settlements,
condemning violence and incitement and calling for
the parties to start taking constructive steps to reverse
current trends on the ground. These are familiar, wellarticulated components of United States policy.
But in reality this vote was not straightforward for
us because of where it is taking place — at the United
Nations. For the simple truth is that for as long as Israel
has been a member of this institution, it has been treated
differently from other nations at the United Nations.
That has been true not only in decades past, such as the
infamous resolution that the General Assembly adopted
in 1975 with the support of the majority of member
States, officially determining that Zionism was a form
of racism, but also in 2016, this year. One need only
look at the 18 resolutions against Israel adopted during
the General Assembly in September or the 12 Israelspecific resolutions adopted this year in the Human
Rights Council — more than those focused on Syria,
North Korea, Iran and South Sudan put together — to
see that in 2016 Israel continues to be treated differently
from other Member States.
Like United States Administrations before it, the
Obama Administration has worked tirelessly to fight
for Israel’s right simply to be treated just like any
other country — from advocating for Israel to finally
be granted membership to a United Nations regional

16-463015/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

body, something no other United Nations Member
State has been denied; to fighting to ensure that Israeli
non-governmental organizations are not denied United
Nations accreditation, simply because they are Israeli;
to getting Yom Kippur finally recognized as a United
Nations holiday; to pressing the Council to break its
indefensible silence in response to terrorist attacks on
Israelis. As the United States has said repeatedly, such
unequal treatment not only hurts Israel, it undermines
the legitimacy of the United Nations itself. The practice
of treating Israel differently at the United Nations
matters for votes like this one, for even if one believes
that today’s resolution is justified or even more,
necessitated, by events on the ground, one cannot
completely separate the vote from the venue.
Member States that say that they are for the twoState solution must ask themselves some difficult
questions. For those States that are quick to promote
resolutions condemning Israel but refuse to recognize
when innocent Israelis are the victims of terrorism, what
steps will they take to stop treating Israel differently?
For those States that passionately denounce the closures
of crossings in Gaza as exacerbating the humanitarian
situation but say nothing of the resources diverted from
helping Gaza’s residents to dig tunnels into Israeli
territory, so that terrorists can attack Israelis in their
homes, what will they do to end the double standard
that undermines the legitimacy of this institution?
Member States should also ask themselves about
the double standards when it comes to the Council
taking action. Just this morning, we came together as a
Council and we were unable to muster the will to act to
stop the flow weapons going to killers in South Sudan
who are perpetrating mass atrocities that the United
Nations has said could lead to genocide. We could not
come together even to curb the flow of arms. Earlier
this month, the Council could not muster the will to
adopt the simplest of resolutions, calling for a sevenday pause in the savage bombardment of innocent
civilians, hospitals and schools in Aleppo, yet when a
resolution on Israel comes before the Council, members
suddenly summon the will to act.
It is because this forum too often continues to be
biased against Israel, because there are important issues
that are not sufficiently addressed in the resolution and
because the United States does not agree with every
word in this text that the United States did not vote in
favour of the resolution. But it is because the resolution
reflects the facts on the ground and is consistent with
6/18

23/12/2016

United States policy across Republican and Democratic
administrations throughout the history of the State of
Israel that the United States did not veto it.
The United States has consistently said that it would
block any resolution that it thought would undermine
Israel’s security or would seek to impose a resolution
to the conflict. We would not have let the resolution
pass had it not addressed counterproductive actions
by the Palestinians, such as terrorism and incitement
to violence, which we have repeatedly condemned and
raised with the Palestinian leadership — and which of
course must be stopped.
Unlike some on the Security Council, we do not
believe that outside parties can impose a solution that
has not been negotiated by the two parties, nor can we
unilaterally recognize a future Palestinian State. But
it is precisely our commitment to Israel’s security that
makes the United States believe that we cannot stand
in the way of the resolution as we seek to preserve a
chance of attaining our long-standing objective — two
States living side by side, in peace and security. Let me
briefly explain why.
The settlement problem has gotten so much worse
that it is now putting at risk the very viability of that
two-State solution. The number of settlers in the roughly
150 authorized Israeli settlements east of the 1967 lines
has increased dramatically. Since the 1993 signing of
the Oslo Accords — which launched efforts that made
a comprehensive and lasting peace possible — the
number of settlers has increased by 355,000. The total
settler population in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
now exceeds 590,000. Nearly 90,000 settlers are living
east of the separation barrier that was created by Israel
itself. And just since July 2016 — when the Middle
East Quartet issued a report highlighting international
concern about a systematic process of land seizures,
settlement expansions, and legalizations — Israel has
advanced plans for more than 2,600 new settlement
units. Yet rather than dismantling those and other settler
outposts, which are illegal even under Israeli law, now
there is new legislation advancing in the Israeli Knesset
that would legalize most of the outposts — a factor that
propelled the decision of the resolution’s sponsors to
bring it before the Council.
The Israeli Prime Minister recently described his
Government as “more committed to settlements than
any in Israel’s history”, and one of his leading coalition
partners recently declared that “the era of the two-State
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution is over”. At the same time, the Prime Minister
has said that he is still committed to pursuing a twoState solution. But those statements are irreconcilable.
One cannot simultaneously champion expanding Israeli
settlements and champion a viable two-State solution
that would end the conflict. One has to make a choice
between settlements and separation.
In 2011, the United States vetoed a draft resolution
that focused exclusively on settlements, as if settlements
were the only factor harming the prospects of a twoState solution. The circumstances have changed
dramatically. Since 2011, settlement growth has only
accelerated. Since 2011, multiple efforts to pursue
peace through negotiations have failed. And since 2011,
President Obama and Secretary Kerry have repeatedly
warned — publicly and privately — that the absence
of progress towards peace and continued settlement
expansion were going to put the two-State solution at
risk and threaten Israel’s stated objective to remain both
a Jewish State and a democracy. Moreover, unlike in
2011, today’s resolution condemns violence, terrorism
and incitement, which also pose extremely grave risks
to the two-State solution. Today’s resolution reflects
trends that will permanently destroy the hope of a twoState solution if they continue on their current course.
The United States has not taken the step of voting
in support of the resolution because it is too narrowly
focused on settlements, when we all know — or should
know — that many other factors contribute significantly
to the tensions that perpetuate the conflict. Let us be clear.
Even if every single settlement were to be dismantled
tomorrow, peace still would not be attainable without
both sides acknowledging uncomfortable truths and
making difficult choices. That is an indisputable fact.
Yet, it is one that is too often overlooked by members
of the United Nations and by members of the Council.
For Palestinian leaders, that means recognizing the
obvious fact that in addition to taking innocent lives,
the incitement to violence, the glorification of terrorists
and the growth of violent extremism erode prospects for
peace, as the resolution makes crystal clear. The most
recent wave of Palestinian violence has seen terrorists
commit hundreds of attacks, including driving cars into
crowds of innocent civilians and stabbing mothers in
front of their children. Yet rather than condemn those
attacks, Hamas, other radical factions and even certain
members of Fatah have held up the terrorists as heroes
and used social media to incite others to follow in their
murderous footsteps. And while President Abbas and

S/PV.7853

his party’s leaders have made clear their opposition to
violence, terrorism and extremism, they have too often
failed to condemn specific attacks or condemn the
praise heaped upon the perpetrators.
Our vote today does not in any way diminish the
United States’ steadfast and unparalleled commitment
to the security of Israel, the only democracy in the
Middle East. We would not have let the resolution pass
had it not also addressed counterproductive actions by
Palestinians. We have to recognize that Israel faces
very serious threats in a very tough neighbourhood.
Israelis are rightly concerned about making sure that
there is not a terrorist haven next door.
President Obama and this Administration have
shown an unprecedented commitment to Israel’s security
because that is what we believe in. Our commitment
to that security has never wavered and it never will.
Even with the financial crisis and budget deficits, we
repeatedly increase funding to support Israel’s military.
In September, the Obama Administration signed a
memorandum of understanding to provide $38 billion
in security assistance to Israel over the next 10
years — the largest single pledge of military assistance
in the history of the United States to any country. As the
Israeli Prime Minister himself has noted, our military
and intelligence cooperation is unprecedented. We
believe, however, that continued settlement building
seriously undermines Israel’s security.
Some may cast the vote of the United States as
a sign that we have finally given up on a two-State
solution. Nothing could be further from the truth. None
of us can give up on a two-State solution. We continue
to believe that that solution is the only viable path to
provide peace and security for the State of Israel and
freedom and dignity for the Palestinian people. We
continue to believe that the parties concerned can
still pursue that path if both sides are honest about the
choices and have the courage to take steps that will be
politically difficult. While we can encourage them, it
is ultimately up to the parties to choose this path, as it
always has been. We sincerely hope that they will begin
to make those choices before it is too late.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) is an important and
in many ways historic moment in the history of the
Security Council. It is the first resolution adopted by
the Council on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in eight
years. It is the first time that the Security Council has

16-463017/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

expressed itself so clearly to state the obvious fact that,
little by little, Israel settlement building undermines
the possibility of building a viable and independent
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel. It was therefore necessary for the
Security Council to recall the collective and unanimous
devotion of the international community to the twoState solution and to clearly lay out the threats to that
solution. Unless we act resolutely to that end, the twoState solution will disappear like a mirage in the desert.
There is no credible alternative that could meet the
legitimate aspirations of both parties.
Over the past few decades, Israeli settlementbuilding has undoubtedly accelerated, which only fuels
tensions on the ground and exasperates the international
community. Settlement-building, which is illegal under
international law, is part of a deliberate policy aimed at
presenting the population, including the international
community, with a fait accompli in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. It proceeds in various manifestations,
including the expansion of settlements beyond the
Green Line, including in East Jerusalem; the de facto
annexation of Zone C; forced transfers of population;
the demolition of Palestinian homes and structures;
restrictions of access and movement; and the building of
the wall beyond the 1967 border. This policy is not only
illegal under international law, but also threatens the
prospects for the creation of a viable and independent
Palestinian State, which is the best guarantee for Israeli
security and a lasting solution to the conflict. That is
the message that France sought to send today by voting
in favour of the resolution.
While settlements are the main threat to the twoState solution on the ground, unfortunately it is not the
only one. Acts of violence and incitement to violence
and terrorism also undermine the chances of seeing
two States — Israel and Palestine — peacefully coexist
one day. They destroy trust and dialogue between
peoples who must find a way to live together. In that
regard, resolution 2334 (2016) strongly reiterates its
condemnation of all acts of terrorism, incitements to
violence and all deliberate attacks on civilians. it calls
on the Palestinian Authority to continue to do its utmost
to discourage terrorist actions.
Identifying and naming the threats to a twoState solution is important but not enough. It is also
necessary to work on recreating, after a two-year
impasse, the conditions for resuming negotiations.
Like the Palestinians, the Israelis have a vital interest
8/18

23/12/2016

in peace, which can be based only on a two-State
solution. That is the aim of the French initiative to try
to relaunch the peace process. In that respect, following
the important ministerial meeting of 3 June, France
decided to organize an international conference on
15 January 2017 in Paris, whose goal will be to introduce
the contributions of the international community to
relaunch the negotiation process and conclude and
implement a peace agreement. We all know, of course,
that only the Palestinians and Israelis themselves can
achieve peace through direct negotiations.
The resolution that we have adopted today and
the Paris international conference represent two sides
of the same coin, both aimed at reiterating our shared
attachment to the two-State solution and creating
conditions conducive to that end. We hope that the
resolution and the French initiative will be the first
important steps towards relaunching a credible political
process that we will need to pursue collectively in the
weeks and months ahead. In sum, the resolution is
certainly not the end of the road. It is an important and
potentially historic step on the difficult and demanding
path to peace and security in the Middle East. Let
us assume together the heavy responsibility that is
incumbent on all of us on that path.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela welcomes the adoption of resolution 2334
(2014) in the conviction that it represents a unique
opportunity to advance the peace process and restore
trust between the parties, while allowing the Security
Council to abandon its habitual inaction by engaging it
in building an environment conducive to negotiations
between the parties that take into consideration the
aspirations and concerns of both and that upholds the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to a free,
sovereign and independent State in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 181 (II).
Of course, this resolution represents a mere first
step, but it is a step in the right direction. This conflict
is extremely complex and fraught with obstacles. There
is an urgent need to respond decisively to the greatest
challenge to the two-State solution — the continued
expansion of illegal Israeli settlements on the occupied
territory of the State of Palestine. Illegal settlements
violate international law and the rights of the Palestinian
people by depriving them of their land, destroying their
homes and means of subsistence, restricting their free
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

movements and undermining their right to social and
economic development.
That is why the Council must speak categorically
against this terrible problem. The United Nations,
the General Assembly and the Security Council
have the obligation and mandate to defend peace and
international law. Furthermore, the United Nations and
the Security Council have the moral obligation to support
the Palestinian cause, as they are deeply responsible
for the tragedy and Nakba of the Palestinian people.
That is why they must adopt all the resolutions they
can to protect the weakest and force Israel to abide by
international law and openly enter into a peace process
based on the existence of two States.
The resolution we have adopted today is a first step
on the path to a peaceful negotiated solution between
Palestine and Israel with the support of the international
community. It is therefore necessary for Israel, the
occupying Power, to put an end to the policies derived
from the prolonged occupation of the territories of the
State of Palestine, as well as the inhumane blockade of
the Gaza Strip, which has lasted for almost a decade
and is a flagrant violation of international law. Those
are essential conditions for consolidating what we
have achieved today and for moving forward towards a
political solution in which Palestine, as a full member
of the United Nations and with East Jerusalem as its
capital, can live peacefully with Israel,within secure,
internationally recognized pre-1967 borders.
The members of the Council have recognized that
illegal settlements are a systematic obstacle to the peace
process and a threat to the two-State solution. Therefore,
it is becoming increasingly critical for Israel to assume
its responsibilities and comply with the resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly urging
it to put an end to a pernicious practice that denies the
human rights of the Palestinian population.
Furthermore, Venezuela reiterates its condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
no matter who the authors may be and what their
motives are. With the same emphasis, we condemn
the continued violation of the most basic rights of the
Palestinian population in the occupied territories and in
Gaza, which continues to be blockaded and besieged by
Israel, through the indiscriminate and disproportionate
use of force by Israeli military and security troops.
We repudiate the violence of extremist settlers
against the Palestinian population and the policies of

S/PV.7853

the occupying Power that subject Palestinian men,
women and children to prison and illegal administrative
detention. We call once again for the release of all
children who are unfairly languishing in Israeli jails.
Clearly, much remains to be done to reverse this
negative situation and ensure that Israel complies with
its obligations as an occupying Power. However, we
recognize that today’s decision opens a space needed for
resuming dialogue and negotiation as the only means of
resolving a conflict that has marked the history of the
Middle East for almost 70 years.
We are pleased that at the end of our term in the
Security Council, the Council has today had the
vision and the courage to adopt this resolution. We
therefore acknowledge the contribution of those who
have participated in this historic outcome, especially
Egypt, New Zealand and the countries that sponsored
the resolution.
Venezuela reaffirms its unyielding commitment to
peace, international security and the Palestinian cause.
We will remain vigilant with regard to the evolution
of the inescapable task of helping to bring about a
negotiated peaceful settlement of the conflict, as
provided for in Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Similarly, we will support in other forums all
the efforts and initiatives directed to realizing the twoState solution in accordance with international law.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2334 (2016) on the Israeli settlements and
appreciates the important role played by the sponsors
in promoting its adoption.
The question of Palestine has been the crux of the
Middle East issue. It is also the underlying cause of
the situation in the region. Safeguarding the legitimate
national interests of the Palestinian people is the shared
responsibility of the international community. Recent
years have seen the stalled peace talks between the two
sides, the ever-expanding Israeli settlements, ongoing
violence and conflict, the constantly deteriorating
humanitarian situation and the growing tension between
Palestine and Israel, all of which has threatened the
vision of two States as well as regional peace and
stability.
China has all along supported the Council in
playing its due role on the question of Palestine.
Resolution 2334 (2016) adopted by the Council today
is significant in that it reflects the common aspiration

16-463019/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and wish of the international community and heeds
the just demand of Palestine and the Arab countries.
We urge Israel to implement 2334 (2016) in a practical
manner, immediately end its settlement activities and
stop demolishing Palestinian homes in order to create
conditions for the relaunch of the peace talks. China
encourages both sides to honour their respective
obligations, keep calm, exercise restrain and gradually
establish mutual trust so as to come back to the path of
peace negotiations as soon as possible.
China has been a firm supporter of the just cause of
the Palestinian people. China supports the Palestinian
people in establishing a fully sovereign and independent
State, based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. China welcomes and supports all efforts that
help ease tension between Israel and Palestine, achieve
the two-State solution at an early date and support the
peaceful coexistence between the two sides. China is
ready to work with the international community in
scaling up the diplomatic efforts to promote an early,
comprehensive and just solution to the conflict between
Palestine and Israel.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) today. It is the first Security Council resolution
on the Israel-Palestine issue in over seven years.
The adoption of the resolution is first and foremost a
clear reinforcement of the international community’s
conviction that a two-State solution remains the only
viable route to sustained Arab-Israeli peace.
As the Quartet report in July 2016 highlighted, the
foundations of peace — trust and goodwill — are being
corroded from all sides because of violence, incitement,
demolitions and settlement activity. Ultimately, as long
as terrorists are treated as martyrs, peace will be distant.
The scourge of anti-Semitic, racist and hateful language
must be excised from the region. It is critical that the
Palestinian leadership implement the recommendations
of the Quartet report and continue their efforts to tackle
terror and incitement, strengthen institutions and
develop a sustainable economy. The United Kingdom
will continue to provide the Palestinian authority with
professional support in helping develop its security
institutions.
But goodwill alone will not secure peace. Today’s
resolution is a sober recognition that the two-State
solution is slipping away. By undermining the
prospects for a contiguous Palestinian State, settlement
10/18

23/12/2016

construction is corroding the possibility of a two-State
solution. Since the Oslo process in 1993, the population
of settlements has doubled to 570,000, including 85,000
settlers deep in the West Bank. The Quartet report
warns of sliding into a one-State reality of perpetual
occupation and conflict. That is no future at all.
The United Kingdom is a dear and close friend of
the State of Israel. We reject all efforts to delegitimize
or undermine Israel. The movement for boycotts,
divestment and sanctions, rooted as it is in a culture of
prejudice and hostility to Israel, is a barrier to peace.
My Government will never support any resolution that
advances the cause of boycotts or delegitimization in
any way. It is because of our steadfast and stalwart
commitment to Israel’s security — and its existence
as the Jewish homeland — that we voted for today’s
resolution and worked tirelessly to secure a balanced
final text. We believe that Israeli settlement activity
represents a clear and present danger to our shared vision
of two States for two peoples. The United Kingdom’s
long-standing view is that settlement expansion is
illegal and not in Israel’s long-term interests.
Today’s resolution also takes important and balanced
steps to support peace through, first of all, calling for
immediate steps to prevent incitement and all acts of
violence against civilians, including terror. It also calls
for a strengthening of efforts to combat terrorism,
including through existing security coordination,
as well as clearly condemning all acts of terrorism.
Secondly, the resolution calls upon both parties to act
on the basis of international law and to refrain from
provocative actions in order to build trust and create
the conditions for peace. Thirdly, the resolution calls
upon all parties to exert collective efforts to launch
credible negotiations on all final-status issues, urging
the intensification and acceleration of international and
regional efforts to support a comprehensive peace.
We have long held that if negotiations are to
be successful, they will need to lead to a safe and
secure Israel, living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders with agreed
land-swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capitol of both
States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees.
In closing, we recognize that the adoption of the
resolution will not change the situation on the ground
overnight. The year 2017 will not be an easy year for the
Israel-Palestine issue, 50 years since the Six-Day War
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the subsequent occupation of Gaza and the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and 100 years since
my country issued the Balfour Declaration. However,
we must all uphold our responsibility, as the Council
has finally upheld its responsibility today, in order to
deliver the long-term security that Israelis deserve and
the statehood and end to the occupation that Palestinians
are calling out for.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016),
convinced that after eight years we finally had an
historic opportunity to break the Council’s stalemate,
which has seriously threatened the two-State solution
and the peace negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians. Resolution 2334 (2016), adopted a few
minutes ago, responds to the ongoing call of Council
members to disrupt the reigning status quo and reverse
the negative trends on the ground, in particular
the illegal settlements built by Israel in occupied
Palestinian territory.
We are at a moment of great importance to the
future of the Middle East peace process and the twoState solution. We hope that the resolution will serve as
a call for action by both Israel and Palestine to promptly
resume bilateral negotiations towards a just and lasting
peace, taking the interests of both parties into account.
Uruguay reaffirms its unwavering support for the right
of Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace within
internationally recognized borders in an atmosphere of
renewed cooperation and free from any threat or action
that could threaten peace. We also reaffirm our support
for the solution based on two independent States, as we
are convinced it is the only possibility whereby Israel
and Palestine could peacefully coexist.

S/PV.7853

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation, I am sure like many
others in the Chamber, was puzzled by the process that
unfolded around today’s resolution 2334 (2016). While
the resolution has been worked on for many months,
the apparent haste surrounding its adoption does not
promote its ends.
For many years, our country has been involved
in the Middle East peace process, first as co-chair of
the Madrid process, then as a member of the Middle
East Quartet and, of course, as a permanent member
of the Security Council. Our experience confirms
that the issue can be resolved only through direct
and unconditional negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. That is precisely what dictated our work
to arrange a September meeting in Moscow between
Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel and President
Abbas of Palestine. The Palestinian side was ready to
take part in the meeting.
Today, we voted in favour of the resolution on
the Israeli settlements, convinced that it was based
on tested language reflecting the general position
of the international community on the illegality of
Israeli settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We believe it important that the document
also condemns violent acts against civilians and acts of
terrorism and appeals to both sides to end the violence
and the rhetoric of incitement and provocation, which
only fuel an atmosphere of distrust and confrontation
between Palestinians and Israelis. There is no doubt
that such actions undermine the possibility of achieving
a two-State solution to the Palestinian question.

It is very important for the authorities to send
political signals of their desire to escape the current
quagmire created by misunderstanding, hatred and
violent confrontation. Likewise, both sides must refrain
from adopting unilateral decisions that can undermine
dialogue, and comply in good faith with their obligations
under international law and the Council’s resolutions.

Russia will continue working on reanimating the
negotiations and restoring Palestinian unity based on
the political platform of the Palestinian Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative. In that
connection we confirm the importance of the ongoing
work of the Quartet as an effective and approved
mechanism of the Security Council in the Middle East
peace process.

Uruguay reaffirms its willingness to continue
working to reactivate the peace process in the Middle
East as quickly as possible and achieve once and for
all the two-State solution of two States, living in peace
and cooperation. We owe that to the many generations
of Israelis and Palestinians that have been exhausted by
many years of conflict.

We also note that the July report of the Quartet
(S/2016/595, annex) on the situation in the PalestinianIsraeli track is still very relevant as a strong signal
from the international community to both sides of the
conflict. Implementing the recommendations contained
in the report would contribute to returning the peace
process to the political track.

16-4630111/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan is deeply concerned
about the current stagnation in the peace process and
alarmed that a two-State solution may be slipping from
our reach. We have been consistent in our position that
settlement activity is in violation of international law
and that it has been steadily eroding the viability of a
two-State solution. With that in mind, Japan voted in
favour of resolution 2334 (2016).
It is important that the parties commit themselves
to the resolution just adopted so as to make meaningful
progress in the Middle East peace process. The Council
also must reaffirm its commitment to a two-State
solution and support the parties to that end. Japan
remains firm in its belief that peace in the region can
be realized only through negotiations and will not
recognize any unilateral change by either party that
may prejudge the final resolution.
I would like to conclude by stressing that Japan will
continue to engage in this matter both in and out of the
Council in order to facilitate the peace process with a
view to achieving a two-State solution.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Today, after decades
of paralysis in the Council on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, the Council has finally exercised its legal,
political and moral responsibility to take effective
action to reverse the negative trends that are
threatening peace and the two-State solution. With the
historic adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), we prove
our sincere commitment to peace and to the two-State
solution. We sincerely thank all Council members
who voted in support of the resolution today. We are
also encouraged by the exemplary restraint shown by
the permanent members of the Council. Malaysia also
appreciates the full support and solidarity shown by
New Zealand, Venezuela and Senegal in carrying the
resolution forward.
We have been persistently warned that the
settlement enterprise constitutes the single biggest
threat to peace and the two-State solution. It is illegal
under international law, as reinforced by the 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and in various Council resolutions. They also lead to
settler violence, home demolitions, land confiscations,
as well as to discriminatory policies and the denial
of development, infrastructure and natural resources.
Decades of great injustice and gross violations of
human rights have perpetuated anger and frustration
12/18

23/12/2016

for those who have nothing to lose, leading to further
radicalization in the region and beyond.
Recent developments have made it even more
urgent for the Council to act, particularly the brazen
attempt by the Israeli Parliament to legalize outposts on
private Palestinian lands. We need to send a strong and
clear signal that this is simply not acceptable. Today
the Council has redeemed itself to steer the parties in
the right direction, away from violence and unjust and
illegal acts. We are giving hope to both the people of
Israel and the people of Palestine, the majority of whom
still believe in the two-State solution and still want
peace. This is not just a victory for Palestine, it is a
victory for the Security Council, for the United Nations,
for the rule of law, for peace and for humankind as a
whole. It is also a victory for the people of Israel who
still believe in living side by side in peace and security
with the Palestinians and their Arab neighbours. In
the next few months, the Council should continue to
exert pressure on both sides to ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016). We also urge all Member States
to abide by their obligations under the resolution to halt
settlement activities.
As we enter into 50 years of Israeli occupation
in 2017, we need to take a step back to reflect on our
collective failures for the past half-century that have
led to our current predicament on the viability of
the two-State solution. Although our action today is
significant in halting settlement activities, we need to
recognize that we are addressing the symptoms and
not the root causes of the conflict. In the long term,
the Council and the international community must
galvanize their efforts to end the longest occupation in
modern history, which has given rise to sustaining the
settlement enterprise.
We therefore urge all parties to intensify their
efforts to resume the peace process in order to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and various initiatives, including the Arab
Peace Initiative. We also reaffirm our support for all
diplomatic initiatives to that end, including by France
and Russia.
Lastly, although Malaysia’s days in the Council are
coming to an end, we will continue to play an active
role in creating the necessary conditions for peace in
the region and defending the two-State solution, in line
with our principled position on the Palestinian question.
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Martins (Angola): Angola welcomes the
adoption today of resolution 2334 (2016). I would
like to thank the sponsors — Egypt, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Senegal and Venezuel — for presenting it to
the Council.
For far too long, a source of deep frustration and
despair to the international community as a whole has
been the continued expansion of illegal settlements
by the Israeli authorities, which have perpetuated an
atmosphere of mistrust, hostility and violence among
Israelis and Palestinians. There is no doubt that the
settlements are illegal under international law, and
therefore we find it disappointing that the Israeli
authorities dispute that and believe that their final status
should be determined in talks on Palestinian statehood.
Palestinian statehood will not be possible if
settlements are expanded; then any possibility of a
contiguous Palestinian State would be eliminated.
Therefore, we urge both parties to refrain from any
negative unilateral actions that could hinder the
prospect of the two States living side by side in peace
and harmony.
A Council resolution represents only a positive
contribution to peace and security in the world, which
again is the primary raison d’ȇtre of the Council; that
is, if the resolution can be implemented. I hope that
resolution 2334 (2016), which we just adopted, will
be effectively implemented, particularly by all key
parties. This calls for the unity of the Security Council,
unity by the Palestinians, unity in Israel. Above all,
resolution 2334 (2016) calls for a commitment to
peace, particularly by the two main parties, Israel
and Palestine.
In conclusion, let me say that the resolution is not
an imposition of terms by the United Nations, but rather
a measure to salvage the prospects of the two-State
solution. Therefore, we hope that we will definitely see
this as a step in the right direction, as we have several
times reiterated in the Council.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Today is a
significant day for the Security Council, as the applause
ringing around the Chamber earlier this afternoon
attests. I was so very pleased that in this last meeting
of the year we are able to adopt a very positive step
on this most very difficult issue. The applause reflects
the pent-up frustration that the Council has been unable
for so long to adopt a resolution on the Israeli-Palestine
issue, despite regular reports from the Secretary-

S/PV.7853

General and the Special Coordinator that the two-State
solution was slipping away and that urgent action was
necessary to arrest it.
As I noted earlier, the focus of resolution 2334
(2016) is on settlements: the primary threat to the
viability of the two-State solution. However, as others
have pointed out, the resolution also includes welcome
elements on the need to stop violence and incitement and
lays the groundwork for a return to negotiations. There
is no question that ongoing Israeli settlement in the
occupied territories is a significant obstacle to a return
to negotiations and a grave threat to the very viability
of a future Palestinian State. As my Foreign Minister
said earlier this month, those settlements violate
international law, and those settlements have created
enemies where there should have been neighbours.
Every settlement creates false hope for the settlers
that the land will one day be part of a greater Israel.
Every settlement takes land away from Palestinians
needing homes or farmland or roads. Today’s resolution
provides important signals to the parties and to the
international community about the way forward. It
reaffirms the central importance of preserving the twoState solution as the only model we have for achieving
a negotiated peace. The resolution also prepares the
ground for a return to negotiations as soon as possible.
The resolution reaffirms, through the United Nations
most powerful organ, that settlements in the occupied
territories are contrary to Israel’s obligations under
international law and a major obstacle to peace. It
condemns the acts of violence, provocation, terror and
incitement that have driven the two sides apart and
hardened feelings of hostility and mistrust on both sides.
The reporting mechanism the resolution establishes
should provide a firm foundation for the Council to
continue to encourage the parties towards negotiations
on a viable two-State solution. We recognize that there
is much more that the resolution might have done. The
Council must stand ready to provide additional support
to the parties, including by setting out the parameters
for negotiations when the time is right. But today we
have focused on what is achievable right now, and that
is what we believe today’s text represents.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): By deciding to
co-sponsor resolution 2334 (2016), along with Malaysia,
New Zealand and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Senegal wishes to reaffirm its principled position on
the settlements, which are illegal from the point of

16-4630113/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

view of international law. Indeed, at a tiime when the
peace process is at a stalemate, we see a continued and
accelerated progress of building settlements in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. In addition to compromising
the chance for peace between Israelis and Palestinians,
those settlements and occupations foment the violence
that affects both Israelis and Palestinians and the
possibility for both peoples to live side by side in peace
and security within internationally recognized borders.
Together with the Israelis and Palestinians, with
whom we, as members of the Council, share the same
aspirations for peace and stability, we must find a path
to negotiations with a view to reaching a peaceful,
happy and definitive solution to the dispute. We avail
ourselves of this opportunity to renew our disapproval
and condemnation of acts of terrorism and incitement
to violence, no matter who the authors are or what the
motives may be.
My delegation reaffirms the urgency of relaunching
the peace process. That is why we encourage the
ongoing initiatives, such as that of France, and
diplomatic efforts, such as those undertaken by Egypt
and the Russian Federation; all of such initiatives, in
our view, require greater coordination.
In conclusion, it is up to the international
community, and first and foremost the Security Council
as the guarantor of international peace and security, to
work on the two-State solution. Our faith was restored
by the remarks President Macky Sall delivered during
the United Nations International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People:
“Despite the stalemate of the peace process, I
have the strong conviction that efforts must be
continued, strengthened and intensified in order
to realize the two-State solution. The two States,
Israel and Palestine, should be able to live side by
side in peace and security, each of them within
its own internationally recognized borders, in
accordance with all the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and the efforts of the Quartet.”
On that basis, Senegal, faithful to its principles and
foreign policy, and also as Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, continues to engage in dialogue and consultation
in order to reach a two-State solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
14/18

23/12/2016

I would like to start by thanking all the sponsors for
their efforts, as well as the delegations that worked so
intensely to achieve such a historic result. Spain voted
in favour of resolution 2334 (2016) because we are
convinced that it will contribute to preserving the twoState solution, which we believe is the only solution
that can lead to a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
for Palestinians and Israelis.
That peace could never be determined externally,
but will need to be negotiated between the two parties.
However, the international community does have
an obligation to do everything it can to promote an
agreement. With today’s vote, the Security Council
did what it had to do. Over the past two years, as a
non-Permanent Member of the Security Council, Spain
has repeated on numerous occasions that we were in
favour of the Council expressing its position on the
Palestinian question when the time was right and, if
possible, to adopt a text on which there was consensus
that could truly advance the peace process. That day has
come today. The text of the resolution that we adopted
today fulfils, as we see it, the necessary requirements.
It is a balanced text that strives for nothing more than
to act in favour of peace.
Over these two years, we have also repeated many
times in this same Chamber the position of Spain on
the Palestinian question. We have always stated that
the settlements are counter to international law and one
of the main obstacles to make the two-State solution
a reality so that Israel and Palestine can live in peace
and security within mutually recognized borders.
Furthermore, we have also stated that the incitement to
hatred and acts of terrorism are not only morally and
legally reprehensible, but they also undermine efforts
to achieve a just and lasting peace between Israelis and
Palestinians, and they should be strongly condemned.
The resolution that we have just adopted is fully
compatible with that position.
As the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon recalled
last week here in the Chamber (ses S/PV.7839), over
the past 10 years the Security Council has pronounced
itself only twice on the Palestinian question — the
last time being eight years ago. We welcome the fact
that such silence has been broken and we see this
as the result of the work carried out by the Security
Council, month after month, throughout these years.
Spain has contributed to that work, motivated only by
its sincere wish to help the cause of peace. Spain will
continue working as long as it is necessary, based on
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that same motivation, to contribute to a just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine, which would be
the outcome of a negotiated agreement between the
two parties.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Today is a dark day for the
Security Council. Resolution 2334 (2016), which
members just voted on, is the peak of hypocrisy. While
thousands are being massacred in Syria, the Council
has wasted valuable time and efforts condemning
the democratic State of Israel for building homes in
the historic homeland of the Jewish people. We have
presented the truth time and again to the Council,
and implored it not to believe the lies presented in
the resolution. By voting in favour of the resolution,
members of the Council have in fact voted no. They
voted no to negotiations. They voted no to progress and
a chance for better lives for Israelis and Palestinians.
And they voted no to the possibility of peace.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon addressing the
Council one week ago said that the United Nations had
“created a disproportionate volume of
resolutions, reports and conferences criticizing
Israel” (S/PV.7839, p.4).
The resolution today will be added to the long and
shameful list of anti-Israel United Nations resolutions.
Instead of charting a course forward members are
sending a message to the Palestinians, that they should
continue on the path of terrorism and incitement; that
they should continue to hold their own people hostage;
that they should continue to seek meaningless statements.
The sad truth is that today’s vote will be a victory for
terror; it will be a victory for hatred and violence. By
continuing to provide excuses for the Palestinians to
avoid recognizing our right to exist, Council members
are only maintaining the status quo.
The world is undergoing great change, and the new
Secretary-General will soon assume office. I call on the
Council to take this opportunity to turn a new page,
put an end to the bias and obsession with Israel, stop
such endless attempts to blame all the problems of the
Middle East on the one true democracy in the region
and make clear to the Palestinians that the only way
forward is to end the incitement and terror and enter
into direct and meaningful negotiations with Israel.

S/PV.7853

Just two months ago, UNESCO approved an absurd
resolution, denying the connection between the Jewish
people and Jerusalem. Today the Council, including
many of the world’s leading democracies — the
beacons of liberty — voted to condemn the State of
Israel. Members voted to condemn the Jewish people
for building homes in the land of Israel, members voted
to ban us from building in our historical capital of
Jerusalem, the heart and soul of the Jewish people, with
the resolution. Tomorrow night, Israel and the entire
Jewish community around the world will celebrate the
holy day of Hanukkah. Over 2,000 years ago, King
Antiochus banished the Jewish people from our temple
in Jerusalem and issued decrees trying to sever us from
religion and our heritage. But we prevailed; the Jewish
people fought back. We gained our independence and
we relit menorah candles in the temples.
I ask each and every member of the Council who
voted for the resolution: Who gave members the right
to issue such a decree, denying our eternal rights in
Jerusalem? Would the Council have had the nerve to
condemn the countries of Council members for building
homes in their capitals? Would members ban the
French from building in Paris? Would members ban the
Russians from building in Moscow? Would members
ban the Chinese from building in Beijing? Would
members ban the British from building in London?
Would members ban the Americans from building in
Washington, D.C.?
We overcame such decrees during the time of the
Maccabees and we will overcome today’s evil decree.
We have full confidence in the justice of our cause and
in the righteousness of our path. We will continue to
be a democratic State, based on the rule of law and full
civil and human rights for all our citizens, and we will
continue to be a Jewish State, proudly reclaiming the
land of our forefathers, where the Maccabees fought the
repressors, and King David ruled from Jerusalem.
This holy book, the Bible, contains 3,000 years
of history of the Jewish people in the land of Israel.
Absolutely no one can change that history.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
I express the State of Palestine’s sincere appreciation
for the principled efforts you have exerted, in both

16-4630115/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

your national capacity as well as in Spain’s capacity as
President of the Security Council for this month.
The Council’s action, while long overdue, is timely,
necessary and important. Resolution 2334 (2016) adopted
today reaffirms the Council’s decades-long position that
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, the eternal capital of the State
of Palestine, have no legal validity, constitute flagrant
breaches under international law, namely the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and constitute a major obstacle
to peace, gravely diminishing the viability of the twoState solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders and the
possibility of realizing it.
We express our appreciation to all the Council
members that supported the resolution. They have
adopted the resolution on behalf of the entire
international community, reflecting the long-standing
global consensus on the matter. We must also express
our gratitude to the four co-sponsors — Malaysia,
New Zealand, Senegal and Venezuela. They have acted
in line with their constant calls for action to redress
the unjust situation, firm in their responsibilities as
Council members. We also thank Angola, as well as
the Non-Aligned Movement caucus members, for their
abiding support. Of course, we also thank our brothers
in Egypt, the Arab representative on the Council, for
all efforts exerted throughout the process. Let me also
thank all those who applauded the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016) here in the Chamber, and the millions who
have applauded in all corners of the globe, especially
those in the State of Palestine.
Over the years we have made countless appeals
to the Council to uphold its duties under the Charter
of the United Nations, convinced of its central role
and the primacy of international law, and insisting
on the need for concerted action to confront Israel’s
oppression of the Palestinian people and relentless
colonization of our land under its half-century foreign
occupation. Our appeals have sought, in the short term,
to alleviate the suffering of our people, a defenceless
civilian population denied of their rights, dignity and
humanity. However, our appeals have also been calls
for the Council to contribute to the cause of peace in the
long term — peace for Palestine, peace for Israel, peace
for the Middle East region and peace for our world.
We have not been alone in our appeals; they have
been echoed by Security Council members themselves
and by the States, organizations, international civil
16/18

23/12/2016

servants and civil society that have come before the
Council to implore it to act, including specifically to
address the illegality of Israeli settlement activities
in occupied Palestine, including East Jerusalem, and
the erosion of the two-State solution based on the
1967 borders and the prospects for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.
That the Council has finally chosen to act is
significant. Let me repeat: that the Council has finally
chosen to act is significant, after years of paralysis, as
is the fact that the resolution has been adopted with
overwhelming majority support. However, this step
requires vigilant follow-up, if it is to be meaningful,
so as to stem further deterioration and salvage the twoState solution from relegation to history’s archives.
Urgent efforts are needed to reverse the dangerous,
negative trends on the ground and to advance our
collective efforts to end the Israeli occupation that began
in 1967, and achieve freedom, rights and justice for the
Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees,
leading to Palestinian-Israeli peace and security, as
well as the goal of Arab-Israeli peace.
No “bashing” is taking place, as repeatedly claimed
by the Israeli Government — not by Palestine, not by
the Council, nor by any who have time and again urged
the Council to act in the interest of peace and security.
Claims of bashing are beyond being offensive, because
in reality today’s action may be too little too late. After
years of allowing the law to be trampled upon and the
situation to spiral downward, today’s resolution 2334
(2016) may rightly be seen as a last attempt to preserve
the two-State solution and revive the path to peace
to keep hope alive. For many, that seems virtually
impossible at this point as Israel, the occupying Power,
has been permitted to entrench its occupation and a
one-State reality with absolute impunity, at times even
being rewarded for its violations and intransigence.
Against that backdrop, one Council resolution in
nearly eight years is not disproportionate; it is shameful.
But today’s vote rectifies that record and sets us on a
new course.
The fact is that only Israel is doing the
bashing — of the Council and the entire United
Nations system — members heard what the Israeli
representative said — of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. For five decades, despite
resolution 242 (1967), calling for Israel’s withdrawal
from the territories it occupied in 1967, and all the
16-46301

23/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolutions thereafter, Israel has persisted full force
with its occupation. Its illegal settlements and the
wall have severely fragmented our land, undermined
its contiguity and isolated East Jerusalem — the heart
and capital of our State and de facto Israeli annexation
of which the international community has never
recognized and continues to reject. Convictions in
the rationality, feasibility and fairness of the twoState solution have been destroyed, as reflected in
the growing negative sentiments among Palestinians,
whether those besieged and inhumanely blockaded for
nearly a decade in the Gaza Strip, or those enduring
the colonization onslaught and daily settler terror in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, or those in
the diaspora, including in our refugee camps across
the region, whose patience in awaiting justice and a
peaceful solution is legendary, yet now so frail.
To the audacious claims of bias, we say that the
only bias taking place is that against the law, against
reason and against the vision of two States as the most
viable solution to this prolonged, illegal occupation
and disastrous, tragic conflict. We have heard it loud
and clear in the gleeful boasts by some Israeli officials
that “the two-State solution is dead” and “there will
be no Palestinian State”. We witness it in the constant
Israeli schemes, including Knesset ploys, attempting
to pervert the law to accommodate the unlawful and
the pretexts used to expropriate and colonize our land
and deepen the occupation. We witness it in Israel’s
blatant contempt of the global demands to comply with
its obligations under the law, as is expected of every
single other State in the international community, and
to finally commit to the path of peace. But today the
Council has said, “enough”. And we thank Council
members for that.
Resolution 2334 (2016) represents a necessary step
for addressing one of the most critical aspects of the
longest issue on the United Nations agenda, a 70-year
open wound, precluding peace and stability in our
region, with far-reaching consequences, not least of
which is fuelling the anger and despair that injustice
breeds, especially among youth, who see no present or
future, and undeniably fuelling much of the radicalism
and extremism plaguing our region and world.
The Security Council must stand firm by that
decision, stand by the law and stand on the right
side of history. It should not be cowed by negative
threats or spin; the Council is doing the right thing by
adopting resolution 2334 (2016). We hope this global

S/PV.7853

call for a cessation of Israeli settlement activities and
violations will serve to compel compliance with the
law, de-escalate tensions, bring an end to the violence,
including all acts of terror, provocations and incitement,
and reverse the negative trends on the ground. That is
vital for salvaging the prospects for peace.
With the Council leading by responsible action,
including follow-up of the reports requested of the
Secretary-General on the resolution’s implementation,
we hope that the coming period will be one of serious
effort to set the course for a credible political horizon
and help the parties advance towards a peaceful
solution. We recognize fully the Arab States’ efforts in
the context of the Arab Peace Initiative, which remains
a cornerstone for peace, and the efforts of France, the
Quartet, Egypt and the Russian Federation. We hope
that those collective efforts, with international support,
will be fulfilled.
We remain firm in our belief that peace — the
central purpose of the Organization — is more than
worthy of both international legislation and action.
We therefore urge intensification of international
and regional efforts to achieve, without delay, an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the 1991 Madrid
Conference terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map, whereby the Palestinian people will
realize their rights and justice, including a just solution
for the Palestine refugees on the basis of resolution
194 (III), and can finally live in freedom and dignity,
exercising their inalienable right to self-determination
in their independent, sovereign and contiguous State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and within secure and
recognized borders.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
concluding this meeting, I would like to express the
sincere appreciation of the delegation of Spain to
the Council members, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives, their respective staff and
teams and also to the secretariat of the Council for
all the support they have given us. It has been a very
busy month, and it would not have been possible to
achieve this outcome without the contribution of the
delegations, the representatives of the Secretariat, the
interpreters, the translators, meeting services, sound

16-4630117/18

S/PV.7853

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/12/2016

engineers, as well as the security officers who kept the
Council safe day after day this month.

Malaysia, New Zealand and the Bolivarian Republic

As this could be the last public meeting of the
Security Council for December 2016, I would like, on
behalf of the Council, to express the sincere appreciation
of the Council to the outgoing members — Angola,

contributions during their term on the Security Council

18/18

of Venezuela. I wish to commend their hard work and
from 2015 to 2016.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

16-46301
