RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AND DECISIONS TAKEN
BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1946
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES ET DECISIONS PRISES
PAR LE CONSEIL DE SECURITE EN 1946

Part I. Questions considered by the Security
Council under its responsibility for the
maintenance o J international peace and
security

Premiere partie. Questions examinees par le
Conseil de securite en tant qu'organe responsable du maintien de la paix et de la
securite internationales

THE IRANIAN QUESTION

LA QUESTION IRANIENNE

Decisions

Decisions

At its 2nd meeting, on 25 January 1946, the Council decided that "the States which have presented complaints should be invited to participate in the work, in
the sittings of the Security Council".

A sa 2eme seance, le 25 janvier 1946, le Conseil a
decide que "Jes gouvernements qui ont formule une
plainte doivent etre invites a participer a l'examen de
la question aux seances du Conseil de securite".

At its 3rd meeting, on 28 January 1946, in accordance
with the decision it had taken at its 2nd meeting, the
Council invited the representative of Iran to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

A sa 3eme seance, le 28 janvier 1946, le Conseil,
conformement a la decision qu'il avait prise a sa 2eme
seance, a invite le representant de l'Iran a participer,
sans droit de vote, a la discussion de la question.

2 (1946). Resolution of 30 January 1946

2 ( 1946). Resolution du 30 janvier 1946

The Security Council,
Having heard the statements by the representatives
of the Soviet Union and Iran in the course of its
meetings of 28 and 30 January 1946,

Le Conseil de securite,
Ayant entendu les declarations faites par Jes representants de !'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques et de l'Iran a ses seances des 28 et 30 janvier
1946,
Ayant pris connaissance des documents presentes par
Jes delegations sovietique et iranienne, ainsi quc des
documents mentionnes au cours des debats,
Considerant que Jes deux parties ont affirme Ieur
intention de chercher, par voie de negociations, une
solution a l'affaire en litige, et que de telles negociations seront reprises prochainement,
Invite Jes parties a informer le Conseil des resultats
obtenus au cours de ces negociations. Le Conseil conserve, clans l'intervalle, le droit de demander a tout
moment des renseignements sur le deroulement desdites
negociations.

Having taken cognizance of the documents presented
by the Soviet and Iranian delegations and those referred
to in the course of the oral debates,
Considering that both parties have affirmed their
readiness to seek a solution of the matter at issue by
negotiation, and that such negotiations will be resumed
in the near future,
Requests the parties to inform the Council of any
results achieved in such negotiations. The Council in
the meanwhile retains the right at any time to request
information on the progress of the negotiations.
AdoPted unanimously at the
5th meeting.

Adoptee d l'unanimite d la
Seme seance.

1
