V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

149

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/187 of 21 December 1976,
in which, inter alia, it expressed deep concern at the
serious economic and social situation in Sao Tome and
Principe as a result of the total lack of infrastructure for
development and appealed urgently to the international
community to assist the Government of Sao Tome and
Principe to enable it to establish the necessary social and
economic infrastructure for development,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/96 of 13 December
1977, 33/125 of 19 December 1978 and 34/131 of 14 December 1979, in which it reiterated its appeal to the international community to provide financial, material
and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe,
Recalling further that in its resolution 33 / 125 it noted
the recommendation of the Committee for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, that Sao Tome
and Principe should be assisted during the remainder of
the current decade and that the special difficulties and
upheavals experienced by that country required special
measures, 194
Bearing in mind its resolution 31 / 156 of 21 December
1976 in which it urged all Governments, in particular
those of the developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for the
implementation of the specific action envisaged in
favour of developing island countries, and its resolution
32/185 of 19 December 1977 in which it urged all organizations in the United Nations system to implement,
within their respective spheres of competence, appropriate specific .action in favour of developing island
countries,
Aware that the economic and social development of
Sao Tome and Principe has been seriously hindered not
only by inadequate health, educational and housing facilities but also by inadequate transport infrastructure,
and that ·urgent improvement in these sectors is a prerequisite for the country's future progress,
Taking note of the current development priorities of
the Government of Sao Tome and Principe, notably in
agriculture and livestock, fisheries, manufacture, mining, transport and other infrastructure, and in education, training, health and housing,
Recalling its n;solutions 32 / 160 of 19 December 1977
and 33 / 197 of 29 January 1979 on the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa,

Noting, in this connexion, that substantial international assistance is needed to improve the infrastructure in sea, air and land transport in Sao Tome and
Principe,
Noting section I of decision 80/ 16 of 26 June 1980
adopted by the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme 19 ' to assign a resident representative to Sao Tome and Principe on a fulltime basis,
Noting also paragraph 2 of decision 80/30 of 26 June
1980 adopted by the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme, 1"'
Noting further Economic and Social Council decision
1980/161 of 24 July 1980, in which the Council requested the Committee fo{ Development Planning to review the economic situation in Sao Tome and Principe
with a view to its inclusion in the list of the least developed countries,
Also noting that the Government of Sao Tome and
Principe will convene a conference of donors early in
1981,
Noting with concern that a large number of the projects and programmes identified in the report of
21 August 1980 of the Secretary-General,'"" to which was
annexed the report of the review mission to Sao Tome
and Principe, have not yet been financed,
Also concerned by the conclusion of the report that,
unless there is a significant increase in the volume of international assistance, the Government of Sao Tome
and Principe will not be able to finance a development
programme,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations contained in the annex to the report of the
Secretary-General; 1"°
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States and
international organizations for the assistance provided
to Sao Tome and Principe, both in food aid and development assistance;
4. Regrets, however, that the assistance so far
provided falls far short of the needs of Sao Tome and
Principe;
5. Renews its appeal to Member States, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental bodies to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Sao Tome and Principe to permit the
implementation of the projects and programmes identified in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral and to enable the Government to launch an
effective programme of economic and social development;
6. Urges potential donor countries and international
financial organizations to participate in and respond
positively at the forthcoming conference of donors;
7. Requests Member States and the organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to take
special measures on behalf of Sao Tome and Principe,
pending the examination of its situation by the Committee for Development Planning;
8. Urges the United Nations Development Programme, the appropriate specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to respond
favourably to requests from the Government of Sao

194
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /978.
Supplement No. 6 (E/ 1978/46 and Corr. I), para. 99.

''" Ibid .. /980 Supp/emenr No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev. 1), chap. XI.
'" A/35/333.

mental organizations to co-operate fully with the resident co-ordinator, once appointed;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To dispatch a mission to the Government of
Chad, as a matter of urgency, to assess the scope of the
problem and the volume of humanitarian assistance required;
(b) To mobilize humanitarian assistance from the
international community on behalf of those suffering
from the war;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session on the progress made in the implementation of the present resolution.
84th plenafy meeting
5 December 1980
35/93.

Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe 190

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

150

Tome and Principe for technical assistance to help in
formulating development projects and to assist in the
implementation of its development programme;
9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring to
the attention of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of Sao Tome and Principe,
and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 August 1981;
10. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system to
report periodically to the Secretary-General on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made
available to assist Sao Tome and Principe;
11. Appeals to the international community to contribute to the special account which was established by
the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/96, for the purpose of facilitating
the channelling of contributions to Sao Tome and Principe;
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
(b) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of
the international programme of assistance to Sao Tome
and Principe and the mobilization of assistance;
(c) To keep the situation in Sao Tome and Principe
under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, of the current status of the special
economic assistance programme for Sao Tome and
Principe;
(d) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Sao Tome and Principe and the progress made in
organizing and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session.
84th plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35 /94.

Assistance to Zambia''"

The General Assembly.
Recalling previous United Nations resolutions concerning the question of assistance to Zambia, in particular Security Council resolution 329 ( 1973) of I O March
1973 and Economic and Social Council resolutions 2012
(LXI) of 3 August 1976 and 2093 (LXIII) of 26 July
1977, which commended the decision of the Government of Zambia in 1968 to implement progressively
United Nations mandatory sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia in accordance with Security Council resolution 253 (I 968) of 29 May I 968,

Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/46 of 2 August 1978, in which the Council endorsed the assessment and recommendations contained
in the annex to the report of the Secretary-General of
5 July 1978, 198
Recalling further Security Council resolution 455
(1979) of 23 November 1979 and General Assembly resolution 33/131 of 19 December 1978, in which the Assembly strongly endorsed the appeals made by the
Council and the Secretary-General for international assistance to Zambia,
Recognizing that the Government of Zambia incurred
both direct costs and the costs of contingency measures
as a result of its decision to apply sanctions against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia as well as losses due
to the diversion of limited financial and human resources from the country's normal development,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 19 June 1980, 199 to which was annexed the report of
the review mission which he sent to Zambia,
Noting that the present critical economic situation in
Zambia has been brought about by the effects of applying mandatory sanctions and of continuous attacks
and incursions by Southern Rhodesian forces,
Noting also that the disruption and reorientation of
transport and trade have placed severe strains on and
created complications for Zambia's development programme,
Gravely concerned about the serious damage caused
by the war to the Zambian economy and the danger
presented by the presence of land-mines and other remnants of war in border areas,
Regretting that the international community has not
thus far provided assistance to Zambia on a scale commensurate with the costs as called for in Security Council resolutions 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968, 277 (1970) of
18 March 1970 and 329 (1973) of 10 March 1973.
Taking note of the broad guidelines of the Government of Zambia for its future development strategy,
which includes programmes for agriculture, manufacturing and mining and the long-term developmem
projects and programmes identified by the Government
as requiring international assistance,
Taking note of Zambia's need for resources to overcome its present economic problems and to implement
successfully a stabilization programme directed towards the country's long-term development objectives,
Expressing concern at the critical food shortage
currently being experienced in Zambia as a result of the
continuing drought,
Recognizing that international assistance is urgently
required to allow Zambia to develop an adequate transport capacity on its external routes for imports and exports,
I. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 194
2. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance
provided thus far to Zambia by various States and
regional and international organizations;
3. Expresses its deep concern that the assistance provided to date falls far short of Zambia's needs;
4. Draws the attention of the international community to the additional financial, economic and
--

'"' See also sect. X.B.J. decision J'i/423

--------·-

-

'" E/1978/114.
"" A/35/208-S/ 13924.
