United Nations

A/RES/66/74

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 52

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2011
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/66/426)]

66/74. Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of
19 November 1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949 and all subsequent related
resolutions, including its resolution 65/100 of 10 December 2010,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering
the period from 1 January to 31 December 2010, 1
Taking note of the letter dated 22 June 2011 from the Chair of the Advisory
Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East to the Commissioner-General, 2
Deeply concerned about the critical financial situation of the Agency, caused
in part by the structural underfunding of the Agency, as well as its rising
expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the socio-economic and
humanitarian conditions and the instability in the region and their significant
negative impact on the provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine
refugees, including its emergency-related and development programmes,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 3
Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, 4
_______________
1
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/66/13); and ibid.,
Supplement No. 13A (A/66/13/Add.1).
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/66/13),
pp. vi and vii.
3
Resolution 22 A (I).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

11-46326

*1146326*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/74

Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 5 to the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees in all fields of
operation, namely, Jordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied
Palestinian Territory,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult socio-economic conditions
being faced by the Palestine refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, particularly in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, as a
result of the continuing prolonged Israeli closures, the construction of settlements
and the wall, and the severe economic and movement restrictions that in effect
amount to a blockade, which have deepened unemployment and poverty rates
among the refugees,
Gravely concerned also about the continuing negative repercussions of the
military operations in the Gaza Strip between December 2008 and January 2009,
which caused extensive loss of life and injury, particularly among Palestinian
civilians, including children and women; widespread destruction and damage to
Palestinian homes, properties, vital infrastructure and public institutions, including
hospitals, schools and United Nations facilities; and internal displacement of
civilians, including refugees,
Commending the extraordinary efforts by the Agency to provide emergency
relief, medical, food, shelter and other humanitarian assistance to needy and
displaced families in the Gaza Strip,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
Expressing regret over the continued restrictions that impede the Agency’s
efforts to repair and rebuild thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters,
and calling upon Israel to ensure the unimpeded import of essential construction
materials into the Gaza Strip, while taking note of recent developments regarding
the situation of access there,
Expressing concern about the severe classroom shortage in the Gaza Strip and
the consequent negative impact on the right to education of refugee children as a
result of the constraints on the ability of the Agency to construct new schools due to
Israel’s ongoing restrictions impeding the entry of necessary construction materials
into the Gaza Strip,
Stressing the urgent need for the advancement of reconstruction in the Gaza
Strip, including through the completion of suspended projects managed by the
Agency, and for the accelerated implementation of other urgent United Nations-led
civilian reconstruction activities,
Urging the continuing disbursement of pledges made at the International
Conference in Support of the Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza,
held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009, to accelerate the reconstruction
process,

_______________
5

2

Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.

A/RES/66/74

Noting with appreciation the completion of the first phase of the project to
rebuild the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp, commending the Government of Lebanon,
donors, the Agency and other concerned parties for the important progress made and
for the continuing efforts to assist affected and displaced refugees, and emphasizing
the need for additional funding to complete the reconstruction of the camp and end
the displacement of its twenty-seven thousand residents without delay,
Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the
Palestinian people, in particular Palestine refugees,
Deploring the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff and the
damage and destruction caused to the facilities and properties of the Agency,
including damage caused to the Agency’s “Summer Games” recreational properties,
during the reporting period,
Deploring also, in particular, the extensive damage and destruction of Agency
facilities in the Gaza Strip caused during the military operations between December
2008 and January 2009, including schools where civilians were sheltered and the
Agency’s main compound and warehouse, as reported in the summary by the
Secretary-General of the report of the Board of Inquiry 6 and in the report of the
United Nations Fact-finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, 7
Deploring further, in this regard, the breaches of the inviolability of United
Nations premises, the failure to accord the property and assets of the Organization
immunity from any form of interference and the failure to protect United Nations
personnel, premises and property,
Deploring the killing and injury of Agency staff members by the Israeli
occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory since September 2000,
Deploring also the killing and wounding of refugee children in the Agency
schools by the Israeli occupying forces during the military operations between
December 2008 and January 2009,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the
freedom of movement and access of the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the
injury, harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which undermine and
obstruct the work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and
emergency services,
Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an
exchange of letters between the Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization, 8
1.
Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields
of operation;
Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the United
2.
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as to all of the staff of the Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work,

_______________
6

See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
A/HRC/12/48.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
7

3

A/RES/66/74

particularly in the light of the difficult conditions and unstable circumstances faced
during the past year;
3.
Expresses special commendation to the Agency for the essential role that
it has played for over sixty years since its establishment in providing vital services
for the well-being, human development and protection of the Palestine refugees and
the amelioration of their plight;
Expresses its appreciation for the important support provided by the host
4.
Governments to the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
5.
Also expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
and requests it to continue its efforts and to keep the General Assembly informed of
its activities;
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the
6.
Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East 9 and the efforts to assist in ensuring the financial security of the
Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary services and
assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
Commends the Agency’s six-year Medium-Term Strategy, which
7.
commenced in January 2010, and the continuing efforts of the CommissionerGeneral to increase the budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as
reflected in the Agency’s programme budget for the biennium 2012–2013; 10
8.
Also commends the Agency for sustaining its reform efforts, and urges it
to continue to apply maximum efficiency procedures to reduce operational and
administrative costs and to maximize the use of resources;
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
9.
the strengthening of the management capacity of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, 11 and further urges all
Member States to carefully consider its proposal for support by the SecretaryGeneral of the institutional strengthening of the Agency through the provision of
financial resources from the regular budget of the United Nations;
10. Endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a
temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally displaced and in
serious need of continued assistance as a result of recent crises in the Agency’s
fields of operation;
11. Welcomes the progress made thus far by the Agency in rebuilding the
Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon, and calls for the expeditious
completion of its reconstruction, for the continued provision of relief assistance to
those displaced following its destruction in 2007 and for the alleviation of their
ongoing suffering through the fulfilment of pledges made at the International Donor
Conference for the Recovery and Reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared Palestine
Refugee Camp and Conflict-affected Areas of Northern Lebanon, held in Vienna on
23 June 2008;
_______________
9

A/66/520.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/66/13/Add.1).
11
A/65/705.
10

4

A/RES/66/74

12. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United
Nations entities, to continue making progress in addressing the needs and rights of
children, women and persons with disabilities in its operations in accordance with
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 12 the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 13 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, 14 respectively;
13. Commends, in this regard, the Agency’s “Summer Games” initiative
providing recreational, cultural and educational activities for children in the Gaza
Strip and, recognizing its positive contribution, calls for full support of the
initiative;
14. Expresses concern about the relocation of the international staff of the
Agency from its headquarters in Gaza City and the disruption of operations at the
headquarters due to the deterioration and instability of the situation on the ground;
15. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949;5
16. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations3 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel of the Agency,
the protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
17. Urges the Government of Israel to expeditiously reimburse the Agency
for all transit charges incurred and other financial losses sustained as a result of
delays and restrictions on movement and access imposed by Israel;
18. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and
access of the staff, vehicles and supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of
taxes, extra fees and charges, which affect the Agency’s operations detrimentally;
19. Reiterates its call upon Israel to fully lift the restrictions impeding the
import of necessary construction materials and supplies for the reconstruction and
repair of thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters, and for the
implementation of suspended civilian infrastructure projects in refugee camps in the
Gaza Strip, while noting the commencement of several projects in this regard;
20. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of
identification cards for Palestine refugees and their descendants in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory;
21. Notes with appreciation the progress made by the Agency in the
modernization of its archives through the Palestine Refugee Records Project,
including the completion of phase I, and encourages the Commissioner-General to
finalize the remaining components of the Project as rapidly as possible and to report
on the progress made to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session;
22. Also notes with appreciation the success of the Agency’s microfinance
programme, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant

_______________
12

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
14
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
13

5

A/RES/66/74

agencies, to continue to contribute to the development of the economic and social
stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
23. Reiterates its appeals to all States, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to continue and to augment the special allocations
for grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees in addition to
their contributions to the regular budget of the Agency and to contribute to the
establishment of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the
Agency to act as the recipient and trustee for the special allocations for grants and
scholarships;
24. Urges all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to continue and to increase their contributions to the Agency in order
to address the serious financial constraints and underfunding, especially with
respect to the Agency’s regular budget deficit, noting that financial shortfalls have
been exacerbated by the current humanitarian situation on the ground that has
resulted in rising expenditures, in particular with regard to emergency services, and
to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary work in assisting the Palestine
refugees in all fields of operation.
81st plenary meeting
9 December 2011

6
