United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/59/84
Distr.: General
10 December 2004

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 65 (v)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2004
[on the report of the First Committee (A/59/459)]

59/84. Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-personnel Mines and on Their Destruction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/54 B of 1 December 1999, 55/33 V of
20 November 2000, 56/24 M of 29 November 2001, 57/74 of 22 November 2002
and 58/53 of 8 December 2003,
Reaffirming its determination to put an end to the suffering and casualties
caused by anti-personnel mines, which kill or maim hundreds of people every week,
mostly innocent and defenceless civilians and especially children, obstruct
economic development and reconstruction, inhibit the repatriation of refugees and
internally displaced persons and have other severe consequences for years after
emplacement,
Believing it necessary to do the utmost to contribute in an efficient and
coordinated manner to facing the challenge of removing anti-personnel mines
placed throughout the world and to assure their destruction,
Wishing to do the utmost in ensuring assistance for the care and rehabilitation,
including the social and economic reintegration, of mine victims,
Welcoming the entry into force, on 1 March 1999, of the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction, 1 and noting with satisfaction the work undertaken
to implement the Convention and the substantial progress made towards addressing
the global landmine problem,
Recalling the first to fifth meetings of the States parties to the Convention
held in Maputo (1999), 2 Geneva (2000), 3 Managua (2001), 4 Geneva (2002) 5 and
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2056, No. 35597.
See APLC/MSP.1/1999/1.
3
See APLC/MSP.2/2000/1.
4
See APLC/MSP.3/2001/1.
5
See APLC/MSP.4/2002/1.
2

04-48130

A/RES/59/84

Bangkok (2003), 6 and the reaffirmation of a commitment to the total elimination of
anti-personnel mines and to pursue, with renewed vigour, efforts to clear mined
areas, assist victims, destroy stockpiled anti-personnel mines and promote universal
adherence to the Convention,
Recalling also the preparatory process for the First Review Conference of the
Convention, to be held in Nairobi from 29 November to 3 December 2004, and the
two preparatory meetings held in Geneva on 13 February and on 28 and 29 June
2004 pursuant to the decisions of the Fifth Meeting of the States Parties, 7
Welcoming the regional seminars that have been held in different parts of the
world during 2003 and 2004, which contributed to the exchange of information,
experiences and best practices in mine action as well as to preparations for the First
Review Conference, and recalling the efforts to enhance cooperation in the regional
context and promote synergies between different regions,
Noting with interest the increased recognition of the need to integrate mine
action into international and national development programmes and strategies, and,
in this respect, welcoming the developments since the Fifth Meeting of the States
Parties, including the meeting between the President of the Fifth Meeting of the
States Parties and the President of the World Bank on 20 September 2004, which
contributed to possible partnership between the mine action community and the
World Bank,
Noting with satisfaction that additional States have ratified or acceded to the
Convention, bringing the total number of States that have formally accepted the
obligations of the Convention to one hundred and forty-three,
Emphasizing the desirability of attracting the adherence of all States to the
Convention, and determined to work strenuously towards the promotion of its
universalization,
Noting with regret that anti-personnel mines continue to be used in conflicts
around the world, causing human suffering and impeding post-conflict development,
1.
Invites all States that have not signed the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction1 to accede to it without delay;
2.
Urges all States that have signed but not ratified the Convention to ratify
it without delay;
3.
Stresses the importance of the full and effective implementation of and
compliance with the Convention;
4.
Urges all States parties to provide the Secretary-General with complete
and timely information as required under article 7 of the Convention in order to
promote transparency and compliance with the Convention;
Invites all States that have not ratified the Convention or acceded to it to
5.
provide, on a voluntary basis, information to make global mine action efforts more
effective;

_______________
6
7

2

See APLC/MSP.5/2003/5.
Ibid., part I, sect. E.

A/RES/59/84

6.
Renews its call upon all States and other relevant parties to work together
to promote, support and advance the care, rehabilitation and social and economic
reintegration of mine victims, mine risk education programmes and the removal of
anti-personnel mines and stockpiles throughout the world and the assurance of their
destruction;
Invites and encourages all interested States, the United Nations, other
7.
relevant international organizations or institutions, regional organizations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant non-governmental
organizations to attend the First Review Conference at the highest possible level
and, pending a decision to be taken at the First Review Conference, to maintain the
high level of participation in the subsequent meetings of the States parties, including
their intersessional work programme;
Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the preparations necessary
8.
to convene the next meeting of the States parties, pending a decision to be taken at
the First Review Conference, and to invite States not parties to the Convention, as
well as the United Nations, other relevant international organizations or institutions,
regional organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and relevant
non-governmental organizations to attend the meeting as observers;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixtieth session the
9.
item entitled “Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction”.
66th plenary meeting
3 December 2004

3
