S/PV.8090

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8090th meeting

Tuesday, 7 November 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cardi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 October 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/904)
Letter dated 25 October 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/905)
Letter dated 30 October 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/916)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-36807 (E)
*1736807*

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

contact with the Director General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to discuss matters related to this file. In anticipation
of this briefing, I spoke to him yesterday. I have also
received a written update from the Permanent Mission
of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 October 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/904)
Letter dated 25 October 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/905)
Letter dated 30 October 2017 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/916)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Head of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/904, which contains the text of a letter
dated 26 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
document S/2017/905, which contains the text of a letter
dated 25 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
document S/2017/916, which contains the text of a letter
dated 30 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic. As always, I have remained in
2/28

07/11/2017

With regard to progress related to the implementation
of resolution 2118 (2013), there is one new development
to report. As the Council is aware, two of the 27
chemical weapons production facilities declared by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic remain to
be destroyed. Following a long-standing delay due to
the security situation at the site, those two stationary
above-ground facilities can now be accessed. The
OPCW is currently conducting a visit to those two
facilities in order to confirm their condition. That is the
first step in the process of OPCW verification of the
destruction of those facilities.
I regret to note that the long-standing issue related
to Syria’s declaration and subsequent amendments
remains, in spite of the fourth round of high-level
consultations that took place in The Hague in September.
As the Director General stated in his most recent note to
the OPCW Executive Council, neither the information
provided during the consultations nor the latest
submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic have enabled
the resolution of all identified gaps, inconsistencies and
discrepancies in Syria’s declaration.
Efforts to resolve those issues have been hampered
by a lack of original historical records, as well as what
the Director General has described as an
“ongoing lack of access to and engagement with
senior leaders/officials who have an overarching
knowledge of the Syrian chemical weapons
programme” (S/2017/916, para. 10).
While it is a positive step that the Government of Syria
has chosen to declare additional laboratories in their
rooms in the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre, the OPCW assessment remains that the
declaration of the Centre is incomplete.
On 2 November, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (FFM) submitted its
report on the alleged incident of the use of chemical
weapons at Ltamenah on 30 March. Last month, the
Director General informed that environmental samples
provided to the FFM team, and reportedly connected
to the 30 March incident at Ltamenah, showed the
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

presence of sarin. The report of the FFM stated that,
given the limitations in some evidence, the FFM was
not able to determine with absolute certainty the use of
a chemical weapon.
However, the FFM was able to determine the
presence of sarin on samples that came from the
alleged site of the incident; that causalities from that
site and time period displayed symptoms and received
treatment consistent with exposure to sarin; and that
munition parts from the alleged site of the incident
were consistent with the application of a chemical
weapon. As a result, the FFM was able to conclude
that sarin was more than likely used at that incident.
The FFM is continuing its work on looking into other
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
These most recent findings of the FFM are deeply
concerning, all the more so in view of the fact that
the mandate of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is set to end on 16 November.
Allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
have not ceased and therefore nor has the need to
identify and to hold accountable those responsible for
their use. The unity of the Council will be necessary in
order to prevent impunity for the use of those abhorrent
weapons. As always, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs remains ready to provide any
support and assistance that it can as we work together
to restore the universal norm against chemical weapons
and to strengthen the broader non-proliferation regime.
The President: I thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to introduce the seventh report of the Leadership Panel
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(S/2017/904, annex). I am joined by Ms. Judy ChengHopkins and Mr. Stefan Mogl. Together, the three of us
form the Leadership Panel.
Members will recall that the mandate of the
Mechanism, as established by the Security Council, is
to identify, to the greatest extent feasible, individuals,
entities, groups or Governments that were perpetrators,
organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use
of chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Mechanism is not a judicial body; rather, it
is an investigative mechanism that reports to the

S/PV. 8090

Security Council. Despite the very real challenges of
investigating complex cases in the midst of an ongoing
armed conflict, the Mechanism has taken great care to
ensure that its methodology and findings are technically
and scientifically sound.
The report contains the findings in respect of, first,
the use of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh on 15 and
16 September 2016 and, secondly, the use of sarin at
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. The findings of the
Leadership Panel have been drawn on the basis of the
sum total of information and evidence obtained by the
Mechanism, as set out in the report and its annexes.
The Leadership Panel has identified the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant as responsible for the use
of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh and the Syrian Arab
Republic as responsible for the use of sarin at Khan
Shaykhun. Before I go into detail about these findings,
I will spend a few minutes outlining the methodology
of the Mechanism.
In collecting, analysing and assessing information,
the Mechanism was guided by the terms of reference,
as approved by the Security Council, and the methods
of work, as outlined in its previous reports. It conducted
its work in an independent, impartial and professional
manner. In making its findings on responsibility,
the Leadership Panel was guided by the evidentiary
standards, as set forth in its first report (S/2016/142,
annex). In the cases at hand, the Leadership Panel
determined that there was sufficient evidence of
a credible and reliable nature to make its findings
regarding the parties involved in the use of chemical
weapons in each incident.
In accordance with its mandate, the Mechanism
took the findings of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission
(FFM) that a chemical weapon had been used as a starting
point for each case and actively gathered additional
information regarding each incident. It applied the same
methodology with respect to both cases and pursued a
rigorous and independent examination of the available
information. In doing so, it examined possible scenarios
as to how the incidents may have happened, including
those put forward by Member States. For the incident
at Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism examined eight
scenarios; for Umm Hawsh, it examined four scenarios.
That methodology ensured that the Mechanism covered
all possibilities and conducted a thorough, impartial
and objective investigation.

17-368073/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

In conducting its investigations into the incidents
at Umm Hawsh and at Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism
collected information from a wide range of sources.
In response to requests for information, 12 Member
States, including the Syrian Arab Republic, provided
case-specific information. The Mechanism interviewed
over 30 witnesses in addition to those interviewed by the
FFM, and collected and reviewed 2,247 photographs,
1,284 files of video footage, 120 audio files and 639
documents, most of which required translation. I
visited Damascus in August. Technical teams visited
Damascus in September and the Al-Shayrat airbase in
October. Technical teams also visited a neighbouring
country on two occasions to interview witnesses and to
collect materials.
I wish to mention that the Syrian Arab Republic
engaged constructively with the Mechanism. The Syrian
Arab Republic provided full cooperation and facilitated
the Mechanism’s requests for access to information and
witnesses. The Syrian Arab Republic also provided
the reports of its own technical investigations into
the incidents, which were carefully reviewed by
the Mechanism.

07/11/2017

Shaykhun, the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security highlighted challenges, such as indirect
artillery fire and recurrent air strikes. Moreover, the
Department of Safety and Security advised that any
possible access arrangements negotiated with the
armed groups controlling the area would not be without
residual security risks. Notwithstanding the possible
benefits of site visits, the Leadership Panel considered
that the Mechanism had gathered sufficient information
to come to a solid conclusion in both cases.
Witnesses were a very important source of
information. Regarding Umm Hawsh, witnesses
interviewed by the Mechanism included victims of the
attack, journalists present in the period immediately
following the attack, doctors who treated victims and
commanders of non-State armed groups. Regarding
the incident at Khan Shaykhun, witnesses included
residents, personnel from the Al-Shayrat airbase,
Government officials, doctors who treated victims,
rescue personnel and commanders of non-State
armed groups.

Collecting samples at the airbase was not an
objective. The Mechanism considered that if a single
chemical munition had been flown from the airbase,
there was little chance of finding any trace of sarin or
its degradation products without specific information as
to where to collect samples. The size of the Al-Shayrat
airbase is approximately 10 square kilometres,
equivalent to more than 900 football fields,

The Mechanism also obtained independent
expert analysis and assessments. It engaged several
internationally recognized forensic and specialist
defence institutes, as well as OPCW-designated
laboratories, to provide forensic and expert support to
the investigation. All of those bodies were selected on
the basis of their independence, established expertise
and record of outstanding performance. The forensic
institutes and OPCW-designated laboratories are
accredited according to international standards. They
were engaged by the Mechanism to authenticate
photographs and video footage to verify the times
and places where they were taken and to provide
independent expert assessments and simulations
with respect to items depicted, as well as chemical
synthesis and analysis. The Mechanism also consulted
with several internationally recognized experts on
energetic materials and the medical effects of chemical
warfare agents.

The Mechanism did not visit the sites of the
incidents at Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun. While a
visit to those sites, in particular Khan Shaykhun, may
have been of value it was too dangerous to visit Khan
Shaykhun, which is in a situation of armed conflict and
under the control of the Al-Nusrah Front, a terrorist
organization. In response to a request for a security
assessment in respect of a possible site visit to Khan

With regard to Umm Hawsh, expert analysis
was provided with respect to the impact location,
the munition, the trajectory of the munition and its
likely delivery method, as well as the medical effects
on victims. With regard to Khan Shaykhun, expert
analysis was provided with respect to the nature of the
plumes resulting from explosions and their effects, the
characteristics of the crater and their likely cause, the

For its visit to the Al-Shayrat airbase, the
Mechanism had a number of objectives, including
to verify the authenticity of the logbooks and flight
operations records from 4 April 2017; to review entry
and exit records and to interview responsible personnel;
to photograph the types of munitions flown on 4 April
2017, in accordance with the records received; and to
photograph the means for attaching such munitions
onto Sukhoi SU-22 aircraft.

4/28

17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

remnants of the munitions, the dispersion of sarin, the
amount of explosives used and the medical effects.
The Mechanism commissioned an in-depth
laboratory study with respect to the chemistry of sarin.
The objective of the study was to test whether the sarin
found in Khan Shaykhun could be linked to chemicals
from the original stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Mechanism sent samples that were collected by the
OPCW in 2014 from the stockpile of the Syrian Arab
Republic to OPCW-designated laboratories. The study
showed that the samples from Khan Shaykhun match
a particular chemical from the Syrian Arab Republic
stockpile that is required to make sarin. That chemical
is the precursor chemical for sarin and is called DF.
As I mentioned earlier, the Mechanism operates in a
non-traditional setting. It does not have judicial powers
and cannot compel the submission of information
or documents to it. It relies instead on the voluntary
cooperation of witnesses and those in possession of
relevant information. The Mechanism cross-checks
witness statements and works to ensure that the
information gathered is credible and reliable, through
means of verification and corroboration, as well as
other measures of quality control. When assessing
information, the Mechanism systematically and
thoroughly examined the source of the information and
whether there were factors that may affect its reliability,
such as whether information was based on first-hand
experience of the events or hearsay, or whether there
were concerns as to the chain of custody.
When corroborating information considered
important to its investigation, the Mechanism paid
particular attention to the possibility of circular
reporting so as to ensure that corroboration was based
on independent sources of information. Questions have
been asked about the possible motives for the use of
chemical weapons in each case. The Leadership Panel
noted that it was not helpful for the investigation to
speculate, and focused on technical issues instead.
Let me now turn to the findings of the Leadership
Panel in the two cases. On 15 and 16 September 2016,
two women were found to have been exposed to sulphur
mustard at Umm Hawsh. A mortar shell containing
sulphur mustard hit the house of one of the victims,
who, together with her neighbour, was exposed when
cleaning a black substance from the wall of her house.
A second mortar shell containing sulphur mustard
was recovered lodged in the pavement. The damage to

S/PV. 8090

the victim’s house indicated that the trajectory of the
mortar shell that caused such damage came from the
south-east. The trajectory of the second mortar shell
found in the pavement was determined to have come
from east or south-east of the impact location.
The Mechanism determined that the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was fighting against
groups belonging to the Syrian defence forces from the
outskirts of Umm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September 2016.
It also determined that ISIL was positioned along three
sides of Umm Hawsh, specifically to the east and southeast of the village, which was the assessed origin of the
chemical mortar shells. Based on the positioning of ISIL
and the forensic assessment that the mortar shell came
from the direction of ISIL-held areas, the Leadership
Panel is confident that ISIL is responsible for the use of
the mortar shells containing sulphur mustard.
With regard to Khan Shaykhun, on the morning
of 4 April 2017 an incident involving sarin killed
approximately 100 people in Khan Shaykhun, and
affected another 200 people who survived acute
exposure. In the course of conducting its investigation
to identify those responsible, the Mechanism examined
eight possible scenarios, including that the incident may
have been staged in an attempt to place responsibility
on the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
mechanism rigorously investigated possible indicators
for all scenarios. In doing so, it gathered and closely
examined information from a wide range of sources.
While expert examination of the crater did not rule
out that it could have been caused by means other
than an aerial bomb, the Mechanism found nothing to
prove that the incident had been staged — and when
I say nothing, I mean nothing. Certain irregularities
and inconsistencies emerged in the course of the
investigation, and they were scrutinized and are
described in detail in the annex to the report. However,
they were not of the nature to change the assessment of
the Leadership Panel.
Mindful of the complexities of the case and
the polarized political environment surrounding
the investigation, the Mechanism actively pursued
unbiased sources of evidence of what happened in Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April. They included video footage from
two separate sources taken that morning, which showed
a series of explosions across Khan Shaykhun, was
authenticated by forensic institutes as not having been
manipulated, and verified to have been filmed between
6.42 a.m. and 6.52 a.m. on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun;

17-368075/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

07/11/2017

satellite imagery of the crater and its surroundings
before and after the incident; video footage and
photographs of the crater assessed by a forensic institute
to have been recorded between 8.04 a.m. and 9.17 a.m.,
and the chemical analysis of the sarin samples that had
been collected by the OPCW Fact-finding Mission from
both the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
non-governmental organizations.

to be consistent with a thin-walled chemical aerial
bomb, was too big and too deeply embedded for the
IED scenario to be likely. The large number of persons
affected by the release of sarin on 4 April, and the fact
that sarin reportedly continued to be present at the site
of the crater 10 days after the incident, indicate that a
large amount of sarin was released, consistent with its
having been dispersed via a chemical aerial bomb.

The Mechanism carefully put together pieces of a
complex puzzle of which some parts are still missing.
For example, it could not establish with certainty that
the aircraft that delivered the chemical bomb took off
from the Al-Shayrat air base, or the type of aircraft
involved. Yet, the parts of that puzzle that have been
established and put together are clear with respect to
certain critical elements.

Finally, the in-depth laboratory study into the
chemistry of sarin revealed that the sarin used in
Khan Shaykhun was very likely to have been made
from the same precursor that came from the original
stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic. That precursor,
known as DF, is a key component of binary sarin,
the kind used at Khan Shaykhun. That conclusion is
based on the presence of unique marker chemicals that
were identified by OPCW laboratories in the samples
from Khan Shaykhun, as provided to the Fact-finding
Mission by both the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and non-governmental organizations. The
same marker chemicals were found in the DF samples
from the original stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic
and in sarin made with that same DF. Binary sarin with
the same composition of marker chemicals would be
very difficult to replicate, even if the exact composition
were known. The in-depth laboratory study further
revealed the production process used to make the
DF precursor. That process requires a high degree of
competence and sophistication, and points towards a
chemical plant production.

Aircraft dropped munitions on Khan Shaykhun
between 6.30 a.m. and 7 a.m. that day. Witnesses saw
and heard aircraft at that time and two of them even
recorded video footage showing a series of explosive
plumes across Khan Shaykhun at that very time that
morning. Forensic analysis confirmed that aircraft and
explosion sounds can be heard in the background of those
videos. Aircraft of the Syrian Arab Republic were in
the immediate vicinity of Khan Shaykhun between 6.30
a.m. and 7 a.m. That was established via information
provided by the Syrian Arab Republic itself, as well as
via information provided by several other sources. The
crater from which the sarin emanated was created on
4 April. That was established by satellite imagery.
The crater was determined by expert analysis to
have been most likely caused by the impact of an aerial
bomb travelling at high velocity. That was the outcome
of analysis by several independent, internationally
recognized institutes with specialization in areas of
forensics, defence and security, as well as two individual
experts on energetic materials. While they did not rule
out completely that it could have been caused by other
means, they said it was very unlikely in the light of the
nature of the damage around the crater.
Experts examined whether an improvised explosive
device (lED) could have caused the crater. They assessed
that a crater of that size would require an equivalent
of 10 kilograms of TNT, but generally ruled out that
possibility on account that such an explosion would
cause much more damage than what was observed in
the area. Moreover, experts observed that the metal
object protruding from the crater, which was assessed
6/28

The Leadership Panel is confident that when taken
together, all these elements constitute clear evidence
that the Syrian Arab Republic is responsible for the use
of sarin at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. Aircraft is in the
air at the relevant time; the crater is caused; the crater
was most likely caused by a high-velocity aerial bomb;
a large number of persons are affected by sarin that
morning; sarin is found in and around the crater; and
samples of the sarin taken from the crater are found to
contain unique markers that match those of the precursor
from the stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic.
With respect to the responsibility of the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Mechanism did not identify specific
actors within the Government and institutions of the
Syrian Arab Republic. The nature and logistics of
the operation would involve a range of actors from
different areas.
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

The international community achieved a major
milestone when it prohibited chemical weapons in their
entirety. When chemical weapons were used despite
such prohibition, the Mechanism was established by the
Council to identify those responsible. The Mechanism
has carried out its mandate in respect of the incidents
at Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun. It is now for the
Security Council to consider next steps. In doing so, I
ask the Council to also consider the victims of those
insidious acts.
Attaining a world without chemical weapons is
an imperative requiring concrete and unified action.
The Security Council has a unique responsibility in
that regard, including to deter all those who continue
to believe that there is something to be gained from
their use. I understand the political issues surrounding
the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. However,
this is not a political issue, but an issue about the
lives of innocent civilians. Impunity must not prevail.
The international community must ensure that it has
effective ways to respond rapidly to any future use of
chemical weapons, including acts of chemical terrorism.
The international community, including the
Security Council, has forcefully condemned any use of
chemical weapons by anyone under any circumstances.
And yet, as I brief the Council today, we have received
another determination by the OPCW of the use of sarin
in Ltamenah in the Syrian Arab Republic.
As I stated to this organ in July, I have hope that
together we can end the use of such weapons forever.
We must let the gains of the international community
be lost. Let us move forward with humanity and
renewed collective commitment to end the use of
chemical weapons.

S/PV. 8090

Envoy to Haiti. His long list of academic credentials
is impressive. In other words, Mr. Mulet is a man very
much like the institution he heads — experienced,
professional and independent. All of those qualities are
reflected in the JIM’s latest report (S/2017/904, annex).
Our friends from Russia have insisted that we put
off the crucial task of reauthorizing the JIM until we
have discussed the report. They tell us that they want to
determine who is responsible for the chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. Russia affirmed that desire when it
voted to create the JIM in 2015 and to reauthorize it in
2016. I share that desire for answers, so let me try to
address their concerns.
The JIM has fulfilled its mandate to identify the
perpetrators of chemical weapons attacks in Syria. It
had produced a report that concludes that the Al-Assad
regime is responsibility for the 4 April sarin gas attack
at Khan Shaykhun. In addition, the report concludes
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is responsible for the September 2016 sulfur mustard
attack at Umm Hawsh. Our Russian friends tell us they
want to ensure that the report and the work of the JIM
itself are professional and impartial. Again, I agree
with them.
The JIM’s report not only identifies those behind
the chemical attacks, it also explains how it reached
its conclusion. It lays out in great detail how the
team carried out such a challenging investigation.
And just as any independent team of experts would,
it takes note of any irregularities that it found in the
information obtained from the investigation. The report
transparently lays out those facts, but determines that
they do not call into question the findings.

Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
thank Ms. Nakamitsu for her briefing today.

Russia has insisted that it is ready to return to
the question of extending the JIM’s mandate after the
publication of the latest report. “Give us more time”,
they said two weeks ago. “Give us until 7 November”,
they said as they acted to protect one of the world’s
most murderous regimes from the consequences of its
actions. Today is 7 November.

I want to say a special word about Mr. Mulet and to
thank him for being here. One look at his resume shows
that he is the right man to lead the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). He had a distinguished
career in public service in his home country of
Guatemala. He has served as the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations and as Special

In the intervening days, we have tried to work with
our friends from Russia in order to ensure that we could
achieve a unanimous reauthorization. We have listened
carefully to Russia’s concerns regarding methodology
and site visits, even though most Council members do
not share them. We have much that we can agree on.
We can agree to strengthen the language on the use of
chemical weapons by terrorists. We can also emphasize

The President: I thank Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Council members who wish
to make statements.

17-368077/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

the need for all parties to help investigators access sites
in Syria relevant to their investigation, and we can
underscore the ongoing importance of high standards
and sound evidence for each attribution. On those issues
we want to work with Russia and find common ground.
All of those items are found in Russia’s proposed draft
resolution. We can accept all of them as a show of good
faith and a desire to find consensus. We have told that
to our Russian friends, and we intend to circulate our
text this afternoon.
However, we cannot put language in the draft
resolution that keeps the Syrians from being
investigated or from having been found to have used
chemical weapons. That is completely up to Syria and
Russia to work out. Yet, even though we have continued
to engage Russia bilaterally and have made efforts to
address its concerns since it vetoed the draft resolution
two weeks ago, our Russian friends continue to push
unacceptable language that is meant only to undermine
the investigators and divide the Council.
The team of experts that the Council created to
investigate those horrific attacks in Syria has done its
job. Now it is time for us to do our job. Since 2012,
there have been hundreds of reports of uses of chemical
weapons in Syria. That is not something that we can turn
away from. Our concern is not about ISIL, the Syrian
regime or anyone else. It is about the people of Syria
and their protection. Ensuring that those responsible
be identified and held accountable is critical to ending
the use of chemical weapons. The Council has created
the tool, the Joint Investigative Mechanism, to do just
that. Now is the time for the Council to unanimously
renew the JIM’s mandate in order to ensure that it will
continue to do its crucial work for at least another year.
The arguments for renewing the JIM’s mandate are
clear. Its most recent report has only strengthened those
arguments. We must ensure continuity of operations.
Last year’s delay in renewing the JIM cost it nearly six
months of work. We cannot afford such a loss this year
when there is evidence of the ongoing use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Tragically, there is no lack of cases for
the JIM to investigate. Just last week, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding
Mission determined that the chemical weapon, sarin
gas, was used in the attack that took place on 30 March,
injuring more than 70 people. That incident bears the
hallmarks of the Khan Shaykhun attack that occurred
just a few days later. I remember vividly the faces of
the murdered children of Khan Shaykhun. I remember
8/28

07/11/2017

the outrage expressed by the Council. In 2015, the
Council came together in a rare moment of unity in
order to identify those who used chemical weapons
and to ensure that such barbaric acts did not continue.
The result of that rare unity was the JIM, which is the
best tool we have to ensure that no individual, group or
regime is allowed to attack with chemical weapons and
get away with it.
The JIM will cease its operations in 10 short days.
There can now be no higher priority for the Security
Council than to ensure the continued operation of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. Anyone who prevents
us from achieving that goal is aiding and abetting
those who have been using chemical weapons in Syria.
They are helping to ensure not just that more women
and children will die, but also that those women and
children will die in one of the cruellest, most painful
ways possible. We are better than that. We must
be. Now is the time to show the world. I call on the
Security Council to act immediately to renew the Joint
Investigative Mechanism.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank UnderSecretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu and the Head of
the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), Mr. Edmond Mulet, for their
briefings on the issue of Syrian chemical weapons. We
particularly welcome the submission of the seventh
report of the JIM (S/2017/904, annex), which contains
crystal clear conclusions regarding the perpetrators of
two chemical weapons attacks in Syria, namely, those
in Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun.
Ukraine commends the JIM’s efforts in conducting
impartial, objective and independent investigations.
We are acutely conscious of the great difficulties
encountered by the Mechanism in its work, given
the abundant political sensitivities and concerted
efforts by some to defend those responsible for having
organized and committed horrible crimes with the use
of chemical weapons.
We also take note of the forty-ninth monthly report
(S/2017/916, annex) of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) regarding the status of the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). Ukraine endorses continuous
constructive interaction between the OPCW missions
and the JIM, and has full confidence in their expertise
and professionalism.
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

After 20 years since its entry into force, the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is widely
recognized as the first multilateral instrument that
bans an entire class of weapons of mass destruction
and subjects them to strict international control and
compliance mechanisms. The Convention has made
a major contribution to strengthening international
peace and security by setting new standards for global
disarmament and non-proliferation and providing
assistance and protection against chemical weapons.
There used to be a broad international consensus that
the use of chemical weapons could not be tolerated,
whatever the circumstances might be. That seems not
to be the case anymore. We continue to see efforts to
undermine the role and status of the CWC, which is
a unique example of synergy between political will
and common sense. Justice for the victims of chemical
attacks in Syria has been denied so far.
I wish to recall that impunity for breaching the
Chemical Weapons Convention undermines the
credibility of the Security Council, which has at its
disposal all the necessary tools to respond decisively
to such crimes. The potential risks and threats that
may arise from the Council’s inaction on the issue are
very high and may trigger very serious consequences
beyond Syria. We must remain vigilant against those
who do not hesitate to use weapons of mass destruction.
Those who defend the perpetrators of the use of
chemical weapons through the manipulation of clear
facts attempt to discredit independent international
entities and create purely artificial obstacles that
obstruct the continuation of the work of those entities.
All of that has become a hallmark of the Russian
Federation’s position on this issue. Indeed, the Council’s
continuous inability to respond to the use of chemical
weapons inadvertently aggravates the situation on the
ground, which remains deeply worrying.
First, it has been confirmed that the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant already possesses and has used
chemical weapons on several occasions. Secondly, the
Syrian Government has so far failed to provide full
and credible information on its chemical-weapons
programme, which is a clear violation of both the CWC
and resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2235 (2015). Thirdly,
there are numerous allegations of the possible illegal
possession, movement and use of toxic substances as
weapons in Syria.

S/PV. 8090

That is why the continued threat of the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic has to be
dealt with decisively and in the shortest time possible.
Against a backdrop of such dangerous developments,
it is extremely reckless and utterly irresponsible to
undermine the reliability and veracity of both the Factfinding Mission and the JIM’s reports. The priority
issue today relates to the confirmed blatant violations
of the Chemical Weapons Convention and several of the
Council’s resolutions. The question of the responsibility
of those who are proven to be responsible for the use of
chemical weapons is of vital importance for the whole
international community.
Given the Security Council’s strong position that
the use of chemical weapons is a flagrant violation of
international law, we are of the view that the Council
should be similarly united in ensuring accountability,
thereby preventing more such crimes and eradicating
the chemical threat in the region. We are convinced that
in order to achieve that goal we have to allow the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to continue its important job.
We must therefore extend the Mechanism’s mandate
without any further delay. In that regard we fully
support the relevant draft resolution submitted by the
United States as a balanced compromise document.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs,
and Mr. Edmond Mulet for their very enlightening
briefings, as well as for their outstanding work.
A few days ago, the report of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (S/2017/904, annex)
established the responsibility of the Syrian regime for
the chemical attacks in Khan Shaykhun in April 2017 and
that of Da’esh in Umm Hawsh in September 2016. The
report’s conclusions are clear and unambiguous. They
are consistent with the assessment published by France
in April after the attack on Khan Shaykhun. On behalf
of France, I salute the exemplary professionalism of the
Mechanism’s team, which conducts its work in complete
independence and with the utmost thoroughness.
The facts that have been established are, we know,
extremely serious. To those who claim to have doubts,
I wish to recall that it has been four years since the
independent investigative mechanisms came to the
same conclusions. The Joint Investigative Mechanism
has already determined the responsibility of the Syrian

17-368079/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

regime and of Da’esh for attacks committed in 2014
and 2015. Today, once again, the Mechanism has
been able to comment unambiguously on the parties
responsible for the attacks under investigation, after an
irrefutable process.
If we stick to objective observation of the facts,
the reality is that the Damascus regime has never fully
complied with its international obligations, despite
the commitments it made. Month after month, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
has continued to inform us of grey areas in the
declaration submitted by Syria in 2013 on its chemical
stockpile. Those doubts, which focus on the Syrian
regime, underscore the cynicism and duplicity of the
Damascus regime. That regime has cooperated with the
investigative mechanisms in ways that allow it, at the
very least, to lie about the nature of its stockpile and,
at the worst, to pursue a chemical programme. Above
all, that regime has not hesitated to use those weapons
against its own people. The massacre of Khan Shaykhun,
like so many others, has been a tragic reminder for
us. The Mechanism only highlighted the regime’s
responsibility in that regard, just as it confirmed that
chemical terrorism has become a reality.
Now that the truth has been clearly established,
now that no one can say that they did not know, our
collective responsibility is to identify and punish
those responsible for those abject acts. There will
be no lasting peace in Syria while there is impunity.
Beyond Syria, everyone sees that the future of the
international non-proliferation regime is at stake today.
While the international non-proliferation regimes have
not equalled the achievements of previous decades, let
us not let the most successful of those — the chemical
non-proliferation regime — be undermined by divisions
and manoeuvres. It would be a deadly precedent for the
other non-proliferation regimes and an irresponsible
stance for which we will all pay a heavy price. The use
of chemical weapons by anyone is a moral abomination
that goes against the most basic principles of humanity;
to look away and accept the use of chemical weapons in
Syria without response would be to give a blank check
or a green light to the proliferation and use of such
weapons elsewhere, and would create fertile terrain for
the chemical terrorism that we all fear.
At the joint initiative of Russia and the United
States, we created the Joint Investigative Mechanism
in order to transcend our political disagreements and
to establish the truth. That was why we did it. Let us
10/28

07/11/2017

not then renege on our pledge or our commitments at
the hour of truth. The Mechanism is not a tool of the
West. Rather, it is one that is shared by the community
of nations as a whole, and one that we have the duty
to strengthen. That means the Mechanism cannot and
should not become hostage to political quarrels, or
worse, tactical games. To weaken the Mechanism is
to play with fire and to risk undermining the chemical
non-proliferation regime that we built together stone
by stone. The Mechanism must be able to continue
its activities, without preconditions and without
any interference.
Let us assume collectively and individually
the heavy responsibilities that we face. France,
as a permanent member of the Security Council,
understands well its own responsibilities. We will not
yield in the fight against impunity or on the issue of the
full and complete dismantling of the Syrian chemical
programme. I call on everyone to do the same and to
support the draft resolution presented by the United
States on the renewal of the mandate of the Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Let us take careful measure
of the gravity of the moment so that we can come
together for the service of the values, instruments and
law that underlie our collective security. The immensity
of the stakes demands it and compels us to do so.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Since
2011, Egypt has been following with interest the rapidly
evolving developments in the Syrian crisis. From the
very beginning, Egypt has adopted a firm position
in support of the aspirations of the Syrian people to
freedom and democracy, as well as the maintenance of
that State’s institutions and territorial integrity. Over
the past years we have been overwhelmed by the extent
of the destruction, killing and displacement that has
befallen the Syrian people. We deeply regret the state
of chaos that Syria has been reduced to, not to mention
the unprecedented spread of terrorist groups in the
Middle East in a manner that threatens the security of
the region and the entire world.
We have also followed with deep regret the
confirmed use of chemical weapons on several
occasions in Syria. While we condemn all forms of
killing and destruction, we especially decry the use of
weapons of mass destruction, which are indiscriminate
in nature and harm innocent civilians. We renew our
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the use of
chemical weapons in Syria by any party whatsoever.
We support the need to hold accountable any individual,
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

entity, party or authority whose involvement in that
criminal matter is proven.
Based on that principled position, Egypt supported
the establishment of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
and recently supported the extension of its mandate
for an additional year. That has been our position,
given our extreme interest in bolstering the concept of
accountability and uncovering the facts surrounding
the Syrian crisis. Our support for the Joint Investigative
Mechanism also seeks to contribute to efforts made to
confront the urgent threat that the world has yet to deal
with, namely, the rapid increase in the proliferation,
possession, manufacture and use of chemical weapons
in the Middle East, especially on the part of non-State
entities. We therefore reiterate the need to establish
a system capable of deterring such entities in their
attempts to acquire such weapons or the means of
manufacturing them. It is important to confront the
dangers of the potential transfer of such methods and
weapons between various conflict zones.
We have followed with interest the reports of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism,
including its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex).
We take note of the report’s evaluation of several
scenarios that were examined with regard to the Khan
Shaykhun incident based on the means available to the
JIM, keeping in mind the complex conditions in the
field, as well as the fact that the Mechanism began its
investigations only several months after the incident
took place, and it has been unable to visit the actual
site of the incident, which is controlled by the terrorist
group Al-Nusra Front.
I would like to reiterate that we are all aware of
the challenges that investigations in the battlefield face.
Indeed, the Mechanism’s mandate was designed with
such challenges in mind. The mandate clearly gave
the Mechanism the mission to identify to the greatest
extent feasible those involved in the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We therefore welcome the work that
the Mechanism has done within its capabilities. We
still see the importance of the Council searching for the
best way to ensure maximum access to the site of the
incidents by the Mechanism and in a timely manner, and
importantly, in a manner that would secure the highest
degree of neutrality in the investigation and ensure the
security of the Mechanism’s personnel.

S/PV. 8090

We reiterate our call to the members of the Council
to work towards bringing their views closer together
through dialogue, so that we can return to the consensus
that prevailed in the Security Council over this matter.
That is especially important since the Syrian crisis has
witnessed rapid developments in the recent period,
which are developments that require us all to support
the political process and the road map adopted by the
Council in resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Head of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM), for their briefings.
The use of chemical weapons is entirely
unacceptable under any circumstances. There is full
agreement within the Security Council on that point,
and it is shared by the entire international community.
The fact that chemical weapons have been used
multiple times in Syria, resulting in the deaths of
numerous civilians, is extremely serious and represents
a challenge to international peace and security.
The Security Council has played an important
role in addressing chemical weapons in Syria. As
High Representative Nakamitsu noted, 25 out of
27
chemical-weapon-production
facilities
have
been destroyed under resolution 2118 (2013). That
verification and destruction process should continue for
the remaining two facilities. At the same time, we also
heard from the High Representative that cooperation
from the Syrian Government remains insufficient. As
a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and in
order to maintain and strengthen the non-proliferation
regime for weapons of mass destruction, Japan calls
on the Government of Syria to constructively engage
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
In the context of the Syrian chemical-weapons issue,
the Council established an important tool, namely, the
JIM. The Council established the JIM in 2015 through
resolution 2235 (2015), since the OPCW fact-finding
mission was not mandated to attribute responsibility for
the use of chemical weapons. Although Japan was not
a member of the Council at that time, we welcomed the
commencement of the JIM’s work on accountability for
the use of chemical weapons.
In line with the seventh report of the Mechanism
presented by Mr. Mulet today (S/2017/904, annex),

17-3680711/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

Japan acknowledges that the Mechanism has identified
to the greatest extent feasible that the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
are perpetrators of the illegal use of such weapons.
Japan continues to have confidence in the expertise,
impartiality and professionalism of the JIM, which are
reflected in the seventh report.
The Council has three main tasks with respect to
chemical weapons in Syria. The first is to continue
to confirm the verification and destruction of
chemical-weapons facilities. The second is to prevent
the further use of chemical weapons. The third is to
ensure accountability for the use of chemical weapons
and to prevent impunity. The JIM is vitally important
for those three tasks, particularly the latter two. To
put it another way, we rely on the JIM’s continued
work in order for the Council to be able to meet its
own responsibilities.
Japan takes note of various discussions on
strengthening or improving the work of the JIM. We
believe that, if necessary, the Secretary-General can
play a role in identifying any possible improvements. In
any event, the JIM should not halt its operations while
enhancing its capabilities.
The sad reality of chemical-weapons use in Syria
continues, demonstrated most recently by the factfinding mission’s report on the use of sarin in Ltamenah
in March. Until all perpetrators have been identified,
the work of the JIM should continue.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu and the Head of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM),
Mr. Mulet, for their comprehensive briefings.
The issue of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
remains one of the most pressing issues on the agenda
of the Security Council, as well as for the entire
international community. The position of Kazakhstan
remains firm and consistent on that issue: we have
always opposed the use of all forms of weapons of mass
destruction under any circumstances and by anyone.
My country has always supported the fight against such
atrocities, which, unfortunately, continue to take place
in the twenty-first century.
Kazakhstan is interested in the early resolution
of the Syrian conflict and believes that any kind of
confrontation on the chemical track impedes the
12/28

07/11/2017

achievement of peace and stability in the country
and the region. All JIM reports, including the most
recent one (S/2017/904, annex), indicate the following
important points. First, the use of chemical weapons
in Syria continues. It must be stopped and condemned
totally by the international community. The use of
sarin, sulfur mustard and other poisonous substances
has been irrefutably proven by the fact-finding mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and the JIM.
Secondly, the situation with regard to the
non-proliferation regime in Syria not only leaves much
to be desired but is also getting worse as chemical
weapons are becoming increasingly accessible and
uncontrollable. What is of grave concern is that all such
crimes might remain unpunished. The international
community must make every effort to prevent the
recurrence of such crimes.
Thirdly, all of the foregoing once against
demonstrates the inability of the international
community to take preventive measures and identify
all cases involving the use of chemical weapons. We
need to work on preserving and strengthening our
investigative potential through proper procedures
and sound methodologies. In that regard, we consider
it important and necessary to continue the work of
the Mechanism and support the timely extension of
its mandate.
Concerning the seventh report of the JIM,
Kazakhstan is continuing to study the content of the
report and this afternoon, we are only presenting
our initial observations. For both of the investigated
incidents, we have a number of issues on which we
would like to receive additional expanded explanations.
In particular regarding the incident in Umm Hawsh, it
would be desirable to obtain more extensive information
confirming the involvement of one group indicated in
the report in the use of chemical weapons.
With regard to the incident in Khan Shaykhun,
we positively note the statement in the report of many
circumstances in an attempt to fully reflect the events
that took place there. The report fully proves the use of
sarin and determines the exact date of the use and cases
of poisoning of local residents with sarin. The JIM also
invested much work to identify the components of the
poison agent sarin.
At the same time, in our opinion, the conclusions
about the Syrian Air Force involvement in the discharge
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

of the aerial bomb with sarin in the Khan Shaykhun
territory are not thoroughly convincing. On this
occasion, we draw attention to the inconsistencies and
contradictions in paragraphs 14, 15, 26, 5, 30 and 31 of
the report. All unconfirmed facts in the report require
additional explanations and strong evidence-based data.
All that leads to the need to continue the investigation
in order to clarify the real picture.
On the other hand, we positively note that
the Mechanism does not conceal the number of
inconsistencies and shortcomings observed during the
investigation. That is with specific reference to the
situation in hospitals, where the time of registration of
victims was not consistent with the actual time of the
chemical attacks, as well as the cross-contamination
admitted during the sampling process, which indicates
discrepancies in the collection of evidence. There are
also other inconsistencies present in the report.
We are continuing to study the report, and at the
same time, we once again confirm the importance of
continuing such a serious and important investigation
of chemical incidents in Syria. We call for unity and
hope for a consensus decision of the Security Council
on the timely extension of the mandate of the JIM.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay has always expressed its desire for most of the
meetings of the Council to be held in an open format,
whenever possible. That is why we are especially
grateful to the presidency for making today’s meeting
public and open to the full membership. This is a
topic of utmost importance for all of us. We are not
only addressing the regular monthly report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the chemical dossier of Syria (S/2017/916,
annex), but also topics such as the expiration of the
mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) within a few days and the publication
of its seventh report (S/2017/904, annex).

S/PV. 8090

in the Syrian conflict. The use of chemical weapons,
wherever it occurs, constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security and a grave violation
of international law. For that reason, we reaffirm that
those responsible for such aberrant crimes must be held
accountable before the courts.
We reiterate that until all of the Syrian chemical
arsenal, whether declared or not, has been irrefutably
destroyed or safeguarded, the chemical dossier of Syria
cannot be definitively closed in the Security Council. In
that regard, we encourage Syrian authorities to cooperate
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to clarify once and for all the omissions and
discrepancies in the initial Syrian declaration. We
received good news from Mrs. Nakamitsu regarding the
inspection of the two sites that had been inaccessible
until recently.
Two weeks ago, the Council did not reach the
necessary consensus to renew the mandate of the JIM.
Uruguay is confident that a satisfactory agreement can
be reached in the next few days to renew its mandate
for at least one year, which will enable it to advance its
work, taking into account that there are dozens of cases
awaiting investigation.
Yesterday, the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic informed us that there was a
new confirmed case of the use of chemical weapons,
on 30 March in the village of Ltamenah. It has been
determined that it is highly probable that sarin gas was
used once again against the Syrian civilian population.
With that, we have at least one case that should be
investigated by the JIM in the coming months to
determine the perpetrators. Unfortunately and surely,
others will arise. As a result, we must reinforce our
conviction that the JIM has been a useful and efficient
tool and that it must pursue its investigations until no
incidents of chemical weapons in Syrian territory use
are confirmed by the OPCW.

I thank the Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, and Mr. Edmond Mulet, Head of the
Leadership Panel of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, for their comprehensive briefings.

Regarding the seventh report of the JIM, which was
published on 26 October, we take note of its content
and call on all members of the Council to take action
in that regard, which should result in sanctions for
those identified as responsible, namely, the authorities
of the Syrian Government and the terrorist group, the
Islamic State.

During the two years that Uruguay has been part
of the Security Council, we have condemned in the
strongest terms any use of toxic chemicals as weapons

Since the day the incident in Khan Shaykhun took
place, we have asserted that Uruguay did not have
the information necessary to identify, one way or

17-3680713/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

another, the perpetrators. As such, we have expressed
our complete confidence in the serious, independent,
impartial and objective work of the JIM, whatever its
conclusions. With the results on the table, we reiterate
our full support for the work done by Mr. Mulet and
his entire team. We have complete faith in their ethical
integrity, professional competence and impartiality. We
encourage them to continue their quest for truth and
pursuit of justice for the victims of those crimes.
We must avoid repeating the scenario we witnessed
in 2016, when after the third and fourth report the
Council was unable to reach a consensus that would
allow measures to be taken to punish those abhorrent
crimes. Similarly, the Council spent weeks to reach
an agreement to the renew the mandate of the JIM,
resulting in a gap of six months before the JIM was able
to resume its operations. Those were six months lost. It
was a serious failure on the part of the Council for the
Syrian people and international humanitarian law, and
we still have time to avoid its recurrence.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank the delegation of Italy for organizing
today’s meeting in an open format, which allows us to
bring the position of Russia on the issue before us home
to all Member States.
We are grateful to Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Mulet
for their briefings.
Russia strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons, wherever it is done and by whomever. In order
to maintain the international non-proliferation regime,
we deem it essential to identify the perpetrators and
bring them to justice. However, systemic deficiencies
have been found in the work of the existing international
entities in the context of the Syrian chemical dossier.
The results of their investigative activity on the use
of toxic substances are deeply disappointing. Their
mandates have been implemented selectively, without
the use of the whole range of methods and means
based on the high standards of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, which requires first and foremost the
collection of samples, interviewing witnesses and the
gathering of evidence directly at the site of the incident.
The specialists from the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) factfinding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic did their
work remotely. Their report (see S/2017/567) was
very mediocre, full of omissions, inconsistencies and
contradictions. They did not comply with the basic
14/28

07/11/2017

principle of ensuring the secure preservation of physical
evidence. Samples were received on the territory of a
third country, with no certainty as to whether they were
taken in Khan Shaykhun, some other place in Syria
or even outside its borders. The key question about
how the sarin was used and delivered to the site of the
incident has not been clarified.
We were assured that a visit to Khan Shaykhun
would be unsafe, although foreign experts from
various States had allegedly been there the day after
the chemical attack. No problems were encountered
even with the Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorists. By the way,
we asked our Western colleagues to share the details of
their investigations so that our specialists could have a
substantive discussion, but we were stonewalled. When
we invited representatives of the Department of Safety
and Security of the Secretariat to Security Council
consultations on 4 October, it suddenly turned out that
they had already managed to reach an agreement with
the groups controlling the Khan Shaykhun district on
the experts’ visit. We should remember, in that regard,
that Riad Hijab, the Syrian opposition’s General
Coordinator of the High Negotiations Committee, had
given security assurances in a letter that our British
colleagues circulated to the Security Council. And
yet for unknown reasons, the OPCW experts did not
manage to visit the site of the incident.
Now began the unconvincing references to
the power of science, thanks to which, apparently,
everything could be ascertained without moving a step.
Just imagine a situation where a case is being considered
in court and it suddenly turns out that the investigators
did not visit the scene of the crime. In judicial practice,
this would be completely absurd. We were then told that
the Syrian side had presented the results of its national
investigation, confirming the use of sarin. Every line
of the investigation apparently converged on the same
conclusion and so the Director-General of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat decided not to deploy a mission
to Khan Shaykhun. Our Western colleagues, for the
first time that we can remember, all began to make
references to the Syrian investigation.
But I should like to point out that the Fact-finding
Mission’s job is not solely to determine the fact that
toxic substances have been used. It is also supposed to
study all the available information on the possible use
of chemical weapons in Syria, as is written down in
black and white in resolution 2209 (2015). The result
has been that the OPCW mission failed to obtain
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

key material evidence. All of its conclusions were
based on circumstantial evidence, the overwhelming
majority of which was provided by the opposition
and non-governmental organizations that have been
entirely compromised, such as the White Helmets, who
are closely linked to the terrorists of Jabhat al-Nusra.
Taking information from them at face value sets a bad
tone, to say the least.
Security conditions cannot be used as an excuse
to justify the fact-finding mission’s refusal to visit the
Shayrat airbase. The Syrian authorities were quick to
guarantee secure access to the facility and asked that
the visit be organized as soon as possible. Under its
mandate, the OPCW mission has the right to access
any areas that could be affected by the alleged use of
chemical weapons. Nevertheless, its leadership did not
consider it necessary to check the version of the story
according to which the sarin munitions were delivered
by Syrian planes from the Shayrat airbase. And yet it
was on that shaky basis that an act of armed aggression
was conducted against sovereign Syria on 7 April.
We have repeatedly said that the OPCW’s
investigation could have been much more objective if
the fact-finding mission’s team had been put together
on a wide geographical basis in order to fulfil its
mission. Meanwhile, it is a fact that its key positions
were held by representatives of countries involved
in the Syrian conflict and hostile to Damascus. In
that regard, it was impossible to ignore the fact that,
right before today’s Council meeting, the fact-finding
mission issued a report on the alleged chemical incident
in Al-Ltamenah on 30 March, based, incidentally, on its
by now familiar remote procedures. That is a striking
coincidence, especially considering that almost nothing
has been heard about the incident for the past six
months. That immediately gives rise to a number of
legitimate questions as to who provided the samples
and when; where and by whom they were taken; how
their preservation was assured during this entire time;
whether the authorities in Damascus were asked for
information; and so on. In the circumstances, one can
only think that the story was intentionally timed to
coincide with today’s meeting.
The specialists of the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) for investigating the
use of chemical weapons in Syria did not visit Khan
Shaykhun either. The decision was taken by the
Mechanism’s Leadership Panel, which considered it
unnecessary. However, the request to the Department of

S/PV. 8090

Safety and Security was still submitted, just in case — in
October, six months after the incident occurred. After
much consideration, the JIM’s visit to Al-Shayrat air
base did eventually take place. But it is not clear that
this added any value, since the team of experts had
not been asked to sample for sarin traces. They were
prepared to do it and had the necessary technical and
human resources, but did not because they had not been
given the go-ahead by the leadership. And yet finding
out if sarin had been stored at the airbase was crucial
to establishing who was to blame and was therefore the
direct responsibility of the JIM.
The result of this series of gross errors by the
investigative mechanisms is that the JIM’s report
of 26 October and its conclusions (see S/2017/904,
annex) cannot stand up to any serious criticism. It is no
accident that the text, including the section analysing
what happened in Khan Shaykun, is full of locutions
such as “possibly”, “probably”, “suggests” and “most
likely”. I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if he really thinks
such terminology is acceptable in a report on such a
serious matter. Would it not have been better to inform
the Council honestly that the JIM was not in a position
to conduct a fully fledged investigation? The relevant
Russian entities did a thorough scientific and technical
analysis of the report and held an open briefing on
2 November to discuss the results. We urge everyone
to familiarize themselves with the briefing. Its main
findings are as follows.
The evidence for blaming the Syrian Arab Republic
is based on a version that states that an aerial bomb
containing sarin was dropped from a military aircraft
flying near Khan Shaykhun, on an analysis of the crater
created by the bomb’s explosion and on a determination
of the presence of sarin’s chemical composition at
the scene. However, the Mechanism’s conclusions are
untenable, since the report fails to provide convincing
evidence of the means of delivery, the type of munitions
used and the method of sarin dispersal.
Turning to the results of the technical analysis based
on our thorough examination, we find that according to
the JIM’s tracking — provided by the United States-led
coalition — of the Syrian Air Force Su-22, the route
was in fact to the side of and parallel to Khan Shaykhun.
No manoeuvres by the plane were observed. In those
circumstances, based on the JIM version of events, the
dropping of the bomb could not have occurred along
the aircraft’s flight path — since non-guided munitions
can be aimed only when the aircraft is precisely on

17-3680715/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

course for its target — but sideways on, at almost a
90-degree angle.
I would like to ask Mr. Mulet why the Mechanism
concluded that this was technically possible. If it was
in fact carried out — although nothing was observed
on the radar — then, going on the radius of the turn
and the approach to the target, the Su-22 would have
inevitably had to fly over the residential area, with an
increased thrust and significant noise. But according to
the JIM report, not one of the witnesses saw a military
aircraft directly over the town. Our Russian experts
have shown, using calculations and graphs, that an air
strike on Khan Shaykhun was not technically possible.
Why did the JIM not consult Russia, given that the
aircraft is manufactured in our country? Then all these
fantasies about the Su-22’s flight path would have
vanished on their own.
The problem is that from the very beginning, the
JIM leadership has looked at the aerial bomb version of
the Khan Shaykhun events as the basic account, if not
the only one. Anything that did not fit into it has been
discarded, and the Mechanism has ignored the version
about how the incident might have been staged, saying
that nobody saw anyone preparing a ground-level
detonation of munitions. How can one take that kind
of reasoning seriously within the framework of such a
serious investigative process? Who on earth would put
together such a thing in front of anyone?
Based on information from social networks, the
fact-finding mission received munition fragments
supposedly found in the crater. I would like to ask
Mr. Mulet if the JIM has analysed the metal fragments
to determine the type of steel and whether it could be
used to manufacture warheads. It is well known that
carbon steel is used everywhere to make these kinds
of munitions. If that was the case, why is the data not
in the report? And if not, how can it be unequivocally
concluded that there was a chemical bomb? There is
a crumpled piece of pipe in the crater visible in the
photographs. What, in the JIM’s opinion, is it made of
and what does it have to do with an aerial bomb?
Let us consider the crater. If a chemical bomb
with binary sarin had been dropped, there would
unquestionably have to have been found, in or near it, the
mixer that synthesizes the two components that produce
sarin, as well as pieces of the tail unit. Nothing like that
was found. I would like to ask Mr. Mulet why the crater
has no signs of the entry channel that the impact of an
16/28

07/11/2017

aerial bomb always produces. How can one conclude
that there was an aerial bomb when the crater’s shape
is rectangular rather than elliptical? Every textbook on
explosions says that a crater like that is characteristic of
an explosion from a horizontal, ground-based position.
That also corresponds to the distribution of the burn
marks on the surface of the asphalt. The edges of the
crater were not turned outwards and there were no
traces of displaced soil, which shows that the munition
was sitting on the asphalt at the moment it exploded.
Incidentally, the crater was paved over soon after the
incident, which looks very like destruction of evidence.
As part of its work, the JIM commissioned a special
laboratory analysis, which detected an impurity that is
left behind after the formation of Syrian binary sarin
from the precursor methylphosphonyl difluoride (DF).
We would like to ask Mr. Mulet what this component’s
concentration was and at what stages, and whether
there was any verification of the likelihood of this
micro-impurity’s being present in DF in any other
processes where DF is used as a basic component for
producing sarin. We believe that the impurities found
in the samples should not be considered as unique
markers solely for Syrian binary technology for
producing sarin. It is also possible that the DF and sarin
were deliberately synthesized following the known
Syrian recipe. The chemicals could have been produced
anywhere in order to deliberately compromise the
Syrian authorities, and as far as we know that version
of events was never considered. Nor has the possibility
that homemade sarin was used in Khan Shaykhun been
explored, although there could be evidence of that in
substance samples. Does Mr. Mulet really believe that
no one besides the Syrians is capable of producing sarin
based on a specific known formula established through
analysis? And if he does, why?
I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if the JIM conducted
a chemical analysis of the samples taken from the crater
with a view to detecting and identifying traces of the
explosive that released the sarin. If not, why? After all,
that would be the most logical way to determine the
type of munitions and explosion and the method used
to disperse the sarin.
What has been noticeable is the visual materials
produced immediately after the chemical incident, in
which people are seen milling around the crater without
special protective equipment. There are representatives
of the White Helmets using respirators and cotton
gloves, which provide no protection from the effects of
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

sarin, and they seem to be feeling fine. That is proof
that there was no sarin in the crater, since if a chemical
bomb had gone off it would have produced a lethal
concentration of the poison around the crater. There is
reason to believe that there was a munitions explosion
on the ground, after which the White Helmets shot the
well-known video and only after that was the sarin
released into the crater. And yet the White Helmets
announced the possible use of chemical weapons even
before the Syrian planes took off from Shayrat airbase.
I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if the JIM verified
the information that the White Helmets had. Why
was almost no attention paid to that fact during the
preparation of the Mechanism’s report? The report also
passes over one very important circumstance. In April,
in the Security Council, the United States Permanent
Representative showed photographs of Syrian children
who had supposedly died from sarin poisoning. The
pupils of the children in the pictures are significantly
dilated, whereas if they had been suffering from the
effects of sarin, their pupils would have shrunk to the
size of a pinhead. We asked the fact-finding mission and
the JIM to explain that inconsistency, but they avoided
the issue. The report also notes that in 57 of 247 cases,
the victims had arrived at hospitals before the incident
actually occurred. That is one in four of the supposed
patients, which excludes the possibility of carelessness
in filling out the documents in the ensuing commotion.
The Mechanism, however, decided to ignore that glaring
discrepancy, forcing the available evidence into the
Procrustean bed of the single, untenable aerial-bomb
version. I would like to ask Mr. Mulet if 57 people is
not rather too many to write off as poor record-keeping.
We are not undermining the authority of the JIM,
simply proceeding according to facts and logic based
on our thorough scientific and technical analysis of the
report. We firmly believe that the Mechanism, vested
with such a major responsibility, cannot continue to
work in this way. If comprehensive changes are not
made, it will remain a tool used solely to settle accounts
with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.
That is the impression that is being given, and that is
unacceptable. In extending the mandate of the JIM,
we want to enhance its effectiveness and bring it in
line with the high standards of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. That is what our draft resolution aims to
do, and we hope that our colleagues in the Security
Council will approach that draft from a constructive,
non-politicized perspective.

S/PV. 8090

Even as some continue to try to find these imaginary
chemical weapons in Damascus, the region is seeing an
increasing threat of chemical terrorism. Owing to the
not very constructive position taken certain countries,
it has been difficult to develop an appropriate response,
despite the draft resolution that we put forward, together
with China. The JIM has not done anything about this,
even though anti-terrorist efforts are one of its main
tasks under the mandate given it by the Security Council
last year. The issue of chemicals continues to be used
to increase tensions around Syria; ultimately, chemical
terrorism could lead to a real conflagration that would
have repercussions even beyond the Middle East.
In conclusion, I want to say that when, together
with our American colleagues, we created the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, we had in mind the goal of
closing a large gap in international tools used to address
such issues as investigating cases of chemical terrorism,
and we considered the Mechanism as a preventive
mechanism aimed at deterrence. Unfortunately, we
have not been able to achieve that. I think that what
Mr. Mulet said today would strike even people with the
wildest imaginations:
(spoke in English)
“With respect to the responsibility of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Mechanism did not
identify specific actors within the Government
and institutions of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
nature and logistics of the operation would involve
a range of actors from different areas”.
(spoke in Russian)
In other words, it stated in its report that the
responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic had not
been determined, within either the Government or its
various institutionss, and that the character and the
logistics of the operation might have involved a whole
range of players from various areas. What kind of
evidence is this? And then it wrote that the Syrian Arab
Republic — the entire State — was responsible.
We need to draw lessons from history. In its
current form, the Mechanism represents a serious step
backward, even compared to the efforts of the United
Nations Special Commission on Iraq, because in that
case Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei clearly based their
work on verifiable facts. They would not have dared
to base it on assumptions such as those that I have just
quoted from Mr. Mulet’s own statement.

17-3680717/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

Once again, I want to say that the Russian draft
resolution is aimed at correcting these errors and
systemic problems.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I say that I am
grateful to our briefers for their clear explanation of
the facts this afternoon. I want to thank the head of
the Leadership Panel, and through him his whole team,
for their committed, impartial and expert work over
the past five months investigating the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.
As we have heard so clearly today, those
investigations have reached a clear, unmistakable
conclusion. Syria, a State Member of the United Nations
and a party to the Chemical Weapons Convention, has
used chemical weapons against its own people. The use
of such weapons by anyone, anywhere, is unacceptable,
and we condemn their use by both the Syrian regime
and by Da’esh. These are weapons that more than 190
States have come together to outlaw, weapons that have
no place in the world today.
And yet we have been here before. Last year we
were told by the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
that the Syrian regime had carried out three poison gas
attacks and that Da’esh had used sulfur mustard. And
yet some on the Council doubted the conclusions of
that investigation, an investigation that they themselves
had set up, with a methodology they had approved. In
February, action in the Council was vetoed.
We now have another report from independent
United Nations experts mandated by the Council.
The report sets out a clear conclusion: on 4 April, the
Syrian regime used sarin against its own people in
Khan Shaykun, just five weeks after the Council was
prevented by Russia from taking action on Syria’s use
of chemical weapons.
The Joint Investigative Mechanism has done what
we as a Council asked it to do. It has done so thoroughly,
impartially and professionally, and today, presented
with its findings, we must speak with one voice to
condemn the use of chemical weapons by Da’esh and
this attack on Khan Shaykun by the Syrian regime.
We must hold those responsible to account, but
experience to date suggests that we will not be able
to do that. Russia continues to deny what happened.
Since the attack on that morning in April, Russia has
advanced a contradictory series of hypotheses and
claims, moving from one to the next as soon as it is
18/28

07/11/2017

proved untrue, as it seeks to prevent the Council from
holding the Al-Assad regime to account.
Faced with science and fact, Russia has had no
answer but fantasy and fiction, and it has provided no
evidence for its claims. The investigators have looked
at the evidence. In their report, they set out the rigour
with which they approached their task; how they had
received information from 12 Member States, including
the Syrian regime itself; how they had scientifically
corroborated that information; and how they had
consulted numerous independent experts and scientists.
The JIM reached its conclusions not on the basis
of any one single piece of evidence. Rather, it built
its case on the totality of evidence available to it, as
any professional, rational investigation would do. And
those conclusions are clear: aircraft of the Syrian air
force were in the vicinity of Khan Shaykun on 4 April
between 6.30 a.m. and 7 a.m., at the time munitions
were dropped on the town. The crater from which the
sarin emanated was created by an aerial bomb dropped
on 4 April, and, most tellingly of all, sarin found at
the scene in samples supplied by the Syrian regime
contained the same unique — unique — signature found
in the chemicals handed over by the Syrian regime
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in 2014.
The Russian representative suggests that sarin can
be easily made, or home-made. Perhaps Mr. Mulet could
please explain just how complex it would be to recreate
that sarin exactly to the unique chemical signature of
the Syrian regime.
In 2013 Russia promised the world that Syria
would abandon all of its chemical weapons. Today, to
the cost of the people of Syria and to the cost of the
international consensus against chemical weapons, that
promise remains unfulfilled, and Russia continues to
protect Al-Assad and his regime.
I therefore call on the whole Council to renew
the JIM’s existing mandate, which has delivered the
rigorous and conclusive findings that we are discussing
today. There is more work to be done. The OPCW factfinding mission has now reported evidence of likely
sarin use in nearby Latamneh on 30 March.
We need to support the JIM and enable it to carry
out its important work. The draft resolution that
Russia has circulated today is not a serious attempt at
renewal. It is a cynical ploy to discredit a professional,
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

independent and impartial body. Russia is trying to
shoot the messenger to cover up for the crimes of the
Syrian regime.
To the Syrian Government, I say that evidence has
been carefully gathered of the inhuman crimes it has
committed. Russia is protecting Syria for now, but the
day will come when it is held accountable for its actions
before international law and its victims will get the
justice that they deserve.
There is no middle ground in the Security Council
when it comes to chemical weapons. We must condemn
the use of these weapons in Syria and support the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to identify those responsible.
To do otherwise is to effectively condone these appalling
attacks and undermine the international architecture
that we collectively designed to stop them.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu
and Mr. Mulet for their briefings.
China’s position on the issue of chemical weapons
has been clear and consistent. We strongly oppose the
use of chemical weapons by any State, organization or
individual for any purpose or in any circumstances.
China is deeply concerned about and strongly
condemns the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
China supports the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism in its investigation of relevant incidents
in a thorough, objective and impartial way. The
investigation should be based on solid evidence and
should reach conclusions that can stand the test of time
and are based on verifiable facts.
China takes note of the report that was recently
submitted by the Mechanism (S/2017/904, annex). We
also note that, as too much time had passed after the
incident and owing to security reasons, the Mechanism
decided not to carry out on-site field investigations
in Khan Shaykhun and Umm Hawsh. Some Council
members have expressed the hope that the Mechanism
will improve its methodology, strengthen field
investigations and refine its mandate. There is
consensus among Council members in condemning
chemical weapon attacks in Syria and on the need to
investigate relevant incidents. Council members should
continue to negotiate on the Mechanism’s methodology,
mandate and extension patiently and strive for a united
message. This will help us to find the truth behind the

S/PV. 8090

attacks, bring the responsible parties to justice and
deter future chemical weapon attacks in Syria.
A political solution is the only way out of the Syrian
issue. Thanks to the joint efforts of all parties of the
international community, there is positive momentum
towards a political settlement of the Syrian issue. The
latest round of the Astana dialogue has just concluded
and a new round of the Geneva peace talks will begin
in late November.
The political settlement of the Syrian issue has
entered a new and critical stage. China calls on
members of the Security Council to focus on the big
picture of maintaining the Syrian political process and
to stay united on the Syrian chemical weapons issue in
order to create conditions allowing all parties in Syria
to reach speedy solutions acceptable to all through the
Geneva talks and, at the same time, play a constructive
role for the comprehensive, impartial and appropriate
resolution of the Syrian issue as soon as possible.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing provided by the Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu. We are also grateful for the
briefing by the Head of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism, Mr. Edmond Mulet, and for
the letter sent by the Secretary-General (S/2017/916,
annex).
Bolivia expresses once again its strong and
categorical condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons and the use of chemical substances as
weapons. It is an unjustifiable and criminal act,
regardless of where, when or by whom it is committed,
and constitutes a serious violation of international law
and a threat to international peace and security. We
agree with assertion of the Secretary-General, in his
letter of 30 October, that “[n]othing can justify their
use in any situation by any users” (S/2017/916, p. 1).
We reaffirm the need to maintain the Council’s unity
to ensure that those who have used chemical weapons
are held accountable for their acts so that they do not
go unpunished.
We take note of the briefing held for State parties
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on 3 October on the alleged use of
chemicals in Hama governorate and the presence of
sarin and sarin-related substances. In that connection,

17-3680719/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

we reiterate that the OPCW, its Fact-finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism must carry
out their mandated tasks and conduct their work in
the most objective, methodical, technical, reliable,
supported and in particular depoliticized way possible
through an independent, impartial, comprehensive and
conclusive investigation.
With regard to the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, we reiterate that its investigative work
is important and that its mandate must therefore
be renewed in order to safeguard the continuity
of the investigations. There are at present 60 such
investigations and they must be carried out objectively
and impartially. Field visits to the sites where the
incidents took place must be carried out, as long as
basic safety assurances are provided, which will make
it possible to achieve the expected results.

07/11/2017

The continued use of chemical weapons in Syria is
indeed a source of grave concern, as the latest report
of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic (S/2017/905, annex) on the Ltamenah incident
confirms, and we join other members in reiterating our
condemnation, in the strongest possible terms, of these
horrible and dreadful acts. That is why we support
any and all efforts to hold those responsible for these
heinous crimes accountable on the basis of robust and
concrete evidence. In this regard, we thank the Joint
Investigative Mechanism for its substantive report.

Finally, Bolivia will continue to study the report
(S/2017/904, annex) and its scope. We reiterate again
the need to maintain unity in the Council to ensure the
continuity of the Mechanism’s work.

Let me state from the outset that we have the highest
respect for the Mechanism and its Leadership Panel.
We understand that the Mechanism has been working
under extremely challenging circumstances due to a
highly sensitive political environment and complex
security considerations, as its report rightly stated
and as also reiterated by Assistant Secretary-General
Mulet today. We respect and appreciate all the efforts
and dedication of the Leadership Panel in carrying out
its heavy responsibilities in spite of these difficulties,
among which is the tremendous time pressure under
which they were working. It is therefore totally unfair
to expect absolutely flawless work and results, which
would obviate the need for members of the Council
to ask for further explanation. It is in that spirit that
we have tried to examine the report, which no doubt
in many instances is very technical and thus requires
some technical knowledge in the area.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu and the Head of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), Mr. Edmond
Mulet, for their respective briefings on the reports
presented by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2017/916, annex)
and the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (S/2017/904, annex), which we have an
obligation to examine and scrutinize very seriously and
scrupulously. We appreciate all the efforts that have
been made in investigating the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, as well as in identifying those responsible for
this serious crime.

In fact, the Mechanism has been very careful in
its analysis of this very complex situation. The report
indicates that it examined two scenarios in detail.
Its conclusions flow from those investigations, but
it is careful to avoid being definitive. For instance,
concerning the crater in Khan Shaykhun, although the
report indicates that the crater “had most likely been
caused by a heavy object travelling at a high velocity,
such as an aerial bomb” (S/2017/904, enclosure, para.
40), it nonetheless adds that the Mechanism “could not
rule out the idea that the crater was caused by other
means” (ibid., para. 49). This is important despite the
qualification, reiterated by Assistant Secretary-General
Mulet a while ago, that it is unlikely.

Our position on this issue has been reiterated
many times. The use of chemical weapons by any
actor — State or non-State — is not only abhorrent,
but also constitutes a serious violation of international
law and a major threat to global peace and security.

Similarly, based on video footage confirmed to be
authentic, the JIM concluded that the Syrian aircraft
was in the “immediate vicinity of Khan Shaykhun
between 0630 and 0700 hours on 4 April 4 2017” (ibid.,
para. 46 (b)). However, the same report states that

We believe that the renewal of the mandate
should be completely depoliticized, the integrity and
independence of the Mechanism should be maintained,
the purpose for which the Mechanism was established
must be respect to the exclusion of all others, and
a specific timeline and a clear methodology for the
Mechanism’s work must be established.

20/28

17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8090

“[t]o date, the Mechanism has found no specific
information confirming whether or not a Syrian
Arab Air Force Su-22 operating from Sha‘irat
airbase launched an aerial attack against Khan
Shaykhun” (ibid., para. 31).

possible, and it might not be proper to require that their
conclusion meet the standard of overwhelming evidence
or even substantial evidence, but for sure it would be
fair to expect the conclusion to be in conformity with
the standard of sufficient evidence.

Again, the JIM report indicates that the sarin released
at Khan Shaykhun was most likely from the original
stock of the Syrian Arab Republic. But the report adds
that this analysis “would warrant further study” (ibid.,
para. 45).

No doubt, they have covered a lot of ground, and
the findings so far cannot in any way be thrown out the
window, but they are not definitive. This is a work in
progress, for which the Leadership Panel deserves a lot
of credit. We doubt that any delegation could impugn
their integrity, but it is very difficult now to conclude
that the work has been completed. More work is needed.

Moreover, the report — both in its analysis and
findings — admits that there are irregularities and
discrepancies. Some of them, the JIM accepts, are
potentially important. As a result of these and other
irregularities in the report itself, we find it difficult,
in all fairness and genuine curiosity, to understand
how the JIM could be confident that it has completed
its work.
Of course, we know that the JIM was not able to visit
the site of the attacks, particularly Khan Shaykhun. Its
report acknowledges that a visit to the site could have
been of value, but then says — as stated by Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet in this meeting — that the
security risks “outweighed the possible benefits for the
investigation” (ibid., para. 15). It further states that
“[s]hould conditions improve, and should it be
determined that an on-site investigation would
produce valuable new information, a visit could
take place in the future” (ibid.).
The problem is the JIM has already made its conclusion
without having to visit the site, which, by its own
admission, could have been of value to the investigation.
Now, we should mention that Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mulet said that the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic has provided good cooperation. That was
particularly true of the visit of Al-Shayrat air base and
its examination of the logbooks and flight information
for 4 April 2017. The information secured did not
seem to confirm the conclusion that the Mechanism
subsequently made, again suggesting the need for more
work to be done.
However, it is important to be fair to the Mechanism
and the Leadership Panel. They cannot be asked to
deliver more than what they have promised to deliver,
pursuant to the method of work that is laid out in annex I
of its third report (S/2016/738/Rev.1). What is expected
of them is to identify the culprits to the greatest extent

Because of this and other new cases which need
to be investigated, we are convinced that it is vital to
renew the mandate of the JIM, and we hope we will
be able to do so by overcoming the differences within
the Council on the matter. It is only through unity of
purpose that the Council can address the threat and use
of chemical weapon in Syria, as well as end its further
use by any actor.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): At the outset let me thank
Ms. Nakamitsu and Mr. Mulet for their briefings today.
I would like to start by reiterating that Sweden
unequivocally condemns in the strongest terms the
repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria. Chemical
weapons use is illegal, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security and can amount to war
crimes or crimes against humanity. There must be no
impunity for chemical weapons attacks.
I welcome the report (S/2017/916, annex) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013). Sweden remains deeply concerned about the fact
that the OPCW is still unable to verify Syria’s initial
declaration on its chemical weapons programme due to
a number of serious outstanding issues. We commend
the continuing efforts of the Declaration Assessment
Team. Full disclosure and proactive cooperation by the
Syrian authorities are urgently required.
We are deeply concerned about the findings
of the latest Fact-finding Mission report regarding
another sarin attack in the Idlib province, this time
in Ltamenah on 30 March. We look forward to the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) investigation regarding that attack. The Joint
Investigative Mechanism, set up unanimously by
the Council, plays a critical role in protecting the

17-3680721/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

international disarmament and non-proliferation
architecture. We offer our full support for the JIM
under its mandate to pursue objective, impartial and
independent investigations into chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. We count on the professionalism and
technical expertise represented in the JIM and the
thorough forensic analysis it performs. We have provided
financial support and technical expertise to the JIM in
order to enable it to carry out its important work.
We thank Mr. Mulet and his team for their
efforts and for their latest report on the chemical
weapons attacks in Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun
(S/2017/904, annex). Those were abhorrent and
unacceptable attacks, which added to the number of
cases of international crimes committed in the conflict
by Da’esh and by the Syrian regime. The sarin attacks
in Idlib province are particularly repugnant, causing
large numbers of casualties, including children and aid
workers. The presence of military-grade sarin indicates
that all stockpiles of sarin precursors in Syria were not
shipped out or destroyed in 2014, as was foreseen.
The Mechanism has carried out thorough work, with
all necessary research and corroboration, as outlined in
the report. On that basis, it concluded that Da’esh was
responsible for the attack in Umm Hawsh in September
2016 and that the Syrian regime was responsible for the
attack in Khan Shaykhun in April 2017. With regard
to the attack in Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism has
argued that the only one of the eight possible scenarios
reviewed to sustain detailed technical scrutiny, using
scientific and forensic techniques, is that of an aerial
bomb dropped by the Syrian armed forces.
We note that, beyond the Government and the
terrorist group responsible, it has not been possible
to provide further information on the individuals or
entities that were perpetrators, organizers or sponsors,
or were otherwise involved in the attacks, or on exactly
from where the attacks originated. Our assessment of
the JIM report with regard to the technical and scientific
aspects is still ongoing.
Finally, let me turn briefly to the matter of the
extension of the mandate of the JIM. All members of
the Council have pledged support for its objective. As
we stated at the previous meeting on this issue (see
S/PV.8073), the JIM needs stability and predictability in
order to continue its essential work. It is also important
that we prevent the considerable costs that would follow
from a gap in the mandate of the JIM.
22/28

07/11/2017

As the current mandate expires in only 10 days, it
is key that we now unite to ensure a timely renewal.
Sweden will continue to do its utmost over the coming
days to seek to ensure a continuation of the JIM and
to uphold its mandate. We will support all serious and
genuine attempts to achieve that objective and we stand
ready to help to facilitate efforts to find a way forward.
The Syrian people, suffering every day from the
brutalities of a conflict that has been ongoing now for
more than six years, deserve no less.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this briefing in order
to review the seventh report (S/2017/904, annex) of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
I take this opportunity to thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu
and Mr. Edmond Mulet for their informative briefings
and, through them, to thank all the men and women
who strive to establish the facts in order to attribute
the responsibilities for, as everyone has said, the
unacceptable use of chemical substances as weapons
against civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic.
As previously stated in the Chamber, my delegation
reiterates its strong condemnation of the chemical
attacks in Syria, in particular the two incidents under
consideration today, in Khan Shaykhun and in Umm
Hawsh, whoever the perpetrators were. As a State party
to the Chemical Weapons Convention and as an ardent
defender of the chemical weapon non-proliferation
regime, Senegal, through me, reiterates its conviction
that nothing can justify an atrocity such as the use of
chemical substances as a weapon against civilians by
anyone and under any circumstances.
Not only such attacks but also the many and ongoing
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria
highlighted by the report and by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic demonstrate — if
any further proof were necessary — how important it
is that the JIM continue its work, which acts also as
an instrument of deterrence, since the risk of weapons
of mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State
actors, such as terrorist groups, is real. That is of
particular concern to Senegal.
On behalf of my country, I therefore takes this
opportunity to welcome the positive cooperation, in
accordance with resolution 2319 (2016), between the
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

Mechanism and other subsidiary bodies of the Council,
including the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. Senegal
also welcomes the cooperation of certain Member States
with the Mechanism as part of its investigative work.
Whatever our views on the report under review, my
delegation believes that there is still sufficient common
ground among members of the Security Council to
allow us to renew the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which expires in only 10 days, as my
neighbour has just reminded the Council. I would
like to express the hope that the Council will regain
the spirit of compromise and consensus on this highly
technical issue, as in the case with the adoption of
resolutions 2118 (2013), 2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), all
of which enabled the Council to make tangible progress
in tackling the issue of chemical weapons in Syria.
In any case, since my delgation is convinced
not only of the crucial contribution of the JIM in
establishing the truth with regard to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, but also of the relevance of the
lessons to be drawn, in particular regarding the global
non-proliferation architecture, my delegation reiterates
its great appreciation of and support for the Mechanism.
We would encourage the Mechanism to continue its
crucial mission, which seeks to discharge — it should
be underscored — independently, impartially and
objectively its mandate established under resolution
2235 (2015) and renewed by the Council through
resolution 2319 (2016). It is important to recall that the
mandate comprises identifying, to the extent possible,
the individuals, entities or Governments that have
perpetrated, organized or ordered the use as weapons
of chemical substances, including chlorine, sarin and
any other toxic chemical substance, in the Syrian Arab
Republic or those who have participated in any way,
Since everyone agrees that chemical weapons have
been used in Syria and given that there are further
allegations that have not yet been verified, Senegal
believes that the Security Council can reach agreement
on renewing the mandate of the JIM.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate the importance
of finding a negotiated political solution to the Syrian
conflict on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015) as the
only viable solution in order to overcome the significant

S/PV. 8090

humanitarian challenges spawned by the conflict and
to shed all possible light on the many allegations of the
use of prohibited weapons in Syria.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
I would first of all like to thank Ms. Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Edmond Mulet for their briefings. They have the full
support of the Security Council in their undertaking,
which is crucial to upholding the international
security architecture.
We thank the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) for its seventh report (S/2017/904,
annex), which is the result of an investigation that
was conducted in the framework of a very complex
security challenge and constraint. Italy supports the
work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. We hold
its professionalism and independence in high regard
and trust.
Italy is deeply concerned about the findings of the
report, as they again affirm that chemical weapons have
been used in Syria. To date, the JIM has verified four
chemical attacks by the Syrian armed forces and two
attacks by Da’esh. What happened in Khan Shaykhun
in April 2017 and in Umm Hawsh in September 2016 is
totally unacceptable and confirms the abysmal scale of
human suffering in the Syrian conflict. We condemn
it in the strongest terms. These episodes are a tragic
reminder that international law, including the Council’s
resolutions, as well as the international non-proliferation
architecture, continue to be blatantly violated in Syria
by the Government and by the terrorists, further
eroding — as emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his latest report (S/2017/902) — the taboo against
chemical weapons.
As long as nobody is held accountable for those
acts, the risk of their recurrence will remain and even
grow. Allegations of new incidents involving the use of
sarin keep emerging, as examined by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Factfinding Mission with regard to the incident in Ltamenah.
It is one more reason why fighting impunity, identifying
the perpetrators and holding them accountable must be
shared priorities of the Council. It is one more reason to
renew the mandate of the JIM, which will soon expire.

17-3680723/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

On the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013), we are disappointed that the recent highlevel consultations between the OPCW and Syria in
September were unable to achieve any significant
progress. As the global non-proliferation architecture
continues to face extremely serious challenges, the
Security Council has the responsibility of defending the
integrity and credibility of these crucial long-standing
norms of our collective security, and preserving the
means of prevention and pathways for accountability
in case of violations. The OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is a critical tool in that respect,
and Italy fully supported the renewal of its mandate two
weeks ago, mindful of the need to preserve its expertise,
protect its independence and uphold the credibility of
its investigations.
We are committed to engaging with other
Council members to achieve consensus on such a
pressing objective, and we would like to thank the
penholder — the United States delegation — for its
constructive efforts in pursuing a consensual solution,
including through a draft resolution that we consider to
be a very good basis for discussions leading to preserve
the unity of the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I gove the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. We would also like to
thank our colleagues, who have clearly pointed out the
shortcomings that beset the report under consideration
(S/2017/904, annex).
I note in particular Mr. Mulet’s statement in his
briefing to the effect that his mandate and that of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
to investigate the incident in Khan Shaykhun is not
a political matter. He said that it is not a political
issue. The strange contradiction is that, in that same
briefing, Mr. Mulet expressed his opinion that the use
of chemicals in Khan Shaykhun was an instance of
chemical terrorism.
My question to Mr. Mulet and the members of
the Council is: Since when is chemical terrorism
considered to be a strictly technical and non-political
24/28

07/11/2017

issue? Saying that the JIM’s mandate is a strictly
technical part of work to be undertaken in a complex
political atmosphere, as my dear friend the Ethiopian
Ambassador has said, is akin to some lazy students in
school saying that focusing on physical education alone
is enough to succeed in education, and that there is no
need to study the rest of the curriculum.
How can the head of the JIM say that the
information concerning the use by terrorist groups of
chemical weapons and the smuggling of such weapons
through neighbouring States — which was information
submitted by my country’s Government to him, to
the Fact-finding Mission before him, to the counterterrorism committees before that, to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) before
that, and to the Security Council as a whole, in 130
letters on the use of chemical weapons and their
smuggling through neighbouring States by terrorist
groups in Syria — is a strictly technical matter? We
submitted 130 letters amounting to practically a book,
from 6 November 2012 to 6 November 2017 — five year
exactly. All of these letters concern the use of chemicals
by armed terrorist groups in my country. Then comes
Mr Mulet to say that all the crimes that we sent him
information about, and that have killed thousands of
Syrians, are strictly a technical matter rather than a
political one. His briefing was completely devoid of
any understanding of the complex political scene in my
country. The Mechanism’s mandate cannot be strictly
technical. That is not convincing proof.
Machiavelli — who was from your country,
Mr. President — said nearly 500 years ago, “Politics
have no relation to morals”. This is what was said by
Machiavelli. I can almost see him today observing
the behaviour of the Governments of some States
that proclaim their morality and declare themselves
the guardians of respect for international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, while
they themselves practice policies that belittle those
very same noble principles and misuse them in order
to further their destructive and interventionist agendas.
I can almost see Machiavelli here today, standing
and observing the behaviour of some United Nations
committees that are supposed to be neutral, professional
and credible, while their work and reports prove that
they are biased, politicized and immoral. They excel
in using false witnesses, sources they call “open” and
fabricated evidence.
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

That is the state of the Fact-finding Mission and
the Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose report we are
discussing today. I will prove to the Council right now,
with scientific and legal evidence, that the report is not
neutral or professional and that its wrongful accusations
against Syria are based on fabricated evidence and
manipulated information. It has used sly remarks and
ambiguous statements that no criminal report should
use in forming its allegations.
Let us refer to the report to count how many times
the report uses the words “likely” and “unlikely” in
discussing scientific evidence that must only be cited
with certainty. I will save the Council the effort.
Those two words “likely” and “unlikely” are used 32
times. Despite that fact, the JIM’s leadership found no
problem in using the word “confident” in its conclusions
to point a finger of accusation at Syria regarding the
Khan Shaykhun incident, despite the fact that the
investigation was partial and ignored and manipulated
the three main pillars of any criminal investigation.In
that respect, I should like to make the following points.
First, paragraph 54 of the Mechanism’s report
states that the Syrian Arab Republic has not provided
the Mechanism with the outcomes of the internal
investigation conducted by the Syrian national
committee. This is what the paragraph says, and in
that regard I would like to pose the following question
directly to Mr. Mulet, who is seated right next to
me, doodling. What are the documents that I myself
handed to him during the meeting we had in his office
on 16 August? Early on the morning of that day,
16 August, I met urgently with Mr. Mulet in his office
at my request, in order to provide him with a copy of the
Syrian national committee’s report on its investigation
into the Khan Shaykhun incident. I personally informed
him that he is the only United Nations official with a
copy of that report.
Second, on several occasions, the report states
that the Al-Nusra Front is primarily in control of the
city of Khan Shaykhun, including the crime scene.
The report therefore candidly states that the Al-Nusra
Front terrorists fabricated and transported the evidence
to Turkey; that the Al-Nusra terrorists allegedly sent
samples to the French, British, Turkish and American
intelligence services, and provided false witnesses in the
Turkish town of Gaziantep; and that the Al-Nusra Front
terrorists also staged and manipulated then concealed
the crime scene. In the light of such information, how
is it possible for the Mechanism’s leadership to be sure

S/PV. 8090

that the conclusions it has drawn, based on the socalled the chain of custody, were not manipulated by
the Al-Nusra Front, which has been classified by the
Council as a terrorist organization? The Al-Nusra Front
is a terrorist organization and it has more credibility
with Mr. Mulet than the Syrian Government.
Third, paragraph 9 of annex II of the report notes
that, on 21 March, the Al-Nusra Front and its affiliate
groups launched an offensive against forces of the
Syrian Arab Republic in the direction of Hama city.
The report states that, by 3 April, the Syrian army
regained control of and moved deeper into areas that
had been lost. That means that it occurred until one day
before the Khan Shaykhun incident — just one day. My
question to everyone is this. If the Syrian army was
achieving decisive victories, as the report states, and
was at the gates of Khan Shaykhun, which was under
the control of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front, just one day
before the incident took place, why stage a crime with
such well-known repercussions? Why would chemical
agents be used? Who would truly benefit from it? The
only party that benefits is the terrorist Al-Nusra Front,
and the Governments of the States that level accusations
at the Syrian Government, whose goal is to obstruct the
progress of the Syrian army against terrorists who have
been genetically modified into moderate terrorists, as
their sponsors like to call them. Some believe that the
Al-Nusra Front is a moderate terrorist organization.
Fourth, why did the Fact-finding Mission and the
JIM not visit the crime scene in Khan Shaykhun? Can a
crime be investigated remotely, like a PlaySation game,
without visiting the scene of the crime? Let us bear in
mind that, as stated by my colleague of the Russian
Federation, the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security confirmed the possibility of conducting
such a visit. In that regard, I would like to recall that
there is a pattern of not visiting the crime scene, which
is nothing new to the Mechanism. To date, the United
Nations has not acquiesced to the request made by the
Syrian Government on 22 June 2013 to investigate the
crime of the use by terrorist armed groups of chemical
weapons in Khan Al-Asal, despite the fact that former
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, had sent
Mr. Sellström to investigate. Five years have passed — I
repeat, five years — and the Khan Al-Asal incident has
not been investigated.
Fifth, why did the Al-Nusra Front, which controls
Khan Shaykhun, rush to cover the crater with asphalt,
and why did it tamper with the crime scene? If the

17-3680725/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

sponsors of that terrorist organization had nothing to
hide, would it not have been better for them to facilitate
the investigation and prevent the crime scene from
being compromised?
Sixth, why did the JIM not collect samples from
the Al-Shayrat air base, which the United States
Administration claimed was the launch point of the
chemical attack? It is an interesting paradox that
Mr. Mulet himself told me that he decided not to go
to Khan Shaykhun, and that it was not within the
Mechanism’s mandate to take samples from the
Al-Shayrat air base. I ask the members of the Council an
important question: What could have caused Mr. Mulet
to make those serious decisions, which would affect
the credibility of the Mechanism’s conclusions? All
of those questions would surely have caused Britain’s
Alfred Hitchcock to be outraged.
Seventh, paragraph 30 of the report notes that the
Mechanism had received information about an aircraft
that was located 5 kilometres of Khan Shaykhun.
It states that the expert it consulted concluded that,
depending on a number of variables, such as altitude,
speed and flight path taken, it would be possible for
such an aerial bomb to be dropped on the town from
the aforementioned distance. Despite the fact that, from
a technical perspective, it is impossible for a Su-22 to
deliver a strike to the town, according to the flight path
determined by the Mechanism, the expert consulted
by the Mechanism used a conniving, misleading and
inconclusive expression. He stated that it would be
possible to deliver a strike — and here we go back to the
words “unlikely” and “likely” — and the Mechanism
rushed to adopt that conclusion. An expert stated that it
was possible, and the Mechanism immediately latched
onto that assertion without challenging it.
Eighth, paragraph 41 of the report states,
“The Mechanism also examined whether an
improvised explosive device could have caused
the crater. While that possibility could not be
completely ruled out...”.
Would the Mechanism’s leadership explain how it does
not dismiss the fact that the crater could have been
caused by an improvised explosive device, while also
stating that it is confident that the crater was caused
by the impact of an aerial bomb? How do we reconcile
those two assertions? On the one hand, they say that
the crater could have been caused by an improvised
26/28

07/11/2017

explosive device, yet on the other they say that the
crater was caused by an aerial bomb.
Ninth, paragraph 45 of the report notes that some
of the evidence that was used to level accusations at
the Syrian Government were samples of a precursor
chemical, known as methylphosphonyl difluoride (DF),
from the original stock from the Syrian Arab Republic.
I ask the leadership of the Mechanism: Why does
it insist on misleading those who read the report by
giving the impression that that sample is as reliable as
a DNA sample, and that it can be manufactured only
by the Syrian Government? Any specialized Western
laboratory could manufacture such a sample. Are
Syrian scientists the only ones able to create the DF
precursor? Can it be manufactured only in Syria?
I would like to remind members of the Council
that the Syrian chemical stock was destroyed
on-board the United States vessel MV Cape Ray, in
the Mediterranean. It is therefore likely that the party
that destroyed the stock has kept part of it, because
they cannot manufacture what our scientists are able
to produce. That kind of DF is a strictly Syrian brand
that only Syrian scientists can manufacture. Americans
are unable to create anything like it, so they may have
kept part of the Syrian stock that they were tasked with
destroying in the Mediterranean. American scientists
learn from our scientists when it comes to chemistry.
Tenth, does the absence of a tailfin at the crime
scene, as stated in paragraph 58 of the report, not indicate
that a certain party manipulated the scene to create
the impression that an aerial bomb had been dropped?
The Mechanism itself has stated that “the absence of
a chain of custody relating to the munition remnants
diminishes their probative value” (S/2017/904, annex,
para. 58). However, that did not prevent the Mechanism
from concluding that the incident was the result of an
aerial bomb.
Eleventh, from paragraphs 74 to 79 of the report,
the Mechanism notes that there is a conflict between
information and witness testimonies, as well as unusual
and inappropriate measures that were taken. I would
like to give just one example to demonstrate the degree
of manipulation regarding the incident. The report
states that
“In sample No. 13, the blood sample tested negative
for sarin or a sarin-like substance, while the urine
sample tested positive for the sarin degradation
17-36807

07/11/2017

The situation in the Middle East

product isopropyl methylphosphonate” (ibid., para.
78).
The report adds that
“Medical experts consulted by the Mechanism
indicated that the combination of the negative result
in the blood and the positive result in the urine was
impossible” (ibid.).
However, the Mechanism insisted that the aforementioned
proves the use of sarin. It is scientifically impossible for
sarin to be absent from someone’s blood and present in
that same person’s urine — that is medically impossible.
Despite all of those contradictions, the report
acknowledges that the Mechanism’s leadership did not
make any effort to uncover the reasons behind them,
even though the reason is quite clear — to manipulate
evidence and information, in order to make accusations
against the Syrian Government, as was the case with the
conclusions of the Mechanism’s former leadership in
its third and fourth reports. Those reports’ misleading
conclusions were used by the American administration
to attack Al-Shayrat air base.
I call on members of the Council to employ logic
and good judgment, and to seek clear and real answers
to the questions that I have just posed, which have
also been posed by other colleagues. Syria reaffirms
that it abides by the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. Since it
exceeded to the Convention in 2013, it has possessed
no banned toxic chemical supplies, as confirmed
by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Head of the Joint Mission of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations for the Elimination
of the Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian
Arab Republic, in her report to the Council that was
submitted in June 2014 (S/2014/444, annex).
My country considers the use of chemical weapons
to be an immoral act that must be condemned, regardless
of where, when and under what conditions they are used.
This report’s prefabricated conclusions are the final
nail in the coffin, which exposes the real motives of the
sponsors of terrorism. The degree that those sponsors
have manipulated reality and the facts in this report
is unprecedented, and far exceeds the manipulation
that this Chamber witnessed on 5 February 2003 (see
S/PV.4701).

S/PV. 8090

Such failed diplomacy is now being repeated in
another pathetic scene, reminding the world of the
fabricated claims that were made by Secretary of
State Powell in a meeting that I personally attended
in this very Chamber on 5 February 2003, when
Mr. Powell submitted evidence that he called “[f]
acts and conclusions based on solid intelligence”
(S/PV.4701, p. 5). He used those words to justify his
country’s aggression in Iraq, under the pretext that
Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction. It is truly
bizarre that his colleague, Secretary of State Kerry,
returned to this Chamber on 27 September 2013 to use
that very same expression to mislead the international
community and to justify an aggression in Syria at the
time (see S/PV.7038). Secretary of State Kerry used
the same words as Secretary Powell. It seems that that
syndrome is the exclusive property of consecutive
United States administrations.
Allow me to now think out loud and seek an answer
to the question that concerns every Syrian. How long
will Syrians continue to suffer from the terrorism that
is being backed by Western Governments, which view
the United Nations and the Security Council only as
an iron fist to further their interests or commercial
enterprises and achieve their goals. Governments of the
force of law have committed every kind of unlawful act
against the Syrian people and continue to believe that
they can kill, destroy, deceive and prevaricate without
any judicial accountability.
What is the use of having our Organization if
the Governments of those States continue to use it to
bear false witness and shatter entire States, such as
Yugoslavia, Iraq and Libya; besiege, starve and kill
entire peoples, as in Palestine and Yemen; impose
illegal sanctions on countries, such as Cuba, Venezuela
and Iran; and bring a dirty terrorist war to my country,
Syria. The list goes on.
To conclude, the terrorist war that has targeted
Syria has cost its sponsoring Governments $137 billion
to date, a fact that was admitted by one of its agents,
former Prime Minister of Qatar Hamad bin Jassim bin
Jaber bin Muhammad Al-Thani. Just a few days ago,
he admitted to the media that the terrorist war was a
joint plan that united his country with Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, the United States, Israel and Jordan. For those
Governments, Syria and its people were simply prey to
a fighting pack of hyenas. In the words of Mr. Al-Thani
himself, “we fought over the prey and it ran away as we
fought over it”.

17-3680727/28

S/PV.8090

The situation in the Middle East

The Syrian Arab Republic rejects the form
and content of the report of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, because of the accusations it has made
regarding the painful incident in Khan Shaykhun. My
country will not allow its thousand-year-old civilization
to become a prey or target to the Governments that
sponsor terrorism. We will continue our war on

28/28

07/11/2017

terrorism. We will rebuild our country. We will achieve
the ambitions of our citizens with our blood, sweat and
tears, and with the support of our friends who respect
international law and reject any breach of the Charter of
the United Nations. We will stand and fight the policies
of domination that support terrorism.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

17-36807
