S/PV.9081

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9081st meeting

Wednesday, 29 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2022/503)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-40526 (E)
*2240526*

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

pour le développement du Congo (CODECO) and other
armed groups in Ituri and North Kivu.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2022/503)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Ms. Julienne Lusenge, President of Female Solidarity
for Integrated Peace and Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/503, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for another opportunity to provide members
with an update on developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as highlighted in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/503). Since
my previous briefing to the Security Council, in March
(see S/PV.9007), the security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo has unfortunately
greatly deteriorated, owing in particular to a surge
in attacks by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) on
the civilian population, national security forces and
the Blue Helmets of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), as well as continued attacks by
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the Coopérative
2/24

29/06/2022

The escalation of M-23 attacks and the resulting
regional tensions have unfortunately undermined the
positive momentum created over the past few years
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. Since April, the M-23 has launched several
offensives in the Rutshuru territory of North Kivu
province, and in May and June there were coordinated
M-23 attacks along several lines in Rutshuru. They
have had a major impact on the civilian population,
resulting in the deaths of at least 23 civilians, including
six children, while more than 170,000 people have been
displaced. While some have found refuge thanks to the
hospitality of host families, the community shelters built
by humanitarian partners have become overcrowded, as
have schools, stadiums and the other community spaces
in which displaced people have found shelter.
I am particularly concerned about the interruptions
to children’s education that the situation has created,
and which are just one example of how the resurgence
of the M-23 has disrupted the daily lives of a civilian
population that was already suffering from persistent
insecurity and last year’s eruption of Mount Nyiragongo.
In that context, MONUSCO’s robust and proactive
response, in accordance with its mandate and in strict
compliance with the human rights due-diligence policy,
has prevented the M-23 from threatening the city of
Goma and other places along Route Nationale 2.
However, following east-west coordinated attacks,
the M-23 has occupied the town of Bunagana, an
important border-crossing point with Uganda. In the
most recent clashes, the M-23 has behaved more and
more like a conventional army rather than an armed
group. It has access to increasingly sophisticated
firepower and equipment, including long-range mortar
and machine-gun capabilities, as well as precision
anti-aircraft weapons. The threat that this poses to the
population and the peacekeepers, who have a mandate to
protect the people, is obvious. At this point I would like
to pay tribute to the nine Blue Helmets who have lost
their lives — eight of them, as I informed the Council,
on 29 March, in a helicopter crash caused by a hostile
operation in an area controlled by the M-23, and one on
5 April, in an offensive operation against CODECO in
Ituri. I would like to reiterate my firm condemnation
of the attacks perpetrated by the M-23 and at the same
time emphasize MONUSCO’s determination to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the Council. However,
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

it is vital that the Council redouble its efforts to
encourage a rapid de-escalation of the situation and the
unconditional disarmament of the M-23.
(spoke in English)
The resurgence of the M-23 has had broad
repercussions for security, human rights and the
humanitarian situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for regional dynamics.
The humanitarian country team has developed a
response plan for the M-23 crisis and the Humanitarian
Coordinator has allocated $5 million from the
humanitarian fund to jump-start the response. A
Central Emergency Response Fund rapid response
request is currently being developed for new needs in
Ituri and North Kivu as a result of the current crisis.
As the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) have redeployed forces to the Petit
Nord to respond to the threat posed by the M-23, and
as MONUSCO has been required to enact a similar
shift of its military component, other armed groups
have sought to take advantage of the resulting security
vacuum. Increased attacks by the ADF in North Kivu
and Ituri provinces, as well as attacks and reprisals by
CODECO and Zaire forces, have taken a heavy toll on
the civilian population, with more than 150 civilians
killed between 28 May and 17 June. In that context, the
humanitarian situation across the eastern provinces has
deteriorated and the overall number of people displaced
this year has risen to some 700,000.
Rising regional tensions have coincided with
a deeply worrisome increase in hate speech and
incitement to violence, particularly targeting Congolese
Rwandophone populations. Between May and June, at
least eight cases of hate speech that meet the Rabat
threshold and that specifically targeted Rwandophones
have been documented, with at least three coming from
the Congolese military and police authorities. The
United Nations has been clear in its condemnation of
those reprehensible attempts to fuel intercommunal
tensions. I welcome the steps taken by the Congolese
authorities to publicly condemn such inflammatory
speeches and bring to justice all who engage in such
reckless behaviour and related acts of violence. I am
greatly encouraged by the dozens of appeals for calm
and the condemnations of incitement to violence that
have been expressed by Congolese officials, politicians
and civil-society leaders. I am also deeply moved
by the successful and peaceful return of displaced

S/PV.9081

Banyamulenge families to their Rurambo home in
South Kivu, thanks to the courageous determination
and leadership of the local Fuliro chief. That act of
courage and intercommunal Congolese fraternity and
solidarity should be highlighted and commended.
In that highly charged context, it is incumbent on
the Security Council to provide its full support to the
region’s efforts to defuse the current diplomatic and
security tensions among neighbouring States and put
an end to the scourge of armed groups. Should the M-23
continue its well-coordinated attacks on FARDC and
MONUSCO with increasing conventional capabilities,
the Mission may find itself dealing with a threat that
goes beyond its current capacities. The ongoing M-23
and armed-group activities in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo threaten to reverse the hard-won
progress that has been made in bringing security and
stability to the country and the region.
I therefore urge the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda to seize the opportunity of the
upcoming summit that President João Lourenço will
be hosting in Luanda to resolve their differences
through dialogue. In the meantime, it is imperative that
both countries continue to make full use of existing
subregional mechanisms such as the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism to address their mutual
grievances on the basis of established facts.
I welcomed the holding on 20 June in Nairobi of
the Third Conclave, during which East African Heads
of States confirmed their commitment to finding
a sustainable solution to the conflict in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo through both
political and military tracks. I am encouraged by the
commitment of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to pursuing consultations with
local armed groups and encouraging them to join the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. Several local armed
groups have expressed their willingness to lay down
their weapons and enter the national programme,
whose timely and effective implementation is critical
to paving the way for peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In the meantime,
and as requested by the joint secretariat of the Nairobi
process, MONUSCO is working very closely with the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to devise transitional measures for the initial phases
of disarmament pending the full operationalization of
the programme to ensure that the momentum generated

22-405263/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

by the consultations in Nairobi with armed groups is
not lost.
I am also encouraged by the progress made by the
operational cell of the Contact and Coordination Group
established under the Peace, Security, and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region to address the threat posed by foreign
armed groups through non-military means. In the past
two decades, it is worth recalling that the implementation
of non-military measures, including disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement, has
already contributed to the repatriation of a majority of
the foreign armed groups from the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo to their countries of origin.
(spoke in French)
The national political situation has also undergone
significant changes since I last briefed the Council. In
June, the National Assembly and the Senate enacted
revisions to the electoral law, which should increase
the transparency of the electoral process and promote
the participation of women as candidates. However,
the absence of the opposition from the parliamentary
debate on revisions to the electoral law demonstrates
that additional efforts are needed to create the
conditions for an inclusive, transparent and peaceful
electoral process.
I reaffirm my determination to use my good offices
in favour of dialogue between the country’s various
political forces. I want to take this opportunity to
call on the nation’s political actors and active forces
to demonstrate responsibility by working to create
a peaceful political climate. I also encourage the
Congolese authorities to preserve the democratic space
and ensure full respect for fundamental freedoms,
particularly in view of the continuing state of siege in
the provinces of Ituri and North Kivu.
Meanwhile, MONUSCO is preparing to take a
major step in adjusting its presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with the final closure tomorrow
of its offices in Kalemie, in Tanganyika province.
I applaud the efforts of the Congolese authorities
to strengthen the presence and capacity of State
institutions in the province. The recent deployment of
80 police officers in areas where security challenges
persist is tangible evidence of the commitment of the
Congolese authorities to fulfilling their responsibilities
to the population in areas where the United Nations
presence will be changing. The United Nations country
4/24

29/06/2022

team will continue to support the Government’s efforts
to preserve and consolidate the progress made with
MONUSCO’s support.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the Government’s commitment, through the
joint working group, to monitoring the implementation
of the joint transition plan endorsed by the Council
in December. In that regard, it is essential that the
Government continue with the reforms envisaged in its
action plan, particularly in the security sector, so that
State institutions are able to respond to the multiple
challenges facing the country.
(spoke in English)
In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
for the continued support of the Security Council and of
troop- and police-contributing countries to MONUSCO,
particularly at a time when the Mission is facing
challenges to the implementation of its mandate. I salute
the bravery and courage of the women and men serving
under the United Nations flag and the commitment of
their contributing countries under these very trying
circumstances. MONUSCO remains determined to
protect civilians and help tackle the drivers of conflict
and violence. A unity of purpose within the Council
and among troop- and police-contributing countries
remains essential for the Mission to deliver on its core
mandated responsibilities.
(spoke in French)
Zawede, an 11-year-old girl from Kivu in the fifth
grade, wrote a slam poem for the children of her country
that I was asked to transmit to the Council. It is long, so
I will read only the end:
“This slam is both an expression of the love
and hope that I have for my country, but also of
the sharp pain, disappointment and feelings of
abandonment caused by the grown-ups who should
be actively involved in the peacekeeping process in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — a
place that has shed its blood, sweat and tears for a
quarter of a century.
“With that in mind, I would therefore ask each
member of the Security Council to take my voice,
amplify it and protect it as far as possible so that the
children of the world, of Africa, of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, of Kivu and of Bunagana
enjoy their rights as human beings and as children
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and that they reclaim their dignity in a climate of
prosperity and stability.”
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lusenge.
Ms. Lusenge (spoke in French): My name is
Julienne Lusenge, and I am the Director of the Fund
for Congolese Women and the President of Female
Solidarity for Integrated Peace and Development. On
behalf of Congolese women, I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity to share with
the Security Council some remarks on the situation of
women in the context of conflicts that disrupt our lives
and destroy our community values.
At the outset, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the countries that have demonstrated their
commitment to Ukraine and to express my solidarity
and sympathy with the Ukrainian people, especially
women and children.
At a time when the eastern region of my country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is experiencing
unprecedented political, security and humanitarian
instability, today’s meeting provides yet another
opportunity to take concrete action in order to put a
definitive end to a tragedy that has lasted far too long
and constitutes a disgrace to humankind.
The security situation is deteriorating badly as
a result of the terrorist acts committed by the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF), the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda, the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo (CODECO) and other armed groups. That is
despite the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the operations carried out by the Congolese
defence and security forces, supported by the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces within the framework of the
state of siege decreed in May 2021 in the provinces
of North Kivu and Ituri. Here I would like to thank
Ms. Bintou Keita and congratulate her on her efforts to
support the Blue Helmets on the ground and even the
local populations during the recent clashes. I welcome
her presence today and I would also like to offer my
condolences to the families of the Blue Helmets who
have lost their lives in my country.
The position of one of our neighbouring countries
in support of the M-23 rebels is hindering peace in that
area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where

S/PV.9081

more than 5.5 million people are currently internally
displaced. Host populations have also been cut off from
their resources. Try to imagine mothers preparing dust
and soil to feed their children instead of corn or soybean
porridge. Here I would like to recount the testimony of
Furaha, one of my fellow countrywomen.
“A member of my family was kidnapped, and
the perpetrators demanded a ransom of $700. We
pawned the family plot of land to get the money.
The kidnappers showed me the way to drop off the
money and demanded that I show up in person. It
was a trap so that they could tie me up, beat me and
undress me.
“They slit the throat of a Nande man from
Beni and ripped out his entrails, which they asked
me to cook. They brought me two cans of water
to clean and prepare the condiments. They made
all the prisoners eat the human flesh. The rest
of the body was transported by the prisoners to
another destination.
“Late at night they arrived at another camp,
raped me throughout the night and subjected me
to other physical abuse. A few days later, I was
released by an element of the same CODECO
militia who showed me the way. Unfortunately, I
was detained again by another group in another
village and held as a sex slave for several days.
There too I was forced to prepare and eat human
flesh. I was subjected to all kinds of degrading
and inhumane treatment. One day, by the grace of
God, I was able to flee and return to my village.
The family member for whom the ransom was
demanded had already been murdered.”
Many orphaned children are without assistance in
Beni territory and Ituri. Those children are taken in by
widowed women or families who have nothing. Minors
engage in survival sex. The women of Oicha say they
have been traumatized by the cruelty of the ADF. In
providing services to survivors in conflict zones, actors
face various constraints and challenges, including the
continued deterioration of the security situation due
to the activism of armed groups, which sometimes
prevents other victims from accessing care within 72
hours. There are several obstacles that prevent victims
from accessing justice, including a lack of judges,
the absence of reparations after the perpetrators have
been convicted, the long distances to the courts and
difficulties in collecting and preserving evidence.

22-405265/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We are witnessing an increase in mistrust — between
the population and leaders, between different
communities, towards humanitarian workers and the
peacekeeping mission — because of the insecurity
and suffering that is growing every day. Our efforts
to strengthen social cohesion and the training we
do on peaceful cohabitation to mitigate conflicts
within communities are being annihilated by this
extreme suffering.
In the light of the foregoing, it is appropriate to make
the following relevant recommendations to members of
the Council. The ambiguity in the situation in eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be
resolved. The reports of the United Nations experts
are available to the Security Council and show the
involvement of the neighbouring country alongside the
M-23. We must stop commending this country, which
thrives on the deaths of and sexual violence against
women and girls, the illicit exploitation of Democratic
Republic’s resources and the instrumentalization of
armed groups. This is what maintains instability in the
Great Lakes region.
It is necessary to strengthen actions and consultation
mechanisms in order to make the protection of the
civilian population more effective, especially in the
eastern part of the country, as the elections approach.
We must support the efforts of communities to assist
the civilian population, listen to their cries of distress
and support programmes that seek alternative and
sustainable solutions so as to save lives.
The Council should act in such a manner that
Rwanda’s problems with the FDLR are dealt with in
Rwanda and not in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; Rwanda must therefore dialogue with the FDLR
in Rwanda.
We must act effectively to establish international
justice for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and make significant decisions based on the mapping
report. The United Nations must stop turning a blind
eye to the deaths in the Democratic Republic. Greater
medical and psychological assistance must be provided
to survivors.
Efforts must continue to be made to address the
current global food insecurity caused by the war in
Ukraine and its ramifications in Africa, especially its
impact on women and children. In addition, there is
an urgent need for the General Assembly and all allies
and partners to convene a forum that will focus solely
6/24

29/06/2022

on addressing this problem of food insecurity and
mitigating its impacts in Africa.
More assistance is needed for orphans and widows
and for internationally funded poverty-reduction-based
anti-prostitution initiatives.
The President: I thank Ms. Lusenge for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Keita and Ms. Lusenge for their briefings.
France fully supports regional efforts to stabilize
the deteriorating situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Civilians and
the country’s security forces continue to suffer from
attacks by armed groups. France condemns the ongoing
offensives by the Mouvement du 23 mars and the actions
of other armed groups, including the Allied Democratic
Forces, the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo and the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is carrying out its mandate with respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
Attacks on the Mission, which lost nine peacekeepers
this quarter, must stop and be investigated.
The process begun in Nairobi must continue.
Consultations with armed groups must lead to their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. It is
essential that the regional force announced during the
most recent Conclave be complementary to a political
process. It must be coordinated with MONUSCO, while
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
France will continue to support the continuation
of dialogue between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda within the framework of existing
mechanisms and ongoing diplomatic initiatives. I am
thinking in particular of the mediation initiated by the
President of the Republic of Angola, with the support of
the African Union.
Priority must be given to the protection of civilians.
We are witnessing a resurgence of hate speech targeting
communities and individuals. MONUSCO has stepped
up its prevention efforts. Everyone must commit to
fighting these incitements to violence, which have
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

led to the displacement of thousands of people. Some
armed groups are targeting these civilians by attacking
camps for displaced persons. France welcomes the
mobilization of MONUSCO — and in particular its
reconfigured Force Intervention Brigade — to protect
these camps.
In the past three months, no new armed groups
have committed to ceasing the recruitment or use of
children. France calls for increased efforts aimed
at preventing the unlawful recruitment and use of
children. The Security Council’s sanctions regime,
which we are preparing to renew, is an additional tool
that should make it possible to combat those who use
children in armed conflicts.
Finally, our partnerships must be strengthened
to ensure sustainable development for the benefit of
populations. France welcomes the continuation of
work in parliament to prepare for the 2023 elections.
The protection of democratic space, transparency,
inclusiveness and the participation of women will
contribute to the smooth conduct of these elections.
In the area of health, support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be increased. Accordingly,
France recently donated nearly 300,000 doses of vaccine
against coronavirus disease. The European Union has
committed €600,000 in humanitarian aid to combat an
outbreak of monkeypox in Maniema province.
It is the younger generation that will build the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of tomorrow. To
support access to education, France will provide
€500,000 to the Kinshasa Digital Foundation to prepare
students in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
higher education.
I will conclude by reaffirming France’s support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
MONUSCO. Their actions serve peace in the region on
a daily basis.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
for her compelling and useful briefing this morning. I
also want to thank Ms. Lusenge for her insights and her
recommendations to the Security Council.
The United States remains deeply concerned by
the continued campaign of violence by the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) in North Kivu province and by the
tensions at the border between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda. We also echo the Secretary-

S/PV.9081

General’s calls for the M-23 and all non-State armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic to
cease violence against civilians, disband and lay down
their weapons. Further, we encourage all groups from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to participate
in the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization programme without
conditions and for foreign armed groups to return to
their countries of origin.
We ask the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda to continue positive steps towards de-escalating
tensions. We note our support for the Nairobi process
and for the high-level engagement of the Presidents
of Kenya and Angola on this issue. We wish to take
this opportunity to highlight that all countries must
respect their neighbours’ territorial integrity. We have
made clear that any entry of foreign forces into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be done in
cooperation with the Democratic Republic and must be
done transparently.
Armed-group activity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as we have just
heard, has very real and horrific human consequences.
It drives displacement and unprecedented humanitarian
needs and poses a major challenge to humanitarian
access and the delivery of life-saving assistance. For
example, reporting by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) from Ituri province highlights
that armed groups killed nearly 800 civilians during
this most recent reporting period alone.
We are extremely troubled by Rwanda’s statements
questioning MONUSCO’s impartiality. The Mission
has worked hard to carry out its mandated objectives
impartially in what is an increasingly complex
environment. Such statements encourage hostility to
MONUSCO peacekeepers, and they are unacceptable.
To be clear, any rhetoric inciting violence or otherwise
increasing the risks to MONUSCO personnel and their
safety and security is unacceptable.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo, of course,
bears the primary responsibility for protecting its
own citizens. The United States pledges its continued
support through our privileged partnership with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially at this
challenging time.
I would urge East African Community (EAC)
leaders to prioritize dialogue-based approaches to the

22-405267/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

crisis. The United States insists that the deployment of
any additional force in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo must be closely coordinated with MONUSCO
and must be conducted in conformity with the parties’
respective commitments under international law,
including international humanitarian law. It must also
be conducted in line with existing Security Council
sanctions resolutions, and the Council must be formally
notified prior to deployment.
Finally, I want to return to a theme I raised at the
top of my remarks. The United States joins its allies
in encouraging all actors to refrain from using rhetoric
that might spark violence against United Nations
peacekeepers or against Kinyarwanda speakers or
people of Rwandan origin in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The elected officials of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should clearly and
unequivocally condemn the use of such language in
public forums and on any social media platform. The
region is all too familiar with what can happen when
groups manipulate their perceived differences to incite
hate and violence against one another. We cannot allow
that to happen again.
In closing, I want to call once more on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and other
EAC members to de-escalate tensions and work to find
a lasting solution to the violence and instability in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the pleasure to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
countries that are members of the Security Council
(A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya.
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her briefing
and commend her efforts in support of peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I also
thank Ms. Julienne Lusenge for her perspective and for
the recommendations that she made to the Council. I
further welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Permanent Representatives of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda.
Our statement will focus on three main areas: the
political, security and humanitarian situations.
On the political front, we welcome the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s commitment
to hold elections in 2023, in accordance with the
constitutional framework. We commend the adoption
8/24

29/06/2022

of revisions to the electoral law by the National
Assembly, featuring provisions that not only increase
transparency but also create incentives for the greater
participation of women. That is an important step in
achieving gender parity.
We note the challenging security environment in
some parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and encourage the national authorities to adopt a
comprehensive approach for planning the preparatory
electoral processes in order to afford all Congolese an
opportunity to participate in the upcoming elections.
We welcome the outcomes of the conclaves of
the East African Community Heads of State on the
peace and security situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its commitment
to contributing to reconciliation, stabilization and the
securing of lasting peace in the region.
We acknowledge the participation of armed groups,
as well as leaders of local communities, in the two
rounds of the inter-Congolese peace dialogue. Their
increasing willingness to surrender their arms and
embrace the national Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
is encouraging.
We welcome the announcement of the establishment
of a regional force, which should contribute to the
stabilization of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as well as of the entire Great Lakes region.
The A3 calls on all stakeholders to discourage and
cease the use all offensive language, hate speech, threats
of genocide and other politically inciting language. It
is imperative that all communities work together to
stabilize the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, with a view to achieving a mutually
shared prosperity.
The devastating impact of armed-group violence
on civilians, particularly vulnerable populations,
including women, children and internally displaced
persons, remains alarming. The activities of terroristaffiliated groups such as the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) continue to exact a heavy toll on civilians and
civilian objects, particularly through manipulation,
abuse, abductions, killings and maimings, as well as
the indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices.
The A3 strongly condemns the destabilizing
activities of armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the ADF, the
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Cooperative pour le développement du Congo and
the resurgent Mouvement du 23 mars. We call on all
armed groups, both foreign and local, to immediately
and unconditionally cease hostilities, lay down their
arms and participate in the national and regional
disarmament programmes.
The armed groups owe it to the people of
Democratic Republic of the Congo to realize that there
is no military solution to their challenges and that the
answer lies in them embracing the call for peace, taking
ownership of the inter-Congolese peace dialogue and
pursuing opportunities for shared economic prosperity
and development.
The A3 remains deeply concerned by the
humanitarian crisis in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, with 5.5 million people internally displaced,
more than half a million refugees and 27 million
civilians facing acute food insecurity, compounded
by the widespread insecurity. We note that as of
today the 2022 humanitarian response plan, targeting
8.8 million people, has received only 15 per cent of the
$1.88 billion required.
We commend the outstanding work of the
humanitarian organizations that, at the risk of their
lives, provide continuous support to the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
jointly with the Peacebuilding Fund Joint Steering
Committee, to implement a humanitarian-developmentpeacebuilding triple-nexus approach in support of the
2022 humanitarian response plan.
It is important that humanitarian support be
resilience-based. It should entail the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of civilian infrastructure, the
restoration of essential services and the provision of
modern equipment and technology in support of local
entrepreneurships that sustain livelihoods.
The A3 encourages States members of the East
African Community, as well as the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region, to work together
to find durable solutions for refugees and internally
displaced persons. That should include their voluntary,
safe and dignified return and reintegration into their
communities of origin.
We reiterate the need for the States of the region
to remain committed to addressing the root causes of

S/PV.9081

the conflict and promoting sustainable and equitable
patterns of human development by fostering inclusion
in all facets of life and the effective management of
diversity. The A3 further encourages the States of
the region to deepen their economic integration as a
critical component of promoting peace, stability and
economic development.
In the light of the ongoing negotiations on the
sanctions regime on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the A3 underscores that the current notification
requirement remains an unnecessary bureaucratic
impediment that infringes on the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That requirement
continues to impede the capacity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to curb the activities of armed
groups as well as improve its ability to safeguard its
internal security.
The notification requirement does not stop the
proliferation of weapons in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo but serves only to make available information
that should remain obscure for a sovereign State. Armed
groups continue to gain weapons, including heavy
artillery, as we have heard this morning, enhancing their
capability to contest the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo as well as MONUSCO.
We call on the Council to respond favourably to the
Congolese authorities’ request to waive the notification
requirement for the acquisition of weapons as well
as its sovereign right to receive military training and
technical support for the security and defence of the
Congolese people. In that regard, we urge the regional
mechanisms and the international community to assist
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in curbing the
illicit proliferation and supply of weapons by sealing the
loopholes being used by trans-border criminal networks.
In conclusion, the A3 commends the efforts of
MONUSCO and the international community in
promoting peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We reiterate our appreciation
to the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and all regional and global
leaders for their support for the ongoing regional
peace processes. We emphasize our solidarity with
the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in their quest for lasting peace
and reaffirm our respect for their country’s territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence.

22-405269/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-Genera1 Keita for her remarks and
also thank Julienne Lusenge for her powerful testimony
and recommendations.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGenera1’s informative briefing and the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/503) clearly show,
the security situation in certain parts of the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo is regrettably
deteriorating, specifically as a result of confrontations
between the Mouvement du 23 mars and the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo.
The Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo and other armed groups
also remain a constant threat to civilians. We are
deeply concerned about those attacks. We are also
concerned about the resurgence of hate speech and the
incitement of violence in the wider Great Lakes region,
together with the reports of repeated acts of violence
over the past few weeks against Rwandaphones in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The declaration
of the state of siege has been one tool for addressing
the security threats, but the intended results do
not seem to have materialized. The fighting in the
east is picking up regardless, and reports show that
abuses and violations of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law continue. We are
particularly concerned about the reported dramatic
increase in cases of sexual violence. Norway urges all
stakeholders to carefully evaluate the benefits of the
state of siege before proceeding with its renewal. We
reiterate that all civilians, including children, must be
protected. We also emphasize that all countries must
respect the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Norway encourages continuing engagement among
the Congolese authorities, armed groups and regional
stakeholders through the Regional Heads of State
Conclave and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. We support the inclusion of all relevant
stakeholders in that process, including members of civil
society, women and young people. We also welcome the
participation of additional armed groups, which could
ultimately reduce the security threat to civilians in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We encourage the further engagement of Special
Envoy Xia and Special Representative of the SecretaryGenera1 Keita in reducing tensions in the region, and we
commend the seven Heads of State of the East African
10/24

29/06/2022

Community (EAC) for their leadership in the process.
It is important that the Nairobi process support the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization programme in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. With regard to the proposed
deployment of an EAC regional force to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Norway would like
to underline the need for thorough coordination with
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and other actors on the ground.
A new milestone will be reached when MONUSCO
draws down from Tanganyika province this month. For
years MONUSCO has contributed to stability, increased
security and the protection of civilians in the province.
In the post-drawdown period, it will be important
to safeguard the gains made and draw on lessons
learned. Furthermore, the Congolese authorities and
the United Nations system must be ready to take over
certain tasks when MONUSCO leaves. In that regard I
want to underline the importance of transparency and
communication among all the relevant actors.
Norway stands ready to work with all stakeholders
for a sustainable and responsible recalibration of
MONUSCO and for peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita and Ms. Julienne Lusenge for their
briefings and welcoming the delegations of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi to this meeting. Let me also take this
opportunity to thank the women and men of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
their hard work and to deplore the fact that some of
them have lost their lives in delivering on MONUSCO’s
mandate. I would like to comment on three subjects.
The first is violence. We remain seriously concerned
about the activities of armed groups in the eastern
Congolese provinces. In addition to the actions of the
Allied Democratic Forces, the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo and the Résistance pour
un État de droit au Burundi, the fight against those
rebel groups has resulted in large-scale violence in
Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. The re-emergence
of the Mouvement du 23 mars and its recent ground
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

offensive are extremely worrisome. Above all, we are
deeply troubled by the debilitating effects of armed
conflict on civilians who live in and around cities such
as Goma, Beni and Uvira and in rural areas of the
provinces, especially women, children and internally
displaced persons.
Those concerns lead to my second subject, which
is regional diplomacy. We reckon that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi
have common interests, face collective threats and will
benefit from joint, concerted actions. Both the level of
threat posed by armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and their cross-border hazards
point us to solutions that should be regional, at least
in part. We therefore commend the efforts combining
leadership both from the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
We acknowledge the important role played by President
Macky Sall and support President João Lourenço’s
efforts. We also warmly welcome the East African
Community’s efforts to endorse the Nairobi process.
My third subject is institution-building. Hate
speech, ethnic stereotyping and attacks on civilians,
peacekeepers or humanitarian personnel are crimes
that claim the lives of thousands of individuals and
undermine durable peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We therefore call on the Congolese
authorities at the local and national levels to publicly
condemn such transgressions, investigate every
incident and hold the perpetrators accountable.
On a more positive note, we welcome the concerted
action of stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to pave the way for the 2023 elections, particularly
the Independent National Electoral Commission, the
National Assembly and the Government. We also
commend the measures that will enable a greater
share of women candidates to participate, in addition
to requirements fostering transparent and predictable
electoral processes.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGenera1 Keita and Ms. Lusenge for their briefings today.
I also welcome the participation of the representatives
of the countries of the region at this meeting.
I will focus on three points — the security and
humanitarian situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, regional efforts and the United

S/PV.9081

Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The current spike in violence
is jeopardizing the recent efforts to pursue peace
and prosperity and exacerbating the already severe
humanitarian situation. The risk of a war in the region
is the highest it has been in many years. An immediate
de-escalation on all sides and mutual respect for
sovereignty are urgently needed. The de-escalation
efforts should include a total rejection of hate speech
and any manipulation of regional public opinion by
self-interested actors.
We welcome the ongoing diplomatic efforts in
this area, including through the Nairobi process led by
President Kenyatta and the African Union-endorsed
engagement by President Lourenço. The United
Kingdom offers its support to those efforts to pursue
dialogue, de-escalate tensions and make use of regional
mechanisms to resolve disputes. As those efforts
continue, we stress the importance of prioritizing
political and diplomatic efforts over military solutions
in order to deliver long-term stability and prosperity for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. It
is equally vital to ensure that the regional engagement
works with existing political processes, especially
the new Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization programme developed by
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which should contribute to ending the state of
siege and thereby enable the re-establishment of local
civilian governance. We await with interest the plans
for the proposed East African Community (EAC)
regional force, and urge EAC partner States to engage
closely and effectively with MONUSCO to manage
the potential risks of parallel military deployments.
As they design their intervention, we encourage
EAC partner States to draw on lessons learned from
MONUSCO’s deployment.
Humanitarian considerations must also be
given sufficient attention by all actors to ensure
that the 5.9 million internally displaced civilians in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo receive the
assistance they need. The recent acts of violence by the
Mouvement du 23 mars armed group have resulted in
a large spike in humanitarian needs. Kidnappings and
violence against humanitarian workers are increasing
and severely impacting the ability of agencies to reach

22-4052611/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the populations affected. We urge the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to work more
closely with humanitarian agencies, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
to find specific and practical solutions to the threats to
humanitarian delivery, including by strengthening the
coordination between civilians and the military.
I want to acknowledge the challenges facing
MONUSCO in this complex context. As the loss of
nine MONUSCO troops in recent months has shown,
the Mission is operating in dangerous circumstances,
and we pay tribute to its personnel and their work. We
call on all actors to avoid any statements or actions that
increase the risk to MONUSCO personnel and express
our full support to the Mission in the implementation
of its mandate. In conclusion, let me commend Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita, and
MONUSCO as a whole, for their continued efforts in
increasingly challenging circumstances.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita for her briefing on the activities
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and related developments. I also thank
Ms. Lusenge for sharing her insights on the situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representatives
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi at today’s meeting.
Since the Council last met on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.9051), the
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains grim. Hundreds of civilians and
several members of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) have been killed or
injured. That resurgence of armed-group activity has
displaced thousands of families in the country’s eastern
regions. Tragically, MONUSCO has also lost nine
peacekeepers. India strongly condemns those dastardly
attacks. The violence must end.
The resurgence of armed groups is not a new
development in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Their operations have also spiked in the past,
particularly when military options have been given
precedence over political processes. We welcome the
recent endeavours to advance the political dialogue
with the involvement of all stakeholders, including
12/24

29/06/2022

the third meeting under the Nairobi process, held on
20 June. We also welcome the commitment expressed
by the leaders of the region to the territorial integrity
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to finding
a swift and lasting solution to the conflict in the
eastern provinces.
We reiterate the call of the Heads of State of the region
for an immediate ceasefire and cessation of hostilities,
as well as for the intensification of the political process.
Those efforts can lead to positive outcomes only if all
stakeholders work together purposefully. Those with
influence over the armed groups need to persuade
them to lay down their arms and engage in the political
process in good faith. In that regard, we welcome the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s validation of the
national strategy for the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization programme.
That community-centred strategy is a step in the right
direction. It gives provincial and local Congolese the
flexibility to adapt the programme to the community’s
needs. We welcome the appointment of the provincial
coordinators and hope that the provincial plans will be
operational soon. The success of the programme will
be crucial to the broader political process under way,
and we urge MONUSCO to continue supporting the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in those efforts.
In tackling the persistent insecurity in the country,
ensuring a swift conclusion to a fair and inclusive
electoral process is equally important. We welcome
the progress made by the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo towards the holding of elections
in 2023. We are hopeful that the differences that certain
stakeholders have expressed will be resolved peacefully
and through dialogue. The holding of the gubernatorial
elections in May and the election of three women as
governors and one as vice-governor are encouraging.
The inextricable link between instability and
the illegal exploitation and trafficking of natural
resources in the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot be overemphasized. The
country and the region will need to show a greater
commitment to ensuring that mines are protected,
regulations strengthened and regional partnerships
bolstered. The Khartoum conference held in April this
year provided a useful framework and direction in that
regard. We welcome the recent efforts to demilitarize
mining zones and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s planned deployment of mining police. In
addition, the country has continued to endure multiple
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

endemic diseases, including a recent outbreak of the
Ebola virus. The humanitarian response plan aimed
at providing assistance for 8.8. million people has
received only 15 per cent of the $1.88 billion required.
That issue needs the constant attention and support of
the international community.
We have noted the progress made towards realizing
the 18 benchmarks and indicators of the joint transition
plan, and we are seeing positive momentum in that
regard since the last briefing on the subject. We
emphasize that the situation on the ground should
guide MONUSCO’s eventual drawdown to ensure that
the gains made in violence-prone provinces are firmly
established so as to prevent any reversal of the security
situation. Strengthening the State’s authority, security
organs and justice institutions remains paramount.
The transition and MONUSCO’s eventual exit must be
gradual, responsible and orderly.
India would like to reiterate that MONUSCO’s role
is supportive and not aimed at replacing the FARDC
in implementing the mandate to protect civilians.
While there is an urgent need to enhance the FARDC’s
ability to take on armed groups, a sustained offensive
posture by MONUSCO is untenable. MONUSCO’s
peacekeepers should be allowed to carry out their
mandate within the framework of what has been agreed
by the Council. Furthermore, it is imperative that each
of MONUSCO’s contingents be suitably equipped, as
per the mandated role. In that regard, we would like
to remind the Council of the provisions of paragraph
29 (i) (e) of resolution 2612 (2021). The interpretation
of peacekeeping mandates must have a strong legal
basis. We also reiterate that all the components of a
peacekeeping mission must be equally and impartially
assessed, given their interlinkages. We will continue to
call for ensuring the implementation of resolution 2589
(2021), especially the reporting requirement stipulated
in paragraphs 4 (a) and (b) concerning the prevention of
and accountability for crimes against peacekeepers. We
hope the next report will also cover that aspect.
India’s long association with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people dates back to
the 1960s. A peaceful and stable Democratic Republic
of the Congo will contribute immensely to the peace
and development of the region. The leadership of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has shown
resolve in addressing the existing challenges, and the
international community should take cognizance of that
and continue supporting the country’s Government.

S/PV.9081

India remains committed to assisting the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on its path to lasting peace,
stability and development.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her briefing
to the Council this morning. I would also like to thank
Ms. Lusenge for her pertinent and disturbing testimony.
The information she shared with us was truly shocking.
I will focus today on the rising regional tensions, the
Nairobi process and the transition plan.
Ireland is extremely concerned about the
deteriorating security situation in the eastern provinces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
the rising regional tensions, particularly between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. The
increase in levels of hate speech, as well as attacks by
armed groups targeting civilians, internally displaced
persons, health and humanitarian personnel, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
are alarming. We are very worried by the resurgence
of the Mouvement du 23 mars group and the continued
activities of the Allied Democratic Forces and the
Coopérative pour le développement du Congo, including
attacks on civilians that have led to mass displacement
and ongoing violence and insecurity. That is taking
place in the context of the prolonged state of siege, as
well as increased military cooperation between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. It is
now clearer than ever that peace cannot be secured by
military means alone.
Regional cooperation is essential to reconciliation
and lasting peace. We continue to stress the importance
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We commend the countries of the
region, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union and the East African
Community for their efforts to ease tensions, support
dialogue and build confidence. We also welcome
MONUSCO’s role in combating hate speech. The
meetings and the most recent communiqué of the
regional Heads of State Conclave on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have demonstrated the concerted
commitment of the countries of the region to promoting
peace, stability and development. We encourage all
parties to cease hostilities, engage constructively

22-4052613/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the Nairobi process and begin a dialogue with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The proposed operationalization of a regional
force must be advanced carefully. It also requires clear
objectives and close cooperation with MONUSCO. We
reiterate that a solution to the problem does not lie in
military action alone. We also welcome the intensified
efforts of regional organizations in recent months.
(spoke in English)
We welcome the validation of the Disarmament,
Demobilization,
Community
Recovery
and
Stabilization programme as a national strategy and
the appointment of its provincial coordinators. The
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is fundamental to lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and requires the adequate and
timely support of partners. We stress the importance
of reinforcing and reforming the security and justice
sectors as well as ensuring the protection of civilians,
and we recognize the work of the Government and
MONUSCO in that regard.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to face multiple overlapping complex crises that are
affecting the wider Great Lakes region. The conflict
is resulting in forced migration and displacement and
alarming levels of hunger and malnutrition. Food
insecurity is increasing, exacerbated by Russia’s war in
Ukraine and the consequent global rise in food prices.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has one of the
most protracted and complex humanitarian crises in the
world, with more than 27 million people in dire need of
assistance. Worryingly, humanitarian organizations and
actors are now operating in an increasingly dangerous
environment, while the humanitarian response plan
remains vastly underfunded.
Insecurity breeds impunity, and we are appalled
by the persistent human rights violations and sexual
and gender-based violence, including by State actors.
Ms. Lusenge’s remarks this morning were eye-opening
and distressing in that regard. We condemn such acts
and call on all actors to end all violence, violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law.
Ireland commends the coordination between
the Government and the United Nations system to
ensure MONUSCO’s responsible drawdown from
Tanganyika province. We welcome the development
14/24

29/06/2022

of a joint programmatic transition plan in line with
the triple-nexus approach, and note the importance of
mobilizing and allocating resources to help preserve
stabilization gains. The continued engagement between
MONUSCO, the United Nations country team, the
Government and civil-society organizations to assess
the progress in implementing the transition plan
remains vital. We welcome the updated benchmark
reporting, with the inclusion of more robust analysis of
progress against many of the indicators.
Finally, as preparations for the 2023 general elections
continue, we look forward to the recommendations
of the United Nations needs-assessment mission on
possible electoral assistance and stress the importance
of protecting the democratic space. We recognize that
this will be a challenging period for Ms. Keita and
her team, who are all making sincere and dedicated
efforts on the ground. We want to assure them of
Ireland’s full support. We continue to urge for greater
transparency and guarantees, including safety, for the
full participation of women and the inclusion of young
people in electoral processes. We also commend the
efforts of MONUSCO and Special Representative Keita
to engage them through radio broadcasts, workshops
and other innovative forms of support.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keita and Ms. Lusenge for their
briefings. We also welcome the representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
Rwanda to the Council.
My country is very concerned about the
deterioration of the security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The resurgence
of the Mouvement du 23 mars is certainly one of the
main reasons for that, but so are the activities of other
armed groups. We condemn their attacks, including
on the positions of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), which have led to deaths and the
forced displacement of civilians.
In the face of those security challenges, we recognize
the regional efforts undertaken within the framework
of the Nairobi process in which the countries of the
East African Community are participating, and we take
note of the 20 June agreements to deploy a regional
force under the Treaty for the Establishment of the East
African Community. We are paying close attention to
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the progress and developments at the political level,
while reiterating that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is important to ensure that the armed groups
participate in the dialogues if long-term agreements are
to be reached. We call on those groups to lay down their
arms and become more involved in the process, as well
as to refrain from recruiting children.
On a different note, we express our concern about
the tensions between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda. Mexico believes that regional
cooperation is essential to addressing these differences.
We recognize the good offices of Angolan President
João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, in his capacity as
President of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.
We note with concern that hate speech, whether
among citizens the Democratic Republic or towards
foreigners, has increased. The use of such speech can
be a precursor to hate crimes, and, therefore, particular
attention must be paid to it. Avoiding incitement and
xenophobia is everyone’s responsibility.
It is also necessary to redirect the dialogue between
the main political actors following the controversy
arising from the revision of the electoral legislation. We
support the efforts of the United Nations to this effect,
as national unity and reconciliation are paramount at a
time when security issues are increasing in complexity.
The achievements made in preparation for the elections
in 2023 must be preserved.
With regard to the MONUSCO transition process,
Mexico takes note of the withdrawal of the Mission
from Tanganyika province. We emphasize that with
this step, progress is being made in complying with
the exit strategy outlined by the resolutions of the
Security Council. In addition, we also appreciate the
presentation of the progress report on the various
benchmarks (S/2022/503).
In this context of transition, we underline the role
played by the initiatives supported by the Peacebuilding
Fund and the investment planned for Tanganyika
province. We also stress the importance of the early
implementation of the national peacebuilding strategy
through the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization programme. It is
critical to continue to combat illicit arms trafficking,
which fuels the cycles of violence that have increased

S/PV.9081

in recent months, and which allow armed groups to
challenge State authority and MONUSCO’s efforts.
In closing, we welcome the progress towards the
meaningful participation of women in political life in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the election of
three women governors and one vice-governor in the last
provincial elections is encouraging. We hope that this
trend will continue in the run-up to the 2023 elections.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
and Ms. Lusenge for their briefings. I welcome the
Permanent Representatives of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi to today’s meeting.
The recent resurgence of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) has escalated tensions and conflicts in
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
leading to a dramatic increase in civilian casualties
and displacement. This is worrisome. Countries in
the region are part of the same community of shared
security. The parties concerned shall bear in mind
lessons from the past and work together to attain and
maintain peace together, so as to turn the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic into an engine for regional
development cooperation, rather than a catalyst for
conflicts and confrontation.
As a good friend to the countries in the region, China
sincerely hopes that the parties concerned will respect
each other’s concerns and interests and properly settle
their differences through dialogue and consultations to
de-escalate tension. Last week, leaders of the members
of the BRICS group — Brazil, Russia, India, China and
South Africa — jointly issued the Beijing Declaration
commending the efforts by the African countries, the
African Union (AU) and subregional organizations in
tackling the challenges in regional peace and security
and calling for continued international support.
The AU, the East African Community (EAC) and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), inter alia, have taken actions to resolve the
issue related to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region, demonstrating the determination
of countries in the region to jointly address their
common security threats. China welcomes the efforts
by President João Manuel Gonçalves of Angola, in his
capacity as Chair of the ICGLR, to conduct good offices
and mediation between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda.

22-4052615/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We commend President Kenyatta of Kenya in
facilitating the EAC’s third Heads of State Conclave
where further progress was made in implementing
the Nairobi process. We also welcome the tremendous
work done by Special Envoy Huang Xia and Special
Representative Keita to alleviate the situation. We
encourage the United Nations to lend further support to
good offices by countries of the region.
To eliminate the threat from armed groups in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, holistic measures must be taken on multiple
fronts. The Nairobi process has offered a two-track
solution — political and military — which we hope will
effectively curb rampant armed groups and stabilize the
security situation in the Democratic Republic and the
region. China urges all armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to immediately heed the call of
the Nairobi process, cease all violent activities and
unconditionally participate in political dialogue and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes should, within
their respective mandates, strengthen coordination and
cooperation with countries in the region in military
and non-military fields. The international community
should form synergy in defusing tensions and bolstering
security in the region and assist the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in improving its
national governance capacity, advancing security sector
reform and implementing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, with a view to genuinely safeguarding
its territory and sovereignty.
China supports MONUSCO’s work in fulfilling
the Council’s mandate and commends the Mission’s
police- and troop-contributing countries for their
contribution to protecting civilians and stabilizing
the situation. We pay tribute to the peacekeepers who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in recent conficts and
call for thorough investigation to bring perpetrators to
justice. MONUSCO should work with the Democratic
Republic’s Government to assess the current security
context in a timely manner and make progress on its
drawdown plan in an orderly and responsible way.
North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri are areas with
the greatest number of conflicts. MONUSCO should
16/24

29/06/2022

stabilize these areas as a priority and carry out its
drawdown plan in a prudent manner.
The purpose of the Council’s sanctions on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is to combat violence
caused by armed groups, not to limit the security
capacity of the Democratic Republic’s Government.
With MONUSCO entering its drawdown phase, it
is becoming increasingly urgent for the Democratic
Republic’s Government to safeguard security on its
own. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
calling for lifting the arms embargo in recent years.
China believes that the Security Council should respond
to the country’s concerns by waiving the notification
requirement in relation to the Government’s import
of weapons and ammunitions. We have noticed the
improvement in this regard in the draft resolution
proposed by the penholders and hope that the opinions
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
fully heeded and that greater strides will be made in
this context.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her
briefing on the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We were moved by the heart-rending
statement of Ms. Julienne Lusenge.
We welcome the participation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi at
this meeting.
We are greatly troubled by the ongoing hostilities
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We condemn attacks by illegal armed groups
against civilians, units of the Democratic Republic’s
armed forces and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). We emphatically condemn the
actions of the fighters from the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23). We see that the M-23 has qualitatively stepped
up its capacity, which now allows it to mount offensive
operations and effectively seize territories, as was the
case with Bunagana, on the border with Uganda.
Against the backdrop of the active hostilities and
confrontation with the M-23, other illegal armed groups
continue to terrorize local populations. There are
internecine clashes for control over natural-resource
deposits, the main victims of which are civilians. There
have been hundreds of casualties. The humanitarian
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9081

situation is deteriorating, and the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees is rising.

of the international community that have influence to
bear to spare no effort to stabilize the situation.

We hope that the Congolese armed forces, alongside
United Nations peacekeepers and international partners,
will manage to restore control over the security situation
and prevent any further escalation of violence.

At the practical level, we deem it important to fully
leverage the tools offered by the Regional Monitoring
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the implementation of the agreement. We also
believe that there is an important need to focus efforts
on the development and implementation of programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration of former combatants. Such programmes
would significantly increase the number of those
willing to leave the ranks of armed groups forever.

We thank MONUSCO peacekeepers, who have
been valiantly discharging their duties, consistently
risking their lives for the sake of peace in the east of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
A key priority now is the cessation of hostilities
and the beginning a full-fledged dialogue, as military
measures alone will not result in any meaningful
normalization in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We call on illegal armed groups to cease their
attacks, abandon violence and embrace negotiations
with the Congolese Government. We note and welcome
the increase in the number of those participating in
consultations under the relevant track of the Nairobi
process, including a growing number of armed-group
representatives.
We welcome the proactive efforts of African
States in facilitating the reaching of a settlement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our hope is that
the negotiations in the Nairobi Conclave will yield in
agreement on measures and steps that will ultimately
result in meaningful and sustained improvements.
We believe that the key to progress towards a longterm resolution and reconciliation lies with transparent
and constructive cooperation among regional
stakeholders. There is an important need to refrain
from hostile rhetoric and to overcome the persistent
mistrust and conflict. We also welcome the mediation
efforts of regional organizations and subregional
mechanisms, specifically those of the African Union
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, and we welcome and support the efforts made
to resolve the situation by the leadership of MONUSCO,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Huang Xia, and the United Nations as a whole. We
reiterate our principled support for the efforts of the
United Nations.
We believe that we cannot allow any recurrence
of the violence of recent years or any backsliding into
large-scale armed hostilities, the consequences of
which we and the citizens of that country will have to
grapple with for decades. We call upon those members

Our hope is that Kinshasa, with support from
the United Nations, the States of the region and the
international community, will be able to stamp out
those heightened threats and ultimately refocus on
meeting State-building and socioeconomic development
objectives. That is particularly important in the light of
the presidential elections planned for late 2023, which
will represent an important stage in the stabilization of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We believe that the resilience and the strength of
the country’s central authorities are key to surmounting
the consequences of the country’s colonialist past,
strengthening its sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and ensuring its control over its wealth of resources and
prosperity for the people.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou Keita, for her
comprehensive briefing and for her efforts and leading
role in fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We listened
carefully to Ms. Julienne Lusenge’s briefing, and I
welcome the participation of the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
representatives of Burundi and Rwanda in this meeting.
I would like to focus in my statement on the security,
political and humanitarian aspects in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
With regard to the current security situation, we
stress the importance of de-escalation, especially in
the light of the rising tensions in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, driven by the increasing
number of violent attacks by armed groups. We

22-4052617/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

also stress the need to spare no effort to ensure that
armed groups lay down their weapons so as to enable
progress to be made in the implementation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme.
We also express particular concern over the
situation of women and girls in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as they continue to face risks
as a result of the deteriorating security situation. In
that context, the United Arab Emirates condemns
all forms of sexual violence and stresses the need to
hold perpetrators accountable, with the possibility of
sanctioning them under paragraph 7(e) of resolution
2293 (2016).
Improving the security situation requires allowing
time for the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as those of neighbouring countries, to
exchange ideas and forge a common understanding on
how to address the increasingly complex threats posed
by armed groups. In that regard, the principles outlined
in the Peace, Security, and Cooperation Framework
remain essential to that end. In the context of the third
Heads of State Conclave, convened on 20 June in
Nairobi, we would affirm the need to continue efforts
that strengthen regional cooperation and achieve peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Long-term stability also requires addressing the
root causes of the conflict, particularly in the light
of recent reports on the escalation of hate speech and
incitement to discrimination across the country, which
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide has
condemned. We commend in this regard all efforts
made to address those challenges and to establish a
culture of tolerance and peaceful coexistence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including through
initiatives led by MONUSCO.
Similarly, we stress the need for the international
community to redouble its efforts to tackle the
worsening humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Various United Nations reports
indicate that almost one third of the population there
is in need of humanitarian aid and that the number of
forcibly displaced people is increasing owing to the
continuing acts of violence. It is imperative to ensure
the protection of civilians and humanitarian workers
as well as the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and facilities.
18/24

29/06/2022

Finally, I reiterate the continued support of the
United Arab Emirates for MONUSCO. We stress the
importance of its presence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to deterring armed-group activities.
MONUSCO’s cooperation with all relevant political
stakeholders remains essential to helping ensure an
environment conducive to the upcoming elections.
In the context of the Mission’s withdrawal from
Tanganyika province pursuant to resolution 2612 (2021),
we look forward to continuing to build on the gains
achieved. The United Arab Emirates also supports all
efforts that contribute to alleviating the suffering of the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
help the country to achieve a sustainable peace.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
Let me start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-Genera1 Keita for her briefing and
Ms. Lusenge for her presentation and recommendations
to the Security Council. We also welcome the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. Today I will address two
points regarding the regional and internal situations.
First, we took note of the outcomes of the third
regional Heads of State Conclave, held in Nairobi on
20 June, including the constitution of the East African
Community force. Any new actors deployed on the
ground to fight armed militant groups should operate in
close cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to achieve lasting results. A
military solution alone would not be able to eliminate
the root causes of conflict, while the dual-track approach
set out in Nairobi provides a more comprehensive
response. We urge all armed groups to lay down their
weapons and take part in the ongoing negotiations to
advance the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization programme. We also
call on the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to redouble its efforts to ensure the
inclusiveness of the process, to which we acknowledge
MONUSCO’s contribution.
We are concerned about the fact that relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda may affect the enhanced diplomatic outreach
between the countries of the region. We encourage both
countries to prevent any actions that could provoke
further tensions. We echo the Secretary-General’s
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9081

call to both countries to engage in a sincere dialogue
to de-escalate tensions and resolve their differences
peacefully and bilaterally through existing regional
mechanisms. In that context, we commend the
mediation efforts of President João Lourenço of Angola
to resolve bilateral disputes.

deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.

Secondly, the positive election preparations for 2023
have been overshadowed by the deteriorating security
situation. Albania would like to remind the Council
of the importance of the meaningful participation
of women and the inclusion of youth in the electoral
process. It is discouraging to see the democratic
space shrinking. We are deeply concerned about the
numerous foreign groups operating in the country and
the allegations that several States and actors are to some
degree responsible for that. The efforts to achieve peace
in the region and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are being threatened by armed groups,
especially the Mouvement du 23 mars, which has been
able to seize control of a vast area in a very short time.
We are also witnessing a dangerous rise in hate speech,
which we strongly condemn. That must stop.

Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): Before delivering my
statement, I would first of all like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 Keita for
her briefing and Ms. Lusenge for her briefing on
the situation concerning the women and children in
the eastern part of our country. I have a number of
comments to contribute.

Another cause for alarm is the devastating impact
of the general instability on civilians, with an alarming
growth in the number of internally displaced persons,
all caused by armed groups. There can be no prospects
for peace and reconciliation if those responsible for
crimes and abuses on all sides are not brought to
justice. Unfortunately, the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/503) once again highlights the high number
of grave violations against children, their recruitment
and cases of conflict-related sexual violence. That
is unacceptable.
Albania reiterates its support for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 with
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its support for MONUSCO, which must be fully
equipped if it is to effectively deal with the multiple
challenges on the ground. We call on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s neighbours and partners to
continue to engage with genuine political will and
with a view to stabilizing the country and the rest of
the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I heard here a whole chorus on hate-related issues
and that there are people who have entered my country
to spread hatred. I have lived enough years in Africa to
know that we have always faced problems of xenophobia
here and there, but we have never before heard such a
chorus about xenophobia-related incidents in a number
of African countries in which people are killed simply
because they are not from the region or because they
are from elsewhere. I do not have any information
concerning the numbers of people who have been killed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the last
few years or months as a result of the conflict in the
country’s eastern regions. Undeniably, there are people
who will shout, who will insult, who will do things,
but that does not represent our Government’s position.
The Government has condemned every incident of
xenophobia and threats against Rwandans in the Congo.
Many churches, civil society and organizations have
also risen to the occasion to condemn such behaviour
among our people. I therefore do not think that it is truly
one of the major issues. And I do not recall hearing
anyone here condemn the many crimes committed in
our country by Rwanda in the past 26 years.
The International Rescue Committee — an
American organization — has estimated that more than
6 million Congolese have lost their lives since 1998 as
a result of Rwanda’s incursions into our country, not
only in the east but also in Mbandaka, on the border
with Congo-Brazzaville, when they were pursuing the
Hutus. There were many deaths that have not been
talked about. Dr. Mukwege, a Nobel laureate, is urging
that we at least consult the 2010 mapping report. I do
not know why the United Nations does not want us to
analyse the report’s findings and prosecute the crimes

22-4052619/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

against humanity that were committed. I believe that
merits our attention.
I would first of all like to congratulate you on
Albania’s presidency of the Security Council for the
month of June, Madam President, and to thank you
for convening this meeting on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and inviting us
to participate. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his commitment to my
country’s cause and his report (S/2022/503) on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the
subject of our discussion today. In addition, I want to
thank all the members of the Security Council, with a
special mention for Ghana, Kenya and Gabon, the three
representatives whose presence within the Council is a
source of pride for the African continent. And I want
to acknowledge all the other members of the Council,
friends and partners who have stood by my country’s
side, some of them since we achieved independence
in 1960.
Earlier in today’s meeting, someone mentioned that
some long-time members address only the issue of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today the country is
in mourning, as the remains of Patrice Lumumba were
returned from Belgium and will be buried tomorrow.
What caused his death and why were his remains not
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for more than
60 years? We know that he was the victim of a vile
assassination. Why was he assassinated? It was because
he was a patriot who wanted to ensure that the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo were
used for the good of its people, not just pillaged. That
is why, 62 years later, we are facing the same situation.
The resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are being pillaged by foreign multinationals and
by neighbouring countries, without the component some
members have underscored today. Members pointed out
that Rwanda, Burundi and the Congo should join forces
to develop their countries together. We were colonized
by Belgium. Since 1925, Ruanda-Urundi was part of
Belgium. When I was growing up in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I did not believe we were in
another country. Our two countries were known as the
Belgian Congo and Ruanda-Urundi. Some Rwandans
and Burundians worked in our country and some
Congolese worked in Bujumbura or Kigali. That is why
I do not understand why we should be at war today.
20/24

29/06/2022

Furthermore, it was the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that took the initiative to establish the Economic
Community of the Great Lakes Countries, which is
headquartered in Rwanda. That means that we intend
and are willing to cooperate with our neighbours. Since
President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo came to
power, he has attempted to foster good neighbourliness
and dialogue with our neighbours. He has done his
utmost to enable Rwanda to trade with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Rwanda has resumed trade
with us. Rwanda was authorized to participate in the
sale of gold and other items. We have done nothing but
promote cooperation with our neighbours.
My delegation has taken note of the Secretary
General’s report on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), which is headed by Ms. Bintou
Keita. I had the pleasure of discussing the report and
the security situation in my country with Ms. Keita
last Monday. I learned a great deal from her. I would
like to congratulate her for her commitment and would
like to express my Government’s deep appreciation for
her excellent work in my country at this sensitive time.
She can rest assured of our full cooperation to ensure
success in her role.
We also thank MONUSCO troops and the Mission’s
leadership, in general, and all Quick Reaction Forces
of the Force Intervention Brigade. We thank them in
particular for the sacrifices they continue to make to
restore peace to the east of my country.
Allow me to make a few remarks on issues
mentioned in the report and the various concerns raised
by members of the Council.
To date, MONUSCO remains an important
partner — even a crucial one — for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its quest for peace and stability
in the east of the country. In reading the report, we were
pleased to note that efforts are being made within the
Mission to improve its efficiency and effectiveness.
With regard to its mandates, the most important
element in a situation of war, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, is civilian protection.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, citizens are
not convinced that MONUSCO’s highest priority is
the protection of civilians. It is therefore crucial for
MONUSCO to work on that area. A robust offensive
position is also essential. If MONUSCO is unable make
its presence felt and be a deterrent on the ground, it
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

will struggle to discharge its mission and its civilian
protection mandate. To that end, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would like to request the Security
Council to allocate sufficient resources to MONUSCO
to update its weaponry and helicopters and improve the
quality of its equipment, in general.
As underscored in the Secretary General’s report,
the political situation in my country is dominated by
preparations for the 2023 elections and the security
situation in the east of the country. Election preparations
are under control, given the commitment of the
authorities of my country to improving the electoral
process and system. Thanks to useful pre-funding
from the central Government and support promised
by the United Nations, it appears that a well-organized
election process is possible.
With regard to the security situation, there is
the Nairobi process, under the leadership of Kenyan
President Uhuru Kenyatta, as well as the African
Union’s initiative to resolve the conflict between the two
Presidents, Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Paul Kagame of
Rwanda, which is mediated by Angolan President João
Lourenço. In that regard, I would like to underscore
that any outcome depends upon the willingness of all
sides, as well as pressure from the African Union and
the international community, to advance the peace and
security process.
Given the time constraints, we cannot go into detail
on the next point. Allow me to summarize the situation
by shedding light on one of the most important actors
in the conflict — the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
It is clear that the resurgence of the M-23 looms
large over the security situation. They were defeated
by the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) and the Force Intervention Brigade
in 2013. The M-23 resurfaced eight years later in
November 2021. As Ms. Keita just told us, today the
M-23 has a better arsenal of weapons than those of
MONUSCO and the FARDC. It is able to shoot down
military helicopters, terrorize North Kivu province and
commit other crimes in the east of the country.
How do we explain the reappearance of the group
after such a long absence? Who is behind the group,
which had been disarmed, under the supervision of
Rwanda and Uganda? I have another question. Why do
the international community and the United Nations not
want to associate the group with the State of Rwanda?

S/PV.9081

We talk about foreign groups here in the Council, but
we make no mention of their origin. We know about
the Allied Democratic Forces, but we fail to mention
other groups.
Is the M-23 not a foreign group? Is it a group from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo? The origins of
the M-23 are well known. I have a note here that I can
give to whomever wants to see it. It is entitled “Note
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and Head of MONUSCO” and
it was written by Mr. Kalev Mutond, who was the
Administrator-General of the National Intelligence
Agency. The note contains a list of commanders, their
equivalents and troops of the M-23 who are not eligible
to be included within the ranks of the FARDC.
The note states that our services have the essential
duty of transmitting a list of the 78 commanders,
their equivalents and soldiers, out of a total of 1,700
persons, who were ineligible for integration into the
FARDC. The list was drawn up at the request of the
former Minister for Defence of Uganda, Mr. Crispus
Kiyongo, following a working meeting that he chaired
with an M-23 delegation on 11 and 12 September 2013
in Mbarara, Uganda.
What does the report tell us? Of those 78 commanders,
officers of the highest ranks — generals, colonels,
lieutenant colonels and majors — only one of them is
a captain, while all of the others are of a higher rank.
None of them are Congolese. They are all Rwandan,
and they were enrolled in Mr. Kagame’s army, namely,
the Rwandan Patriotic Front.
When the war began against the Habyarimana
regime in 1990 and after Kigali, was taken, the
Rassemblement Congolais pour la démocratie was
formed in Goma. The Congolese people were well aware
that, when Kagame took power, the Chief of Staff of the
FARDC, Mr. James Kabarebe, was not Congolese, but
Rwandan. His deputy, too, was Rwandan. Therefore,
the fact is that Rwandans infiltrated our army.
I have heard it said here that it is the primary
responsibility of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to protect its own borders and its own
population. We agree wholeheartedly, but who decided
to integrate Rwandans within our army? It was the
international community.
Every time there is a small rebellion, we are told
that we must negotiate. Then, when we negotiate, we

22-4052621/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

are encouraged to include certain people within our
army. Those people come with a self-appointed rank;
one says he is a general, another that he is a colonel or
a major. They are not actually given military training
that justifies the rank they are given. Therefore, we
have an army that has been infiltrated. How is that
army supposed to be capable of truly protecting the
population when its loyalties do not lie solely with our
country? There are elements within our army working
for another side. That is a very significant issue that
must be closely examined and addressed.
Returning to the note from Mr. Kalev Mutond of
the National Intelligence Agency, I would be happy to
make it available and share it with the Council. I will
also mention a few of the names listed therein.
The Rassemblement Congolais pour la démocratie
was formed in 1998. We then saw the formation of the
Congrès national pour la défense du peuple, led by
Mr. Laurent Nkunda. That organization was also under
Rwandan control. Mr. Bosco Ntangada, who was born
and raised in Rwanda, came to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with Mr. Laurent Nkunda and entered into
the system led by Mr. James Kabarebe. He also became
a member of the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
démocratie in Goma.
Shortly afterwards, he joined Mr. Laurent Nkunda
in the Congrès national pour la défense du peuple and
became the leader of the M-23. His right-hand man,
Mr. Sultani Makenga, can be found on the list of people
who were in Nairobi to negotiate and be integrated
into the Congolese army. He was a general at the time
but was promoted to the rank of colonel. Mr. Sultani
Makenga began his training in Kagame’s forces in
Uganda before Rwanda was taken by Kagame’s regime.
It is clear, therefore, that the group is essentially a
Rwandan army militia. There may be some Congolese
nationals, I have no doubt about that, in the M-23, but
the group is controlled by Rwanda, and its leaders,
including almost all of its commanders, are Rwandan.
I must recall, with great sorrow, that several million
Congolese have died in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and that, for more than 26 years now, my
people have been massacred and raped in the name of
the illicit and mafia-like exploitation of the mineral
wealth of their soil. The Congolese people have also
been following with interest the recent mobilization
of the United Nations, the Security Council and the
international community. The Democratic Republic of
22/24

29/06/2022

the Congo, a full State Member of the United Nations,
must have its borders and its sovereignty respected and
its stability restored.
Therefore, allow me, before I conclude my remarks,
to make several requests to the Council on behalf of
my delegation.
First, we call for respect of the integrity and
inviolability of the borders of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Second, we call for stronger condemnation of the
criminal aggression of the M-23 and all its supporters,
starting with the State of Rwanda and its President,
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Third, we ask that the M-23 be called on to leave
Congolese territory, immediately and unconditionally.
Fourth, we urge support for the Nairobi process.
Fifth, we call for all armed groups, without
exception, to be required lay down their arms and join
the disarmament, demobilization, community recovery
and stabilization programme and for greater support to
the programme.
Sixth, we call for more sanctions against the
various internal and external mafia networks operating
on our territory and their entire supply chains, from
production to transit to destination.
Seventh, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
calls on the Security Council to totally, not partially, lift
the prior notification clause required by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) contained
in paragraph 5 of resolution 1807 (2008), as called for
by President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo from
the rostrum of the United Nations General Assembly in
September 2021 (see A/76/PV.3). That provision, now
over 14 years old, has become completely obsolete. The
armed groups that massacre the Congolese population
every day are not even affected by that measure.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou
Keita, and Ms. Julienne Lusenge for their briefings, and
the members of the Security Council for their remarks.
We take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/503) and appreciate that it identified all the
main armed groups operating in the eastern part of
22-40526

29/06/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9081

the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, the
resurgence of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has
overshadowed the presence of more than 130 armed
groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic,
including the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), which was founded by Rwandan
former government forces and militia that committed
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi. In this regard,
we welcome the outcome of the third Heads of State
Conclave on the Democratic Republic of the Congo held
in Nairobi on 20 June 2022, where East African Heads
of State agreed to a joint regional force that will work in
cooperation with the military and administrative forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to stabilize
the region by neutralizing all the negative forces.

complex internal issues. It is yet another attempt by the
Government of the Democratic Republic to externalize
its internal weakness and problems onto its neighbours.

Rwanda’s commitment to the protection of civilians
is informed by the tragic history of the failure of the
United Nations to prevent and stop the 1994 genocide
against the Tutsi. We call for a swift and lasting solution
to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to ensure that this tragic history never happens again in
the Great Lakes region.

If the hate speech and calls for violence continue, it
will exacerbate the problems in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and further divide
the country by deepening hatred and mistrust among
communities in the Democratic Republic. In turn,
this will lead to deterioration of the security situation,
which means that the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) may not successfully fulfil
its mandate anytime soon. In this regard, Rwanda once
again welcomes the outcome of the third Heads of State
Conclave on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
during which the Heads of State of the East African
Community emphasized that all offensive language,
hate speech, threats of genocide and other inciting
political language must cease and must be discouraged.
The Heads of State also called for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to work together
towards a solution.

I would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the false allegations that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has lodged against Rwanda
and the resulting consequences, including hate speech
targeting a section of the population of the Democratic
Republic. As Council members know, the political and
military leaders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have falsely accused Rwanda of backing the
M-23. We have also heard it just now. It is an unfounded
accusation. The problem is that, notwithstanding such
statements, the Council has mechanisms to verify
any accusations made against any country. In this
case, there is Joint Verification Mechanism, which is
never used, and then we hear such statements. Any
allegations in this regard should be reported to the
Joint Verification Mechanism for an independent
investigation, which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has not done up to now. The grievances and
concerns of Democratic Republic’s domestic armed
groups must be resolved through the implementation of
prior agreements and political negotiations, rather than
accusing neighbouring countries.
Rwanda also rejects the ongoing propaganda
narrative promoted by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo that countries of the region want to balkanize the
eastern part of the country. These are absurd statements
without basis and intended to divert attention from

In the last few weeks, we have all observed hate
speech in mainstream media and on social media
and witnessed calls for killing and extermination,
intimidation and stigmatization, xenophobic and
inflammatory rhetoric, genocide ideology and political
manipulation targeting Tutsi in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular, and Rwandans in general.
Targeting and killing innocent civilians perceived to
be Tutsi may have a negative effect, as the targeted
civilians may seek protection by joining local armed
groups, which will lead to further insecurity.

Rwanda is aware that the Forces armées de la
République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) are
fighting the M-23 alongside the FDLR, which was
sanctioned by the Security Council in 2012, pursuant
to resolution 2078 (2012). The FARDC should avoid
the tendency of forging alliances with hostile and
sanctioned armed groups to fight other armed groups. It
is counterproductive and undermines the commitment
of the region and the United Nations to stabilize the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic. This alliance
also puts MONUSCO in a very difficult position, because
supporting the FARDC while it fights alongside the
FDLR is tantamount to supporting a genocidal armed
group. We call on the Security Council to condemn this
alliance and urge MONUSCO through its due diligence

22-4052623/24

S/PV.9081

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to avoid any military cooperation with the FARDC, as
long as the latter are allied with negative forces.
Following the deployment of the United Nations
Force Intervention Brigade in 2013, the M-23 was
the only armed group that happened to be defeated.
Rwanda remains concerned about a selective and
double-standard approach to fighting armed groups in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Rwanda believes that the regional approach
recommended by the second Heads of State Conclave
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on 21 April
2022, is essential and complements other regional
and subregional agreements to deal in a sustainable
manner with the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic. In this regard, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should
acknowledge its obligation under regional agreements
and fully incorporate all armed groups under agreed
peace arrangements.
In conclusion, Rwanda remains committed to
existing bilateral, regional and international efforts to
stabilize the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. Rwanda also looks forward
to the planned summit hosted by Angola with a view to
de-escalation in our region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Burundi would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on the manner in which you and
the Albanian delegation have conducted the presidency
of the Security Council in this month of June. Since
the beginning of the month, we have borne witness
to the importance of the points that the presidency
has addressed.
My delegation would like to thank Ms. Julienne
Lusenge for her extremely heart-rending briefing
and would particularly like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
the excellent report under analysis today (S/2022/503)
and salute the courage, commitment and all the efforts
made by the MONUSCO offices in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in a somewhat delicate context
that requires greater attention from the international
community and the Security Council in particular.
24/24

29/06/2022

In view of the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Burundi delegation attaches great
importance to the principles of the peaceful resolution
of disputes through such universally recognized
mechanisms as cooperation, dialogue and good offices.
To this end, Burundi will work harder to respect the
sacrosanct principles of the United Nations Charter and
regional peace and security instruments. Furthermore,
it will spare no effort to promote good-neighbourly
relations with all the countries in our subregion so that
peace can reign, thereby enabling us to tackle the main
challenges that arise at both regional and international
levels, such as, inter alia, security, climate change,
economic recovery and the fight against poverty.
In line with the essential principle of African
solutions for African problems, which we would like to
strengthen by formulating a regional approach that lays
the foundation for the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
my delegation commends the leadership of the Kenyan
President. We fully align ourselves with the Nairobi
process on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo within the framework of the East African
Community (EAC) as well as with the conclusions of
the EAC summit held in Nairobi on 20 May 2022, and
we give priority to respecting the regional dimension in
the management of disputes in Africa.
The fight against local and foreign armed groups
and terrorists in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and against proxy wars must
remain a priority for the States of the region in order
to stabilize this subregion once and for all. Particular
attention should also be paid to the legitimate claims of
the Democratic Republic with regard to respect for and
defence of its sovereignty.
In conclusion, Burundi calls for the respect of the
provisions set forth in paragraph 5 of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region signed in Addis
Ababa and welcomes all the efforts made by the United
Nations, the African Union and the East African
community for a lasting peace in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
22-40526
