A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/180
28 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 93 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/608/Add.3)]
53/180. Special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/177 of 16 December 1996 on the implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) and 52/192 of 18 December 1997 on the
follow-up to the Conference and the future role of the Commission on Human Settlements,
Also recalling that, in paragraph 13 of its resolution 51/177, the General Assembly reaffirmed that
the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, together with the Commission on Human Settlements, should constitute
a three-tiered intergovernmental mechanism to oversee the coordination of activities for the implementation
of the Habitat Agenda,1
Further recalling paragraph 218 of the Habitat Agenda, adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Human Settlements (Habitat II), in which the Conference recommended that the General Assembly
consider holding a special session in the year 2001 for an overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of the outcome of the Conference,

1

Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
99-76441

/...

A/RES/53/180
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 52/190 of 18 December 1997, in which it, inter alia, decided to hold a special
session of the General Assembly in the year 2001 for an overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), the
modalities of which were to be decided on at its fifty-third session,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General2 containing proposals on the scope and
organizational aspects of the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal
of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General2 concerning the modalities
for the special session of the General Assembly for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation
of the Habitat Agenda;
2. Decides that the special session for an overall review and appraisal of the implementation of the
outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) will be held in June 2001
for a period of three working days;
3. Reaffirms that the special session will be undertaken on the basis of and with full respect for the
Istanbul Declaration on Human Settlements3 and the Habitat Agenda1 and that there will be no
renegotiation of the existing agreements contained therein;
4. Decides to invite States members of the specialized agencies that are not members of the United
Nations to participate in the work of the special session in the capacity of observers;
5. Also decides that the Commission on Human Settlements, which is currently scheduled at its
seventeenth and eighteenth sessions to focus on monitoring the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and
assessing its impact, should serve as the preparatory committee for the special session;
6. Further decides that the Commission, meeting as the preparatory committee for the special
session, shall be open-ended to allow full participation of all States;
7. Stresses the need for the effective participation of local authorities, other Habitat Agenda partners
and relevant actors of civil society, in particular the private sector and non-governmental organizations,
in the preparations for the special session, as well as the need to ensure appropriate arrangements, taking
into account the practice and experience gained at the Habitat II Conference, for their substantive
contributions to and active involvement in the preparatory meetings and the special session, and invites
the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States, to propose to Member States
appropriate modalities for their effective involvement in the special session;
8. Invites Governments to play an active role in the preparatory process, inter alia, through an
intensified exchange of experiences, and welcomes the proposals received so far from Singapore to hold

2

A/53/267.

3

Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
/...

A/RES/53/180
Page 3

an international conference on model cities, from 19 to 21 April 1999, and from Germany to hold an
international conference, entitled “Urban 21”, in 2000;
9. Invites the Commission on Human Settlements, serving as the preparatory committee, to meet
for two working days back-to-back with its forthcoming seventeenth session in order, inter alia, to elect
its officers, adopt appropriate rules of procedure and consider the organization of work for its first
substantive session, to be held at Nairobi for five working days in May 2000, and invites the preparatory
committee, at its first substantive session, to consider the modalities, duration, date and agenda for the
second substantive session, to be held in 2001;
10. Invites the Economic and Social Council to devote its coordination segment in 2000 to human
settlements issues and the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
11. Also invites the Economic and Social Council actively to promote and coordinate the role of the
regional commissions in the review and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda at the
regional and subregional levels;
12. Invites the regional commissions, within their mandates and in cooperation with regional
intergovernmental organizations and banks, to consider convening high-level meetings to review the
progress made in implementing the outcome of the Conference and to report the results of their review
to the Economic and Social Council;
13. Requests other relevant organizations and agencies of the United Nations system and the funds
and programmes, consistent with their respective mandates, to contribute, as appropriate, to the review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda at the national, regional and global levels;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to seek extrabudgetary resources to assist developing countries,
in particular the least developed countries, to send representatives to the sessions of the preparatory
committee and the special session of the General Assembly in June 2001 for an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session
on the implementation of the present resolution;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fourth session the sub-item entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II)”.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
