A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/145
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 19
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/51/588)]
51/145.

Question of Tokelau

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Tokelau,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the
question of Tokelau,1
Recalling the solemn declaration on the future status of Tokelau
delivered by the Ulu-o-Tokelau (the highest authority on Tokelau) on 30 July
1994, that an act of self-determination in Tokelau is now under active
consideration, together with the constitution of a self-governing Tokelau, and
that the present preference of Tokelau is for a status of free association
with New Zealand,
Recalling also the emphasis placed in the solemn declaration on the
terms of Tokelau's intended free association relationship with New Zealand,
including the expectation that the form of help Tokelau could continue to
expect from New Zealand in promoting the well-being of its people, besides its
external interests, would be clearly established in the framework of that
relationship,
Noting with appreciation the continuing exemplary cooperation of New
Zealand as the administering Power with the Special Committee relating to

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement
No. 23 (A/51/23), chap. XI.
97-76549

/...

A/RES/51/145
Page 2

Tokelau and its readiness to permit access by United Nations visiting missions
to the Territory,
Recalling the dispatch in 1994 of a United Nations visiting mission to
Tokelau,
Noting that, as a small island Territory, Tokelau exemplifies the
situation of most remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting also that, as a case study pointing to successful decolonization,
Tokelau has wider significance for the United Nations as it seeks to complete
its work in decolonization,
1.
Notes that Tokelau remains firmly committed to the development of
self-government and to an act of self-determination that would result in
Tokelau assuming a status in accordance with the options on future status for
Non-Self-Governing Territories contained in principle VI of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960;
2.
Also notes Tokelau's desire to move at its own pace towards an act
of self-determination;
3.
Commends Tokelau for seeking on the basis of wide consultation
with its people a form of national government that reflects its unique
traditions and environment, and for charting its own constitutional course;
4.
Acknowledges the collaboration between New Zealand and Tokelau
regarding the Tokelau Amendment Act 1996, which provides Tokelau's national
government with a legislative power, supplementing the executive power
delegated in 1994;
5.
Also acknowledges Tokelau's need for reassurance, given that local
resources cannot adequately cover the material side of self-determination, and
the ongoing responsibility of Tokelau's external partners to assist Tokelau in
balancing its desire to be self-reliant to the greatest extent possible with
its need for external assistance;
6.
Welcomes the assurances of the Government of New Zealand that it
will meet its obligations to the United Nations with respect to Tokelau and
abide by the freely expressed wishes of the people of Tokelau with regard to
their future status;
7.
Invites the administering Power and United Nations agencies to
continue their assistance to the social and economic development of Tokelau.
83rd plenary meeting
13 December 1996
