A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/99
17 December 1999

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 47
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/54/L.27 and Add.1)]
54/99.

United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 53/93 of 7 December 1998, in which it decided to authorize the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in Guatemala from 1 January to 31 December 1999,
Taking into account the ninth report on human rights of the Mission,1
Taking into account also the report of the Commission for Historical Clarification,2
Stressing the role played by the Mission in support of the Guatemala peace process, and emphasizing the
need for the Mission to continue to enjoy the support of all parties,
Taking into account the fact that the parties have expressed their interest in the continued presence of the
Mission in Guatemala,

1

A/53/853, annex.

2

A/53/928, annex.

99-77791

/...

A/RES/54/99
Page 2

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Mission3 and the

/...

A/RES/54/99
Page 3

recommendations therein, which are aimed at ensuring that the Mission can respond adequately to the demands
of the peace process until 31 December 2000,
1. Welcomes the ninth report on human rights of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Guatemala;1
2.

Also welcomes the report of the Commission for Historical Clarification2 and its recommendations;

3. Takes note with satisfaction of progress made in the implementation of the peace agreements, in
particular the finalization of the programme for the repatriation of Guatemalan refugees in Mexico, compliance
with the spending targets included in the agreements, increased deployment of the new National Civil Police,
the approval by Congress of the new Land Trust Fund and the establishment of the Office for the Defence of
Indigenous Women;
4. Also takes note with satisfaction of the ongoing efforts at consensus-building carried out within the
commissions created under the peace agreements, as well as of the contribution of the Women’s Forum;
5. Underscores the fact that, as pointed out by the Commission to Follow up the Implementation of the
Peace Agreements, key reforms remain outstanding, including the fiscal, judicial, military and electoral reforms,
and therefore stresses the critical importance of continued compliance with the peace agreements in 2000;
6. Encourages the Government to implement its decision to adopt a new military doctrine and disband
the current Presidential Military Staff, in keeping with the peace agreements;
7. Underscores the fact that meeting the tax revenue targets set in the Agreement on Social and
Economic Aspects and Agrarian Situation4 is essential to the sustainability of the implementation of the peace
agreements;
8. Notes that, while significant achievements have been registered in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights,5 important shortcomings persist, and calls upon the Government
to redouble its efforts in the promotion of human rights, taking into account the recommendations contained
in the reports on human rights of the Mission, and to do its utmost to assist in the investigation of the murder
of Monsignor Juan José Gerardi Conedera;
9. Calls upon the Government to follow up on the recommendations of the Commission for Historical
Clarification, with a view to promoting national reconciliation, upholding the right to truth and providing
redress, in accordance with Guatemalan law, for the victims of human rights abuses and violence committed
during the thirty-six-year armed conflict;

3

A/54/355.

4

A/50/956, annex.

5

A/48/928–S/1994/448, annex I; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-ninth Year, Supplement
for April, May and June 1994, document S/1994/448.
/...

A/RES/54/99
Page 4

10. Welcomes the commitment to the implementation of the peace agreements made by the presidential
candidates of the major political parties and their support for the extension of the mandate of the Mission;
11. Encourages the parties and all sectors of Guatemalan society to continue efforts to achieve the goals
of the peace agreements, in particular the observance of human rights, including the rights of indigenous
peoples, equitable development, participation and national reconciliation;
12. Invites the international community and, in particular, the agencies, programmes and funds of the
United Nations, to continue to take the implementation of the peace agreements as the framework for their
technical and financial assistance programmes and projects, and stresses the continued importance of close
cooperation among them;
13. Stresses the role of the Mission as a key instrument in the consolidation of peace, promotion of the
observance of human rights and building of confidence in the implementation of the peace agreements;
14. Decides to authorize the renewal of the mandate of the Mission from 1 January to 31 December
2000;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, as early as possible, an updated report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fifth session, with his assessment and recommendations with regard to the peace process
after 31 December 2000;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly fully informed of the
implementation of the present resolution.
73rd plenary meeting
8 December 1999
