XIII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITIEE
R(SULUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS
DE LA TROISIEME COMMISSION

54 {I). Transfer to the United Nations of powers exercised by
the League of Nations under
the International Agreements,
Conventions and Protocols on
Narcotic Drugs

54 (I). Transfert aux Nations Unies
des pouvoirs exerces par la
Societe des Nations en vertu
des Accords, Conventions et
Protocoles internationaux sur
les stupefiants

The General Assembly,
Desirous of continuing and developing the international control of narcotic drugs,
Approves the Protocol which accompanies this
resolution;
Urges that it shall be signed without delay by
all the States who are Parties to the Agreements,
Conventions and Protocols mentioned in the
Annex;
Recommends that, pending the entry into
force of the aforesaid Protocol, effect be given to
its provisions by the Parties to any of these
Agreements, Conventions and Protocols;
Instructs the Secretary-General to perform the
functions conferred upon him by the Protocol,
signed on 11 December 1946, amending the internationai Agreements, Conventions and Protocols relating to narcotic drugs which were concluded in the years 1912, 1925, 1931 and 1936;
Directs the Economic and Social Council and
the Secretary-General, in view of the General Assembly's resolution on the relations of Members
of the United Nations with Spain, adopted on
9 February 1946, to suspend all action under this
Protocol and the above-mentioned Agreements,
Conventions and Protocols with respect to the
Franco Government in Spain so long as this Government is in power.
Forty-ninth plenary meeting,
r9 November r946.

L'Assemblee generale,
Desiran.t continuer et etendre le controle international des stupcf1ants,
Approuve le Protocole qui accompagne la presente resolution;
Demande qu'il soit signc, sans retard, par tous
Jes Etats qui so11t Part1l·, ;111x ,\nord,, Cott\Clltions et Protocoles mentionncs clans !'annexe;

Protocol amending the Agreements, Conventions and Protocols on Narcotic Drugs concluded at The Hague on 23 January 1912, at
Geneva on 11 February 1925 and 19 February
1925 and 13 July 1931, at BanCJkok on 27
November 1931 and at Geneva on 26 June
1936

Protocole amendant les Accords, Conventions et Protocoles sur les stupefiants conclus
a La Haye le 23 janvier 1912, a Genhe le
11 fevrier 1925 et le 19 fevrier 1925 et le
13 juillet 1931, a Bangkok le 27 novembre
1931 et a Genhe le 26 juin 1936

The States Parties to the present Protocol, considering that under the international Agreements,
Conventions and Protocols relating to narcotic
drugs which were concluded on 23 January 1912,
11 February 1925, 19 February 1925, 13 July
1931, 27 November 1931 and 26 June 1936, the
League of Nations was invested with certain
duties and functions for whose continued performance it is necessary to make provision in consequence of the dissolution of the League, and
considering that it is expedient that these duties
and functions should be performed henceforth
by the United Nations and the World Health

Les Etats Parties au present Protocole, considerant que Jes Accords, Conventions et Proter
coles internationaux concernant Jes stupefianta
qui ont ete conclus le 23 janvier 1912, le 11 fevrier
1925, le 19 fevrier 1925, le 13 juillct 1931, le
27 novembre I 931 et le 26 juin 1936 ont con fie a
la Societe des Nations certaines charges et fonctions et, qu'en raison de la dissolution de la
Societe des Nations, ii est necessaire de prendre
des dispositions en vue d'en assurer l'accomplissement sans interruption, et considerant qu'il est
opportun que ces charges et fonctions soient
accomplies desormais par !'Organisation des Na-

Recommande que, en attendant l'entree en
vigueur dudi t Protocole, ses dispositions soient
appliquces par les Parties a chacun de ces Accords,
Conventions et Protocoles;
Donne pour imtruction au Secretaire general
de s'acquittcr des fonctions qui Jui sont confices par le Protocole, signe de 11 decembre 1946,
amendant Jes Accords, Conventions et Protocoles
internationaux sur Jes stupefiants conclus en 1912,
19~5. 1931 Cl 1936;
lnviJe le Conseil cconomique et social ainsi
quc le Secretaire general, etant donne la resolution de !'Assemblee generale du 9 fevrier 1946
sur les relations entre Jes Membres des Nations
Unies et l'Espagne, a suspendre toute action en
vertu de ce Protocole et des Accords, Conventions
et Protocoles susmentionnes, en ce qui concerne
le Gouvernement de "Franco en Espagne, aussi
longtemps que ce Gouvcrnemcnt est au pouvoir.
Q11arnnte-11e1wieme seance pleniere,
le 19 novembre 1946.

81

Organization or its Interim Commission, have
agreed upon the following provisions:

tions Unies et par !'Organisation mondiale de la
sante ou par sa Commission interimaire, soot convenus des dispositions suivantes:

Article 1
The States Parties to the present Protocol undertake that as between themselves they will, each
in respect of the instruments to which it is a party,
and in accordance with the provisions of the
present Protocol, attribute full legal force and
effect to, and duly apply the amendments to those
instruments which are set forth in the Annex to
the present Protocol.

Article I
Les Etats Parties au present Protocole prennent !'engagement qu'entre eux-memes, chacun
en ce qui concerne les instruments auxquels il
est Partie, et conformement aux dispositions du
present Protocole, ils attribueront plein effet juridique aux amendements a ccs instruments mentionnes a !'annexe au present Protocole, les mettront en vigueur et en assureront !'application.

Article 11
It is agreed that, during the period preceding the entry into force of the Protocol in respect
of the International Convention relating to Dangerous Drugs of 19 February 1925, and in respect
of the International Convention for limiting the
Manufacture and regulating the Distribution of
Narcotic Drugs of 13 July 1931, the Permanent
Central Board and the Supervisory Body as at
present constituted shall continue to perform
their functions. Vacancies in the membership of
the Permanent Central Board may during this
period be filled by the Economic and Social
Council.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations is authorized to perform at once the duties
hitherto discharged by the Secretary-General of
the League of Nations in connexion with the
Agreements, Conventions and Protocols mentioned in the Annex to the present Protocol.

Article II
II est convenu que, en attendant l'entree
en vigueur du Protocole relativement a la Convention internationale du 19 fevrier 1925 concernant les drogues nuisibles et relativement a la
Convention internationale du 13 ju ill et 1931 pour
limiter la fabricalion et reglementer la distribution des stupefiants, le Comite central permanent
et l'Organe de controle, tels qu'ils sont constitues
actuellement, continueront a exercer leurs fonctions. Pendant cette pcriode, le Conseil economique et social pourra pourvoir aux sieges vacants au Comite central permanent.

1.

1.

2. Le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies est autorise a assumer immediatement les fonctions dont le Secretaire general de
la Societe des Nations etait charge jusqu'a present en ce qui concerne les Accords, Conventions
et Protocoles mentionnes a !'annexe du present
Protocole.
3. Les Etats Parties a l'un des instruments qui
doivent ctre amcndes par le present Protocole
sont invites a appliquer Jes textes amendes de
ces instruments des l'entree en vigueur des amendements, mcme s'ils n'ont pas encore pu devenir
Parties au present Protocole.
4. Si les amendements a la Convention sur
les drogues nuisibles du 19 fevrier 1925 ou Jes
amendcments a la Convention pour limiter la
fabrication et reglementer la distribution des
stupefiants du 13 juillct 1931 entrent en vigueur
avant que !'Organisation mondiale de la santc
soit en mesure de rcmplir les fonctions que ces
Conventions Jui attribuent, Jes fonctions confiees
a cette Organisation par les amendements seront
provisoirement remplies par la Commission interimaire.
Article 111
Les fonctions attribuees au Gouvernement des
Pays-Bas en vertu des articles 21 et 25 de la Convention internationale de !'opium signee a La
Haye le 23 janvier 1912 et confiees au Secretaire
general de la Societe des Nations, avec le consentement du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas, par une
resolution de l'Assemblee de la Societe des Nations en date du 15 decembre 1920, seront
exercees ctcsormais par le Secrctaire general de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies.

3. States which are Parties to any of the instruments which are to be amended by the present
Protocol are invited to apply the amended texts
of those instruments so soon as the amendments
are in force, even if they have not yet been able
to become Parties to the present Protocol.
4. Should the amendments to the Convention
relating to Dangerous Drugs of 19 February 1925,
or the amendments to the Convention for limiting
the Manufacture and regulating the Distribution
of Narcotic Drugs of 13 July 1931, come into force
before the World Health Organization is in a
position to assume its functions un<ler these Conventions, the functions conferred on that Organization by the amendments shall, provisionally,
be performed by its Interim Commission.
Article 111
The functions conferred upon the Netherlands
Government under articles 21 and 25 of the International Opium Convemion signed at The Hague
on 23 January 1912, and entrusted to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations with the
consent of the Netherlands Government, by a
resolution of the League of Nations Assembly
dated 15 December 1920, shall henceforward be
exercised by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Article IV
As soon as possible after this Protocol has been
opened for signature, the Secretary-General shall

Article IV
Aussitot que possible apres l'ouverture a la
signature du present Protocole, le Secretaire ge-.

82

prepare texts of Lhe ,\grcements. Conventions and
Protocols revised in accordance with the proent
Protocol and shall send copies for their i11formation to the Government of every Member of the
United Nations and every non member State to
which this Protocol has been communicated by
the Secretary-General.

neral preparera Jes textes des Accords, Conventions et Protocoles revises conformement au present Protocole et transmettra, a titre d'information, des copies au Gouvernement de chaque
Membre des Nations Unies et de chaque Etat
non membre auquel le present Protocole aura
ete communique par le Secretaire general.

Article V
The present Protocol shall be open for signatu1e or acceptance b) any ol the States Parties to
the Ai-,TTeemcnts, Conventions and Protocols on
narcotic drugs of 23 January 1912, 11 February
1925, 19 February 1925, 13 July 1931, 27 November 1931 and 26 June 1936 to which the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations has communicated
a c~py of the present Protocol.

Article V
Le pi-escnt Protocole sera ouvert a la siguature ou a l'acceptation de tous les Etats Parties
aux Accords, Conventions et Protocoles sur les
stupefiants du 23 janvier 1912, du 11 fevrier 1925,
du 19 fcvrier 1925, du 13 juillet 1931, du 27
novembre 1931 et du 26 juin 1936, auxquels le
Secretaire general de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies aura communique une copie du present
Protocole.
Article VI
Les Etats pourront devenir Parties au present
Protocolc:
a) En le si,.;nant ,am rt'·,n,e <1uant :i
!'approbation,
b) En le signant sous reserve d'approbation,
suivie d'acceptation,
c) En !'acceptant.
L'acceptation s'effectuera par le deplh d'un
instrument formel aupres du Secretaire general
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies.

Article VJ
States may become Parties to the present Protocol by:
(a) Signature without reservation as to approval,
(b) Signature subject to approval followed
by acceptance or
(c) Accept;,_nce.
Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of
a formal instrument with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.
Article Vil
I. The present Protocol shall come into force
in respect of each Party on the date upon which
it has been signed on behalf of that Party without
reservation as to approval, or upon which an
instrument of acceptance has been deposited.
2. The amendments set forth in the Annex to
the present Protocol shall come into force in respect of each Agreement, Convention and Protocol when a majority of the Parties thereto have
become Parties to the present Protocol.

Article VII
Le present Protocole entrera en vigueur a
l'egard de chaque Partie a la date ou celle-ci y
aura adhere sans fonnuler de reserves quant a
son acccptation, ou a la date a laquelle un instrument d'acccptation aura ete depose.
2. Les amendcments mentionnes a l'annexe au
present Protocole entreront en vigueur, en ce qui
concernc chaque Accord, Convention et Protocole, lorsqu'une majorite des Parties a l'Accord,
a la Convention et au Protocole en question serom devenues Parties au present Protocole.

Article Vil/
In accordance with Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations will register and publish the
amendments made in each instrument by the
present Protocol on the dates of the entry into
force of these amendments.

Article VIII
Conformement a !'Article 1c2 de la Charle des
Nations Unies, le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies enregistrera et publiera
les amendements apportes a chaque instrument
par le present Protocole avec dates d'entree en
vigueur de ces amendements.

Article IX
The present Protocol, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are
equally authentic, shall be deposited in the
archives of the United Nations Secretariat. The
Agreements, Conventions and Protocols to be
amended in accordance with the Annex being in
the English and French languages only, the English and French texts of the Annex shall equally
be the authentic texts and the Chinese, Russian
and Spanish texts will be translations. A certified copy of the Protocol, including the Anne·:,
shall be sent by the Secretary-General to each of
the States Parties to the Agreements, Conventions
and Protocols on narcotic drugs of 23 January

Article IX
Le prest:nt Protocole, dont les textes anglais,
chinois, espagnol, fran~ais et russe feront egalement foj, sera depose aux archives du Secretariat
de l'Orgarn,ation des Nations Unies. Les Conventions, Acco1ds et Protocoles a amender conformement a l'annexe ayant ete rediges seulement err
anglais et en fran~ais, les textes anglais et fran~is de l'annexe feront egalement foi, les textes
chinois, espagnol et russe etant des traductions.
Une copie tertifiee conforme du present Protocole, y compris !'annexe, sera envoyee par le Secretaire general a chacun des Etats Parties aux
Accords, Conventions et Protocoles sur les stupefiants du 23 janvier 1912, du 11 fevrier 1925, du

1.

83

1912, 11 February •~25, 19 February 1925, 13
July 1931, 27 November H)31 and 26 June 1936,
as well as to all Members of the United Nations
and non-member States mentioned m Article IV.
IN FAITH WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have signed the pr1..a<!Jlt Protocol on
behalf of their respective Governments on the
dates appearing opposite their respective signatures.
DONE at Lake Success, New York., this eleventh
day of December one thousand nine hundred and
forty-six.

19 fevrier 1925, du 13 juillet 1931, du 27 novembre 1931 et du 26 juin 1936, ainsi qu'a tousles
Membres des Nations Unies et aux Etats non
membres mentionnes a l'article IV.
EN FOi DE QUOI les sowsignes dl'lment autorises ont signe le present Protocole au nom de
leurs Gouvernements respectifs aux dates figurant en regard de Jeur signature respective.

ANNO

ANNEXI

Tc. the Protocol ame■ dh19 tit• Agreements, Co11vt10 ■ 1 and Protocols o ■ Narcotic Dr1191 concl ■ded at
The Ha911e on 23 Ja11■ ary 1912, at Geneva on 11 Febr■•
ary 1925 and 19 February 1925 and 13 July 1931, at
laa9kok on 27 November 1931 and at Ge■eva 011
26 J ■ne 1936

A■ Protocol■ amendant les Accord,, Co■ve■Ho■ 1 et
Protocol■s 111r l■s stupefia ■ts co11cl ■ 1 c\ La Haye lo
23 la ■ vler 1912, c\ Gonhe le 11 fhrler 1925 et le
19 ffvrlor 1925 et le 13 l ■lllet 1931, c\ la ■9kok le
27 ■ ovembr• 1931 et c\ Genh• le 26 l■I• 193'

1. AGll!c!\fENT CONCERNING THE MANUF.\GTURE OF,
INTERNAL TRADE IN, AND USE OF PllEPAJlED OPIUM,
WITH PROTOCOL AND FINAL Acr, SIGNED AT GENEVA
ON 11 FEBRUARY 1925
In articles 10, 13, 14 and 15 of the Agreement,
"the Secretary-General of the United Nations"
shall be substituted for "the Secretary-General of
the League of Nations" and "the Secretariat of the
United Nations" shall be substituted for "the
Secretariat of the League of Nations".
In articles 3 and 4 of the Protocol, "the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations"
shall be substituted for "the Council of the
League of Nations".

J.

FAIT a Lake Success, Etat de New-York, le onze
decembre roil neuf cent quarante-six.

ACCORD CONCERNA.NT LA FABRICATION, LE COM•
MERCE INTERIEUR ET L'USAGE DE L'0PIOM 1'-REPARE,
AVEC PR0TOC0LE ET Acn: FINAL, SIGNES A GENEVE
LE 11 FEVRIER 1925

Aux articles 10, 13, 14 et 15 de l'Accord, on
remplacera "Secretaire general de la Societe des
Nations" par "Secretaire general de !'Organisation
des Nations Unies" et "Secretariat de la Societe
des Nations" par "Secretariat de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies".
Aux articles 3 et 4 du Protocole, on remplacera
"le Conseil de la Societe des Nations" par "le
Conseil economique et social de !'Organisation
des Nations Unies".
CONVENTION INTERNATIONALE SUR. LES DROGUES
NUISIBLES, AVEC PR0TOC0LE, SIGNES A GENEVE LE
19 FfVRIER 1925
On remplacera l'article 8 par )'article suivant:

lt. INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION RELATING TO DANGEROUS DRUGS, WITII PROTOCOL, SIGNED AT GENEVA
ON 19 FEBRUARY 1925
For article 8, the following article shall be substituted:
"In the event of the World Health Organization, on the advice of an expert committee
appointed by it, finding that any preparation
containing any of the narcotic drugs referred
to in the present chapter cannot give rise to
the drug habit on account of the medicaments
with which the said drugs are compounded and
which in practice preclude the recovery of the
said drugs, the World Health Organization
shall communicate this finding to the Economic
and Social Council of the United Nations. The
Council will communicate the finding to the
Contracting Parties, and thereupon the provisions of the present Convention will not be
applicable to the preparation concerned."

2.

"Lorsque !'Organisation mondiale de la
sante, sur l'avis d'un Comite d'experts nomme
par elle, aura constate que certaines preparations contenant des stupefiants vises dans le
present chapitre ne peuvent donner lieu a la
toxicomanie en raison de la nature des substances medicamenteuses avec lesquelles ces
stupefiants sont associes et qui empechent de
les recupercr pratiquement, !'Organisation
mondiale de la sante avisera de cette constatation le Conseil economique et social de !'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le Conseil communiquera cette constatation aux Parties
contractantes, cc qui aura pour effet de soustraire au regime de la presente Convention les
preparations en question."
On remplacera l'article 10 par !'article suivant:

For article 10, the following article shall be
substituted:
"In the event of the World Health Organization, on the advice of an expert committee appointed by it, finding that any narcotic drug
to which the present Convention does not apply
i, liable to similar abuse and productive of
similar ill-effects as the substances to which this

"Lotsque !'Organisation mondiale de la sante,
sur l'avis d'un comite d'experts nomme par elle,
aura constate que tout stupefiant auquel la presente Convention ne s'applique pas est susceptible de donner lieu a des abus analogues et de
produire des effets aussi nuisibles que les aub-

84

stances vi~es par ce chapitre de la Convention,
l'Organisation mondiale de la sante en informera le Conseil economique et social et lui
recommandera que les dispositions de la presence Convention soient appliquees a cette substance.
"Le Conseil economique et social communiquera cette recommandation aux Parties
contractantes. Toute Partie contractante qui
accepte la recommandation signifiera son
acceptation au Sccretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Uni€s, qui en avisera les
autres Parties contractantes.
"Les dispositions de la presente Convention
deviendront immediatement applicables a la
substance en question dans les relations entrc
les Parties contractantes qui auront accepte la
recommandation visee par les paragraphes precedents."
Au troisieme paragraphe de !'article 19, on remplacera "le Conseil de la Societe des Nations" par
"le Conseil economique et social de )'Organisation
des Nations Unies".
Le quatrieme paragraphe de l'article 19 sera
supprime.
Aux articles 20, 24, 27, 30, 32 et 38 (paragraphe 1), on remplacera "le Conseil de la Societe des Nations" par "le Conseil economique et
social de l'Organisation des Nations Unies" et
"le Secretaire general de la Societe des Nations"
par "le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies", partout ou ccs appellations se
rencontreront.

chapter-of the Convention applies, the World
Health Organization shall inform the Economic and Social Council accordingly and recommend that the provisions of the present
Convention shall be applied to such drug.

"The Economic and Social Council shall
communicate the said recommendation to the
Contracting Parties. Any Contracting Party
which is prepared to accept the recommendation shall notify the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who will inform the other
Contracting Parties.
"The provisions of the present Convention
shall thereupon apply to the substance in question as between the Contracting Parties who
have accepted the recommendation referred to
above."
In the third paragraph of article 19, "the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations"
shall be substituted for "the Council of the
League of Nations".
The fourth paragraph of article 19 shall be
deleted.
In articles 20, 24, 27, 30, 32 and 38 (paragraph
1), "the Economic and Social Council of the
United Nations" shall be substituted for "the
Council of the League of Nations" and "the
Secretary-General of the United Nations" shall
be substituted for "the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations", wherever these words occur.
In article 32, "the International Court of Justice" shall be substituted for "the Permanent
Court of International Justice".
Article 34 shall read as follows:
"The present Convention is subject to ratification. As from 1 January 1947, the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who
shall notify their receipt to all the Members
of the United Nations and the non-member
States to which the Secretary-General has communicated a copy of the Convention."

A !'article 32, on remplacera "la Cour permanente de Justice internationale" par "la Cour
internationale de Justice".
L'artic~ 34 sera redige comme suit:
"La presente Convention est sujette a ratification. A partir du ler janvier 1947, les instruments de ratification seront deposes aupres
du Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies qui en notifiera le dep0t a tous
les Membres de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies et aux Etats non membres auxquels le
Secretaire general aura communique un exemplaire de la Convention."
L'article 35 sera redige comme suit:
"A partir du 30 septembre 1925, tout Etat
represente a la Conference OU fut elaboree la
presente Convention et non signataire de celleci, tout Membre des Nations Unies ou tout
Etat non membre mentionne a !'article !14
pourra adherer a la presente Convention.

Article 35 shall read as follows:
"After the 30th day of September 1925, the
present Convention may be acceded to by any
State represented at the Conference at which
this Convention was drawn up and which has
not signed the Convention, by any Member of
the United Nations, or by any non-member
State mentioned in article 34.
"Accessions shall be effected by an instrument communicated to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to be deposited in the
archives of the Secretariat of the United Nations. The Secretary-General shall at once notify such deposit to all the Members of the
United Nations signatories of the Convention
and to the signatory non-member States mentioned in article !H as well as to the adherent
States."

"Cette adhesion s'effectuera au moyen d'un
instrument communique au Secretaire general
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et qui sera
depose clans les archives du Secretariat de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le Secretaire general notifiera immediatement ce depOt aux
Membres des Nations Unies signataires de la
Convention et aux autres Etats non membrcs
signataires mentionnes a l'article !H ainsi qu'aux
Etats adherents."
85

L'article 37 sera redi~ comme suit:
"Un recueil special sera tenu par le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations

Article 37 shall read as follows:
"A special record shall be kept by the Secretary-General of the United Nations showing
which States have signed, ratified, acceded to or
denounced the present Convention. This record shall be open to the Contracting Parties
and shali be published from time to time as
may be directed."
The second paragraph of:,· .'·-·e 38 shall read
as follows:
"The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify the receipt of any such deuunciations to all the Members of the United
Nations and to the States mentioned in
article 34."

Unies, indiquant quels Etats ont signe ou ratifie
la presente Conv(;ntion, y ont adhere ou l'ont
denoncee. Ce recueil sera constamment ouvert
aux Parties contractantes'et publication en sera
faite de temps a autre."
Le second paragraphe de !'article 38 sera redige
comme suit:
"Le Secretaire general de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies portera a la connaissance de chacun des Membres <le l'Organisation des Nations
U nies et des Etats mcntionnes a l'article 34
toute denonciation rcc;ue p:,r l11i."

3. INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR LIMITING THE
MANUFACTURE AND REGULATING THE DISTRlllUTlO:S:
OF NARCOTIC DRUGS, WITH PROTOCOL OF SIGNA·
TURE, SIGNED AT GENEVA ON 13 JULY 1931

3. CONVENTION INTERNATIONALE POUR LIMITER LA
FABRICATION ET REGLEMENTER LA DISTRlllUTION DES
STUPEFIANTS, AVEC PROTOCOLE DE SIGNATURE, SIGN ES
A GENEVE LE 13 JUILLET 1931

In article 5, paragnph 1, the words "to all the
Members of the League of Nations and to the
non-member States mentioned in article 27'' shall
be replaced by the words "to all the Members of
the United Nations and to the non-member States
mentioned in article 28".
For the first sub-paragraph of paragraph 6 of
article 5, the following sub-paragraph shall be
substituted:

Dans rarticle 5, paragraphe 1, les mots: "a tous
les Mcmbres de la Socicte des Nations et aux Etats
non mcmbres mentionncs a l"article 27'' seront
remplaccs par les mots ";1 tous les Membres de
l"Organisation des Nat ions U nies et aux Etats non
membres mentionnes a l'article 28".
Au premier alinea du paragraphe 6 de l'article
5, sera substitue l'alinea suivant:

"The estimates will be examined by a Supervisory Body consisting of four members. The
World Health Organization shall appoint two
members and the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs of the Economic and Social Council and
the Permanent Central Board shall each appoint one member.
"The secretariat of the Supervisory Body
shall be provided by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations who will ensure close collaboration with the Permanent Central Board."
In article 5, paragraph 7, the words "December
15th in each year" shall be substituted for the
words "November 1st in each year", and the words
"through the intermediary of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to all the Members
of the United Nations and non-member State~
referred to in article 28" shall be substituted for
the words "through the intermediary of the Secretary-General, to all the Members of the League
of Nations and non-member States referred to in
article 27''.
For paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5 o. article 11, the
following paragraphs shall be substituted:
"2. Any High Contracting Party permitting
trade in or manufacture for trade of any such
pn;iduct to be commenced shall immediately
send a notification to that effect to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall
advise the other High Contracting Parties and
the World Health Organization.
"3. The World Health Organization, acting
011 the advice of the expert committ<'c apponned by it. will thereupon decide whctl1cr
the product in <p1c~tio11 is capable of producing

"Les evaluations seront examinees par un
Organe de controle comprenant quatre membres. L'Organisation montliale de la sante nommera deux membres et la Commission des stupcfiants du Conseil economique et social ainsi
que le Comitc central permanent nommeront
chacun un mcmbre.
r.e secretariat de l'Organe de controle sera
assure par k Secretairc gcnt'.ral de !'Organisation des Nations U nics en s'assurant la collaboration etroite du Comitc central permanent."
Dans !'article 5, paragraphe 7, les.mots "15 decembre de chaque annee" remplaceront les mots
"!er novembre de chaque annee" et les mots "par
l'entremisc du Secrctaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies a tous les Membres des
Nations Unies et aux Etats non membres mentionnes a !'article 28'" remplaceront les mots "par
l'entremise du Secrctaire general a tous les Membres de la Socictc des Nations et aux Etats non
membres mentionncs a !'article 27''.
Aux paragraphes 2, 3, 4 et 5 de !'article 11, seront
substitues les paragraphes suivants:
"2. La Haute Partie contractante qui autorisera le commerce ou la fabrication commerciale
d'un de ces produits en avisera immediatement
le Sccretaire general de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, qui communiquera cette notification aux autres Hautes Parties contractantes et
a l'Organisation mondiale' de la sante.
"3. L'Organisation mondiale de la sante, prenant l'avis du comite d'cxperts nomme par elle,
dccidcra si le produit clont ii s'agit peut engendrer la 1ox1comanie (et doit etre assimile

86

de ce fait awe "drogues" mentionnees dans le
sous-groupe a) du groupe I) ou s'il peut ~tre
transforme en une de ces memes drogues (et
hre, de ce fait, assimile aux "drogues" mentionnees clans le sous-groupe b) du kt"oupe I
ou dans le groupe II).
"4. Si l'Organisation mondiale de la santc,
prenant I'avis du comite d'experts nomme par
elle, decide que, sans etre une "drogue" susceptible d'engendrer la toxicomanie, le produit
dont il s'agit peut etre transforme en une telle
"drogue", la question de savoir si ladite
"drogue" entre dam le sous-groupe b) du
groupe I ou dans le groupe II sera soumise pour
decision a un comite de troits experts qualifies
pour en examiner Jes aspects scientifiques et
techniques. Deux dr ccs expnts seront dcsigne,
respectivement par le gouvernement interesse
et par la Commission des stupefiants du Conseil
economique et social, le troisieme sera designe
par les deux precites.
"5. Toute decision prise conformement aux
deux paragraphes precedents sera portee a Ja
connaissance du Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies, qui la communiquera
a tous les Membres de !'Organisation et aux
Etats non membres mentionnes a !'article 28.'"
Dans Jes paragraphes 6 • 7 de !'article 11, on
remplacera "le Secretaire general" par "le Secrctaire general de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies'".
Dans les articles 14. 20, 21, 23, 26, 31, 32 et 33,
on remplacera .. le Secretaire general de la Societe
des Nations" par "le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies".
A I'article 2 1, Jes mots "la Commission consultative du trafic de l'opium et autres drogues nuisiblcs" seront remplaces par Jes mots "la Commission des stupefiants du Conseil economique
et social".
On substitucra au deuxieme paragraphe de
J"article 25 le paragraphe suivant:
"Au cas ou de telles dispositions n'existeraient
pas cntre lcs Parties au differend, elles le soumct tront a une procedure arbitrale ou judiciaire. A defaut d'un accord sur le choix d'un
autre tribunal, elles soumettront le differend,
a la requete de I'une d'elles, a la Cour internationale de Justice si elles sont toutcs Parties
au Statut et, si elles n'y sont pas toutes Parties,
a un tribunal d'arbitrage constitue conformement a la Convention de La Haye du 18 octobre
1907 pour le reglement pacifique des conflits
internationaux."

addiction (and is in conse({uence assimilable,
to the drugs mentioned in sub-group (a) of
Group I), or whether it is convertible into such
a drug (and is in consequence assimilable to
the drugs mentioned in sub-group (b) of
Group I or in Group 11).
"4. In the event of the World Health Organization, on the advice of the expert committee
appointed by it, deciding that the product is
not itself a drug capable of producing addiction, but is convertible into such a drug, the
question whether the drug in question shall
fall under sub-grnup (b) of Group I or under
Group II shall be referred for decision to a
body of three experts competent to deal with
the scientific and technical aspects of the matter, of whom one member shall be selected by
the Government concerned, one by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the Economic
and Social Council, and the third by the two
members so selected.
"5. Any decision arrived at in accordance
with the two preceding paragraphs shall be
notified to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, who will communicate it to all States
Members of the United Nations and the nonmember States mentioned in article 28."
In paragraphs 6 and 7 of article 11, "the
Secretary-General of the United Nations" shall be
substituted for "the Secretary-General".
In articles 14, 20, 21, 23, 26, 31, 32 and 33, "the
Secretary-General of the United Nations" shall
be substituted for "the Secretary-General of the
League of Nations".
In article 21 for the words "by the Advisory
Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs" shall be substituted the words "by
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the Economic and Social Council".
For the second paragraph of article 25, the following paragraph shall be substituted:
"In case there is no such agreement in force
between the Parties, the dispute shall be referred to arbitration or judicial settlement. In
the absence of agreement on the choice of
another tribunal, the dispute shall, at the request of any one of the Parties, be referred to
the International Court of Justice, if all the
Parties to the dispute are Parties to the Statute,
and, if any of the Parties to the dispute is not
a Party to the Statute, to an arbitral tribunal
constituted in accordance with The Hague Convention of 18 October 1907 for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes.""
For the last paragraph of article 26, the following paragraph shall be substituted:
"The Secretary-General shall communicate
to all Members of the United Nations or nonmember States mentioned in article 28 all declarations and notices received in virtue of the
present article."

Le dernier paragraphe de !'article :16 sera remplace par le suivant:
"Le Secretaire general communiquera a tous
les Mcmbrcs de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies, ainsi qu'aux Etats non membres mentionnes a !'article 28, toutes Jes declarations et
tous Jes avis rci;:us aux termes du present article."
L'article 28 sera redige comme suit:
"La presente Convention est su jette a ratification. A partir du ler janvier 1947, Jes instru-

Article 28 shall read as follows:
"The present Convention is subject to ratification. As from I January 1947, the instru-

87

ments of ratification shall be'depositcd_with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who
shall notify their receipt to all the Members of
the United Nations and to the non-member
States to which the Secretary-General has communicated a copy of the Convention."
Article 29 shall read as follows:
"The present Convention may be acceded to
on behalf of any Member of the United Nations or any non-member State mentioned in
article 28. The instruments of accession shall
be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who shall notify their receipt
to all the Members of the United Nations and
to the non-member States mentioned in article 28."
In the first paragraph of article 32, the last
sentence shall read as follows:
"Each denunciation shall operate only as
regards the High Contracting Party on whose
behalf it has been deposited."
The second paragraph of article 32 shall read
as follows:
"The Secretary-General shall notify all the
Members of the United Nations and non-member States mentioned in article 28 of any denunciation received."
In the third paragraph of article 32, the words
"High Contracting Parties" shall replace the
words "Members of the League and non-member
States bound by the present Convention".
In article 33, the words "High Contracting
Party" and "High Contracting Parties" shall replace the words "Member of the League of Nations or non-member State bound by this Convention" and "Members of the League of Nations or non-member States bound by this Convention".
4. AGREEMENT

ments de ratification seront deposes auprb du
Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies qui en notifiera le dcpbt a tousles
Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies
ainsi qu'aux Etats non membres auxquels le
Secretaire general aura communique un exemplaire de la Convention."
L'article 29 sera redige comme suit:
"Tout Membre de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies et tout Etat non membre visc a l'article
28 pourra ad.1erer a la presente Convention.
Les instruments d'adhesion seront deposes aupres du Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies, qui en notifiera le dep6t a tous
les Membres de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies, ainsi qu'aux: Etats non membres vises
a !'article 28."
Au premier paragraphe de l'article 32, la derniere phrase sera redigee comme suit:
"Chaque denonciatfon ne sera operante que
pour la Baute Partie contractante au nom de
laquelle elle aura ete deposee."
Le second paragraphe de }'article 32 sera redige
comme suit:
"Le Secretaire general notifiera a tous les
Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies
et aux Etats non membres mentionnes a l'article
28 les denonciations ainsi re,;ues."
Au troisieme paragraphe de l'article 32, les
mots "des Hautes Parties contractantes" remplaceront les mots "des Membres de la Societe des
Nations et des Etats non membres qui sont lies
par la presente Convention."
A l'article 33, les mots "toute Haute Partie
contractante" remplaceront les mots "Membres
de la Societe des Nations ou Etats non membres
lies par la presente Convention" et les mots
"toutes les Hautes Parties contractantes" remplaceront les mots "tous les autres Membres de la
Societe des Nations et Etats non membres ainsi
lies."

OPIUM-

4. At:CORD POUR LE CONTR0LE DE L'HABITUDE DE

SMOKING IN THE FAR EAST, WITH FINAL Ac:r, SIGNED

FUMER L'OPIUM EN f.xTREME-ORIENT, AVEC ACTE

FOR

THE

CONTROL

OF

AT BANGKOK ON 27 NOVEMBER 1931

FINAL, SIGNES A BANGKOK LE

In articles V and VII, "the Secretary-General of
the United Nations" shall be substituted for "the
Secretary-General of the League of Nations".

27 NOVEMBRE 19lP

Aux articles V et VII, les mots "le Secretaire
general de l'Organisation des Nations Unies"
remplaceront les mots "le Secretaire general de
la Societe des Nations".

!I• INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE SUPPRES-

5· CONVENTION lNTERNATIONALE POUR LA REPRES·

SION OF ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN DANGEROUS DRUGS,

SION DU TRAFIC ILLICITE DES DROGUES NUISIBLES,

SIGNED AT GENEVA ON 26 JUNE

1936

SIGNEE A GENEVE LE

In articles 16, 18, 21, 23 and 24, "the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations" shall be substituted for "the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations".
For article 17, second paragraph, the following
paragraph shall be substituted:
"In case there is no such agreement between
the Parties, the dispute shall be referred to arbitration or judicial settlement. In the absence of
agreement on the choice of another tribunal,
the dispute shall, at the request of any one of
the Parties, be referred to the International
Court of Justice, if all the Parties to the dispute

26 JUIN 1936

Aux articles 16, 18, 21, 23 et 24, on remplacera
"Secretaire general de la Societe des Nations" par
"Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Natioru
Unies".
A !'article 17, on remplacera le deuxieme paragraphe par le paragraphe suivant:
"Au cas ou de tdles_dispositions n'existeraient
pas entre les Parties, elles soumettront le
differend a une procedure arbitrale ou judiciaire. A defaut d'un accord sur le choix d'un
autre tribunal, elles soumettront le differend, a
la requete de l'une d'elles, a la Cour internationale de Justice si elles soot toutes Parties au

88

Statut et, si elles n'y sont pas toutes Parties, a
un tribunal d'arbitrage constitue conformement a la Convention de La Haye du 18 octobre
1907 pour le reglement pacifique des conflits
internationaux."

are Parties to the Statute, and, if any of the
Parties to the dispute is not a Party to the
Statute, to an arbitral tribunal constituted in
~ccordance with The Hague Convention of 18
October 1907 for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes."
Paragraph 4 of article 18 shall read as follows:

Le paragraphe 4 de !'article 18 sera redige
commesuit:
"Le Secretaire general communiquera a tous
Jes Meinbres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, ainsi qu'aux Etats non membres mentionnes a !'article 20, toutes les declarations
et tous les avis re,;;us aux termes du present
article."
L'article 20 sera redige comme suit:
"La presente Convention est sujette a ratification. A partir du 1" janvier 1947, les instruments de. ratification seront deposes aupres du
Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies qui en notifiera le depot a tous les
Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies,
ainsi qu'aux Etats non membres auxquels le
Secretaire general aura communique un exemplaire de la Convention."
Le paragraphe 1 de !'article 21 sera redige
comme suit:
"II pourra etre adhere a la presente Convention au nom de tous les Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies ou de tout Etat non
membre vise a !'article 20."
Au paragraphe 1 de !'article 24, les mots "la
Haute Partie contractante" remplaceront les mots
"le Membre de la Societe des Nations ou l'Etat
non membre".
Le paragraphe l! de !'article 24 sera redige
comme suit:
"Le Secretaire general notifiera a tous les
Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies
et aux Etats non membrcs mentionncs a !'article 20, Jes denonciations ainsi rci,;ues."
Au paragraphe 3 de !'article 24, les mots "Membres de la Societe des Nations et des Etats non
membres qui sont lies par la presente Convention" seront remplaces par les mots "les Hautes
Parties contractantes."
L'article 25 sera redige comme suit:
"Une demande de revision de la presente
Convention pourra etre formulee en tout temps,
par toute Haute Partie contractante, par voie
de notification adressee au Secretaire general
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies. Cette notification sera commun1quee par le Secretaire
general aux Hautes Parties contractantes et, si
elle est appuyee par un tiers au moins d'entre
elles, les Hautes Parties contractantes s'engagent
a se reunir en une conference aux fins de revision de la Convention."

"The Secretary-General shall communicate
te all the Members of the United Nations and

to the non-member States mentioned in article
20 all declarations and notices received in virtue
of this article."
Article 20 shall read as follows:
"The present Convention is subject to ratification. As from 1 January 1947, the instruments of ratification shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who shall notify their receipt to all the Members of the United Nations and the non-member
States to which the Secretary-General has communicated a copy of the Convention."
Paragraph I of article 21 shall read as follows:
"The present Convention shall be open to
accession on behalf of any Member of the
United Nations or non-member State mentioned in article 20."
In paragraph 1 of article 24, the words "High
Contracting Party" shall be substituted for the
words "Member of the League or non-member
State".
The second paragraph of article 24 shall read
as follows:
"The Secretary-General shall notify all the
Members of the United Nations and non-member States mentioned in article 20 of any denunciations received."
In paragraph 3 of article 24, the words "High
Contracting Parties" shall replace the words
"Members of the League or non-member States
bound by the present Convention".
Article 25 shall read as follows:
"Request for the revision of the present Convention may be made at any time by any High
Contracting Party by means of a notice addressed to the Secretary-General of the Unih.:d
Nations. Such notice shall be communicated by
the Secretary-General to the other High Contracting Parties and, if endorsed by not less
than one-third of them, the High Contracting
Parties agree to meet for the purpose of revising
the Convention."

55 (I). National Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies

55 (IJ. Societes nationales de la
Croix-Rouge et du Croissant-Rouge

The General Assembly draws the attention of
the Members of the United Nations to the fact
that the following purposes are of special concern, namely:
(a) That the said Members should encour-

L'Assemblee generale appelle l'attention des
Membres des Nations Unies sur l'inten~t tout
particulier qui s'attache a ce que:
11) Les Etats Membres encouragent et favori-

89
