UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/506
15 June 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 2 JUNE 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I write with reference to the letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua New Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council regarding
developments in Bougainville (S/1998/287) and to the subsequent statement made
by the President of the Security Council on 22 April 1998 on behalf of the
Council (S/PRST/1998/10). In that statement, the Council strongly supported the
Agreement on Peace, Security and Development on Bougainville, signed at Lincoln
University, New Zealand, on 23 January 1998 and, noting that the Agreement
called for the United Nations to play a role in Bougainville, requested me to
consider the composition and financial modalities of such involvement by the
United Nations.
Concurrently with his letter to the President of the Security Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Papua New Guinea, Mr. Roy Yaki, wrote to me on
30 March requesting that I deploy a United Nations observer mission to monitor
implementation of arrangements concluded in the Lincoln Agreement. Following
receipt of this letter and of a subsequent letter addressed to me by the Papua
New Guinea Special State Negotiator for Bougainville, Sir John Kaputin, inviting
me on behalf of his Government to be represented at the signing ceremony of the
Agreement Covering Implementation of the Ceasefire to be held at Arawa,
Bougainville, on 30 April, I requested Mr. Francesc Vendrell, Director of the
Asia and the Pacific Division of the Department of Political Affairs to
represent me at the ceremony and, at the same time, to head a mission to assess
how the United Nations could best carry out the functions assigned to it by the
parties to the Lincoln and Arawa Agreements. (The Arawa Agreement is attached
as an annex to the present letter.)
After examining the assessment mission’s report, I have reached the
conclusion that a United Nations presence in Bougainville would provide added
confidence to the parties to the Agreement, facilitate the tasks assigned to the
Peace Monitoring Group and assist in the promotion of the political process to
which the parties to the Agreements have committed themselves. I might add that
this conclusion is fully shared, not only by the parties, but also by the
Governments contributing to the Peace Monitoring Group. I therefore wish to
inform the Security Council of my willingness to respond positively to the
requests from the parties and of my intention, if the Security Council has no
98-16721 (E)

150698

/...

S/1998/506
English
Page 2

objection, to establish a United Nations Political Office in Bougainville, based
in Arawa. I will keep the Council regularly informed of the work of the Office.
The Office will perform the following functions, as spelled out in the Lincoln
and Arawa Agreements:
(a) Work in conjunction with the Peace Monitoring Group, while maintaining
the right to make its own observations and assessments;
(b) Monitor and report on the implementation of the Lincoln and Arawa
Agreements, including the activities of the Peace Monitoring Group in relation
to its mandate;
(c) Chair the Peace Process Consultative Committee, which comprises
representatives of the parties and which the States contributing to the Peace
Monitoring Group will be invited to attend. The functions of the Peace Process
Consultative Committee include consulting on all aspects of the ceasefire and on
breaches thereof, developing plans for the phased withdrawal of the Papua New
Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF) and of the Mobile Riot Squad of the Royal Papua New
Guinea Constabulary, developing plans for the disposal of weapons and promoting
public awareness and understanding of the peace process;
(d)

Assist in other areas as agreed by the parties to the Agreements.

The Office would be headed by a Director and composed of two political and
two military advisers plus international and local support staff. The
associated financial implications of the Office are estimated at approximately
$1.4 million for the period from June to December 1998. The financial
modalities of this will be a matter for the General Assembly to determine in due
course.
I should be grateful if you would kindly make the text of the present
letter and its annex available to the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/506
English
Page 3

Annex
Agreement Covering Implementation of the Ceasefire

(Annex I to the Lincoln Agreement)
The Government of Papua New Guinea, the Bougainville Transitional
Government, the Bougainville Resistance Force, the Bougainville Interim
Government, the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and Bougainville leaders ("the
parties"):
(i)

Recognizing that the situation on Bougainville has substantially
improved following the signing of the Burnham Truce;

(ii)

Realizing that this was brought about by the cooperation between all
parties, the people of Bougainville and the Truce Monitoring Group in
observing the terms of the truce;

(iii)

Desiring that this same spirit of cooperation be maintained and
continued;

(iv)

Realizing that the Lincoln Agreement on Peace, Security and
Development on Bougainville is the basis for the Agenda for ongoing
consultation and negotiation between the parties, which Agreement
needs to be implemented;

hereby agree to the following arrangements:

PART I.
1.

CEASEFIRE

Permanent and irrevocable ceasefire

A permanent and irrevocable ceasefire will come into effect on Bougainville
at 2400 hours on 30 April 1998.
2.

Terms of the ceasefire
2.1

As from that hour all parties will continue to refrain from all
hostile acts or the carriage or possession and the use of arms,
ammunition, explosives and other instruments of death, injury or
destruction on Bougainville.

2.2

No one will manufacture, trade or distribute weapons in Bougainville.

2.3

The parties will cooperate in reporting and preventing the use,
manufacture, importation, sale, trade and exchange of weapons and
ammunition.

2.4

People will be allowed to move freely without hindrance in
Bougainville.
/...

S/1998/506
English
Page 4

PART II.

3.

4.

NEUTRAL REGIONAL PEACE MONITORING GROUP
AND UNITED NATIONS OBSERVER MISSION

Neutral regional Peace Monitoring Group
3.1

The Papua New Guinea Government, in consultation with the parties,
will negotiate an agreement based on the Agreement concerning the
Regional Truce Monitoring Group to establish a neutral regional Peace
Monitoring Group.

3.2

The parties agree that Papua New Guinea will invite Australia, Fiji,
New Zealand, Vanuatu and other countries in the region to participate
in the neutral regional Peace Monitoring Group.

Mandate of the Peace Monitoring Group

The parties agree that the Peace Monitoring Group will carry out the
following mandate:

5.

(i)

Monitor and report on compliance with all aspects of the ceasefire;

(ii)

Promote and instil confidence in the peace process through its
presence, good offices and interaction with people in Bougainville;

(iii)

Provide such assistance in implementation of the Lincoln Agreement as
the parties to the Lincoln Agreement and the States contributing to
the Peace Monitoring Group may agree and available resources allow;

(iv)

Cooperate by agreement in ways that assist in the democratic
resolution of the situation.

United Nations observer mission
5.1

The parties agree that the Papua New Guinea Government will request:
(i)

The Security Council to endorse the neutral regional Peace
Monitoring Group;

(ii)

The Secretary-General to send an observer mission to
Bougainville.

5.2

The parties recognize that the United Nations observer mission will
work in conjunction with the Peace Monitoring Group while maintaining
the right to make its own observations and assessments.

5.3

The mandate of the United Nations observer mission will be to monitor
and report on implementation of these arrangements and it may be
requested to assist in other areas as agreed by the parties.

/...

S/1998/506
English
Page 5

PART III.
6.

7.

8.

MECHANISM FOR CONSULTATION

Peace Process Consultative Committee
6.1

The parties agree to establish a Peace Process Consultative Committee
which will replace the Peace Consultative Committee.

6.2

The Papua New Guinea National Government will seek funding for the
establishment of a secretariat for the Peace Process Consultative
Committee.

Membership of the Peace Process Consultative Committee
7.1

The Peace Process Consultative Committee will comprise members from
all the parties.

7.2

The United Nations observer mission and the States contributing to the
Peace Monitoring Group will be invited to sit at meetings of the Peace
Process Consultative Committee.

Chairman of the Peace Process Consultative Committee

The parties agree that the Chairman of the Peace Process Consultative
Committee will be the leader of the United Nations observer mission or otherwise
as may be agreed by the parties.
9.

Function of the Peace Process Consultative Committee

The parties agree that the functions of the Peace Process Consultative
Committee shall be the following:
(i)

To consult with all the parties on aspects of the ceasefire;

(ii)

To assist the Peace Monitoring Group to monitor the ceasefire and
resolve problems resulting from breaches of the terms of the
ceasefire;

(iii)

To promote the process by screening and clearing issues arising from
the Lincoln Agreement;

(iv)

To develop detailed plans for the disposal of weapons;

(v)

To develop detailed plans for phased withdrawal of the Papua New
Guinea Defence Force and the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary
Mobile Riot Squad;

(vi)

To promote public awareness and understanding of the peace process;

(vii)

To work with similar bodies at district and local levels to help
achieve the same objectives in their respective areas;

(viii)

To staff the secretariat.
/...

S/1998/506
English
Page 6

10.

Consultation with the Peace Process Consultative Committee

Recognizing the special situation in Bougainville, the Police Commissioner
shall consult with the Peace Process Consultative Committee prior to any order
to redeploy the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary Mobile Riot Squad on
Bougainville.

PART IV.
11.

CALL-OUT ORDER AND NEUTRAL ZONE

Call-out order and neutral zone
11.1

11.2

The Special State Negotiator will raise the Government of Papua New
Guinea, within seven days of the signing of annex I to the Lincoln
Agreement, the following:
(i)

Recognition by all parties of the township of Arawa as a
demilitarized neutral zone;

(ii)

Rescinding of the call-out order to consolidate the ceasefire.

The first meeting of the Peace Process Consultative Committee shall
take place within seven days of the implementation of (i) and (ii)
above.

Ceasefire - annex I
This agreement is annex I to the Lincoln Agreement on Peace, Security and
Development on Bougainville.
Dated at Arawa this 30th April 1998

(Signed) Sir John KAPUTIN
Special State Negotiator
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Sam AKOITAI
Minister of Bougainville Affairs
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Gerard SINATO
Premier
Bougainville Transitional Government

(Signed) Joseph KABUI
Vice President
Bougainville Interim Government

(Signed) Hilary MASIRIA
Chairman
Bougainville Resistance Force

(Signed) General Sam KAUONA
Commander
Bougainville Revolutionary Army

(Signed) John MOMIS
Member for Bougainville Region
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Michael LAIMO
Member for South Bougainville
Papua New Guinea Government

(Signed) Michael OGIO
Member for North Bougainville
Papua New Guinea Government
/...

S/1998/506
English
Page 7

WITNESSED BY:
(Signed) Bartholomew ULUFA’ALU
Prime Minister
Government of Solomon Islands

(Signed) Don MACKINNON
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade
Government of New Zealand

(Signed) Alexander DOWNER
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Government of Australia

(Signed) Bernardo VUNIBOBO
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Government of Fiji

(Signed) Clement LEON
Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
Government of Vanuatu

(Signed) Francesc VENDRELL
Representative of the Secretary-General

-----
