United Nations

1409th

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING
(Opening meeting)

ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 20 September 1966,
at 3 p.m.

TWENTY.FIRST SESSION

Official R~cords

NEW YORK
CONTENTS

Page
Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of Italy. . . . . • • . . • . . . . . . • .

1

Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent pray8r or meditation. . . • . •

1

Address by Mr. Amintore Fanfani, Temporary
President, Chairman of the delegation of Italy

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of the representatives to the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly:
BJ Appointment of the Credentials .Committee

3

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President. . . . . . • • . . . . . .

3

Address by Mr. AbdulRahman Pazhwak, President of the General Assembly at its twentyfirst session . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations. • • . . . . . • . . . . . . • . . . . . • . • .

'1

President: Mr. Abdul Rahman PAZHWAK
(Afg hani 5 tan).
Temporary President:IMr. Amintore FANFANI
(Italy).

AGENDA ITEM 1

Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation of Italy
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I declare open the twenty-first regular
session of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I invite the representatives to rise and
observe one minute of silent prayer or meditation.

The representatives rose and observed the period
of silence
rar Pres'i:ta y
J. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): Last year the General Assembly met in
circumstances that seemed highly auspicious to us all.

Just when the work of the twentieth session was
beginning, the efforts of numerous States and of the
Organization enabled two Member States to bring to
an end bitter fighting which threatened to degenerate
into a broader conflict. The armistice was subsequently
carried a step further at an important meeting arranged
by a permanent member of the Security Council.
4. This year we begin our work at a time when,
despite the suspension of bombings after the twentieth
session was adjourned, and despite subsequent
demarches ,and efforts, another conflict rages on,
sowing anxiety, misery and sorrow.

5. As the twenty-first session opens, we find ourselves fervently hoping that by the time our work
has been completed we may see positive signs of
peace on the horizon and catch a glimpse of that
moment, so intensely desired, when constructive
negotiations are begun with a view to a settlement
which will be honourable for all concerned-and will
enable the Viet-Namese to live peacefully in calm
and prosperity, as a free and independent people.
6. Even if the United Nations as such cannot at this
time have a direct influence on the settlement of this
conflict; no country or individual participating in the
activities of this great family of nations must refrain
from helping in the search for a peaceful solution.

7. On 4 October 1965, during a meeting outstanding
among all those of the twentieth session [1347th
meeting], we all applauded a most distinguished guest,
who came from Rome to address to us the exhortation
repeated again yesterday: "Never again war!" In
keeping with the acclaim we accorded that exhortation
a year ago, it is our duty to persevere unceasingly
to explore the path to peace-for peace is absolutely
essential to the freedom, progress and well-being
of all mankind.

8. During the session opening today, you will have
to examine-under difficult circumstances, considering the present international outlook--a number
of problems which must be solved if the United Nations
is to function effectively.

The printed official recorrIs of the plenary
meetings of the General Assembly are pUblished
in fasoio1e form, the record of each meetinlJ
being issued separately. A prefatory fascicle is
issued for each session, containing a· table of
contents, the agenda, a list of numbers of delegallons, and other prefatory matter. The fas..,
clcZes are subsequently bound in volumes by
session.

I

2

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetmgs

9. Before we broke up on 22 December last year, we
reached by common accord certain decisions which
seemed favourable to the solution of those problems.
Unfortunately, the intervening period has not been
long enough to enable all the results hoped for to be
achieved. And since the success has been only partial,
there is a danger that the difficulties which appear
to be partly responsible for the Secretary-General's
decision not to make himself available for a second
term of office may continue and grow worse.

of the world, leaving no region where its influence is
not felt. This will be possible, however, only if we
have the wisdom and sense of responsibility expected
of us and achieve-without departing from the principles of the Organization-the true universality
envisaged by those who drew up the Charter of the
United Nations.
15. I have indicated three problems which will be
difficult to solve. However, this difficulty does not
mean we may overlook them.

10. Our recognition of the services whIch U Thant
has rendered, as all agree, with dedication and lntegrity, to the United Nations and the cause of peace,
has prompted us all to express to him-in our very
different ways-our confidence and gratitude. The
expressions of solidarity and appreciation-a veritable
plebiscite-from small and great nations alike, irrespective of their leanings or political allegiance, bear
witness to the way in which in'carrying out his duties
he has succeeded in rising above all controversies,
thereby earning universal respect. It would thus seem
fair to say that, in view of the difficulties we face
today, Secretary-General U Thant would help to
dispel our fears if he would agree either to carry on
his work, as we all hope, or-and I suggest this
alternative only because I am called upon to do so-to
offer his assistance to the competent organs of the
United Nations and so help them to take the most
appropriate decisions.

16. In 1945, Beardsley Rum! predicted: "It will only
be when the United Nations is twenty years old that
... we will know that the [Organization] is the only
alternative to the demolition of the world." 31"Since
this prediction has come true, all that remains is to
find a proper solution to the problems plaguing the
United Nations. If we struggle now to ward off the
apocalyptic destruction of the world, we are in fact
fighting to ensure for the Organization sufficient funds,
effective action and universal authority.

11. Aside from this difficulty which has arisen on the
eve of the present session, and which we hope to
overcome in accordance with the wishes I have just
expressed, we are all bound in duty to redouble our
efforts to solve the problems relating to the resources,
activities and authority of the United Nations.
12. First, we must solve the problem of the financial
situation of the United Nations. To this end, at the
last session we set up the Committee of Fourteen;!L
which has dUly carried out its task. It is now a matter
of urgency for its recommendations, and any amendments which may be made to them, to be translated
into decisions of the General Assembly. These decisions will no doubt help to simplify and rationalize
the administrative structure and operational methods
of the United Nations. In addition, by enabling those
Member States which have not as yet announced
voluntary contributions to do so, they will help to
eliminate the final obstacles to the task of putting
the finances of the Organization in order.
13. The second fundamental requirement, which
involves us all, is that the Organization should have
well-defined rules on which it can base its action in
fulfilling its peace-keeping responsibilities. Unfortunately, the efforts of the Committee of Thirty-threeU
have hardly been encouraging. During its twenty-first
session, the Assembly should therefore study the
problem again closely, so that the Organization may
become a reliable and efficient instrument in this
area.

14. The third and final requirement is that the authority of the United Nations should extend to all parts
lJ ~ Committee of Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies.

Y Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations.

17. Once we have confronted and solved the three
basic problems just outlined, we shall have laid the
foundations for a stronger and more effective United
Nations. But we shall not have created the climate
best suited to the balanced economic and social development of all mankind. Yet this is indispensable if
new sources of social conflict are to be a voided and
war prevented.
18. We have already reached the half-way point in
the United Nations Development Decade. If we pause
briefly to take stock at this stage, we find.that the
situation is far from satisfactory, despite the many
efforts made-though admittedly they have been poorly
co-ordinated at times. The flow of funds intended for
developing nations has increased, but not in proportion
to the need. The terms on which financial aid is
granted are still too heavy and the rate at which the
effect is felt is discouragingly slow. Exchange rates
are still unfavourable for the developing countries,
and the United Na,tions has not yet succeeded in getting
the necessary corrective measures adopted, even in
respect of those essential commodities for which an
agreement seemed near at hand. Under such circumstances, the debts of developing nations are increasing
alarmingly, and the technical, economic and social
gulf between these nations and the industrialized
countries continues to widen.
19. The experience acqUired up to now would suggest
more co-ordination and simpler procedures. Perhaps,
too, we should devote particular attention to technical
co-operation which, as was indicated in a recent
proposal by a European nation, is indispensable If
the development of the different countries is to proceed
smoothly and the gap between them is not to widen
until the situation is beyond control.
20. This predicament appears less ominous when
we consider that the principles of economic cooperation espoused by the United Nations are steadily
gaining greater acceptance. No one today challenges
the fact that the problem of under-development affects
]j
R. N. Gardner. In PUrlluit of World Order United States Foreign
Policy and International Organizations, New York, F. A. Praeger, ed..
1964, p. 45.

i

Ir
,
I

I

3

1409th meeting - 20 September 1966
all nations, whether industrialized or not. Everyone
recognizes that moral, political and economic factors
make the mobilization of the energies and resources
of every country to combat the scourge of underdevelopment justifiable and indeed mandatory. Let us
hope that this agreement on principles may prove the
first stage in a review of our course of action, and
that this review may in turn lead to the rationalization
and greater yield and efficiency of the work already
begun.
21. The agenda of the twenty-first session of the
Assembly encompasses, as usual, a wide range of
questions involving international co-operation. Without
stopping to analyse this agenda, I wish to stress that
we must devote special attention again this year to the
problems of disarmament and partiCUlarly to those
where a solution will lead to the conclusion of an
agreement to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
This is no easy task and it must be accomplished with
the utmost urgency, before new developments looming
up at this very moment render any solution impossible.
22. The constructive debates held at Geneva, and
later in New York, appear to be leading rapidly
towards the adoption of a draft agreement on outer
space. This agreement will extend the principles of
international law and of the Charter of the United
Nations and the ban on nuclear devices and weapons
of mass destruction beyond the boundaries of the
earth's atmosphere. We may thus look forward with a
measure of optimism to the possibility, pursued with
such tenacity, of an agreement to halt the spread of
nuclear weapons.

23. During the present session, the decolonization
issue will prove particularly urgent and delicate. There
are few problems dealt with in the United Nations
that are so intimately bound up with the very nature
of the Organization as those involving the evolution
-and especially the political evolution-of Non-SelfGoverning Territories. Impressive though the results
achieved in this sensitive and critical area may be
to date, we cannot consider our task completed. Certain
problems, for which no solution is as yet in sight,
remain a source of tension and frustration in international relations. There are particularly complex
ones in various regions of sub-equatorial Africa,
where a very serious situation has been created by
the spread of discriminatory doctrines and practices
incompatible with respect for human dignity. In
examining these problems, the Assembly should
make clear first and foremost its resolve to establish
in every Non-Self-Governing Territory, as elsewhere,
the necessary conditions for the affirmation of human
dignity, in an atmosphere completely free from discrimination, apartheid and arbitrary action consistent
with the degree of maturity which the human race has
attained.
24. The mere mention of these formidable and delicate
problems facing us gives cogency to the hope I would
like to share with you: may the twenty-first session
prove universally beneficial. This hope applies to all
here pr~sent, and to our respective countries, Members of the Organization; and it applies as well to
those peoples which do not yet enjoy independence
and freedom.

25. May God hallow this wish; may the representatives gathered here fulfil it; and may all :mankind
reap its plentiful benefits.
AGENDA ITEM 3

Credentials of the representatives to the twenty-First
session of the General Assembly:
(Q.) Appointmen~ of the Credentials Committee
26. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): Pursuant to rule 28 of the rules of procedure,
the General Assembly is called upon, at the beginning
of each session, to appoint a Credentials Committee
consisting of nine members on the proposal of the
President. I therefore recommend that, for the duration of the twenty-first regular session, the Credentials Committee consist of the following Member
States: Austria, El Salvador, GUinea, Ivory Coast,
Japan, Nepal, Nicaragua, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United states of America.
27. If there is no objection, I shall consider that
those States are appointed as the Credentials Committee.
It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 4

Election of the President
28. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I now invite the Members of the General
Assembly to elect the President of the twenty-first
regular session of the General Assembly. In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure, the
election will be decided by secret ballot.
At the request of the Temporary President. Mr.
Hasle (Denmark) and Mr. MuzOc (Czechoslovakia)
served as tellers.
The vote was taken by secret ballot.
Number of ballots cast:
Invalid ballots:
Valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of Members voting:
Required majority:

116
0
116
3
113
57

Number of votes obtained:

Mr. J\bdul Rahman Pazhwak (Afghanistan) 112
Mr. Salvador Lopez (Philippines) . . . . .
1
Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Abdul
Rahman Pazhwak (Afghanistan) was elected President
•of the twenty-first session of the General Assembly.

29. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I offer my most sincere congratulations to
Mr. Pazhwak, and I am sure that I am entrusting this
high office to capable hands. I now invite Mr. Pazhwak
to come to the rostrum and assume the Presidency.
Mr. Pazhwak took the Chair.

Address by Mr. Abdul Rohman Pazhwak, President
of the General Assembly (It its twenty-first session
30. The PRESIDENT: You have just conferred upon
me the highest honour by electing me President of
the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.

4

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

r wish to convey to you my most sincere appreciation
of your highly esteemed confidence. It is difficult
indeed for me to find words that can express my
gratitude in a manner to match the election which
has just taken place with almost complete unanimity.
31. Such a gesture of confidence can imply only one
mandate-which r accept without reservation-to endeavour to conduct the office with complete impartiality, in total compliance with the principles of
the Charter and with the rules governing the deliberations of the General Assembly. r consider the mandate
entrusted to me an augury of the equal determination
of the Members of the Assembly to provide me with
the kind of co-operation which can help the office of
the President make a constructive and even creative
contribution to the smooth working of the world's
foremost parliamentary body.
32. r have been personally associated with my
colleagues here for a considerable number of years
and have enjoyed at all times their co-operation and
friendship. At the present session of the General
Assembly it would be odd indeed if this policy were
to stop at the door of the Presidency. Wherever
feasible, politically and diplomatically, I shall remain
at the service of all my colleagues who seek the
neutral office of the President whenever it may help
to promote understanding and harmony and to further
and expedite agreement for the benefit of all.
33. I consider this election as a tribute to my
country. I do so with pride and with ,due regard for
the consistent manner in which Afghanistan has
maintained its unaltered position in the pattern of
peace. It has participated actively in the work of
this Organization in a spirit of friendly co-operation
and _understanding with all Members. That is a policy
which we have always endeavoured to base on an
objective and independ~nt judgement of all international situations.
34. Afghanistan has never sought any alliance formed
for any interests other than the common interest of
all nations. It has enjoyed membership only in the
grand alliance, the l,lnited Nations, the one association
of peoples and nations which we believe can, in the
end, bring about and guarantee to the peoples of the
world, all peoples of the world, final and lasting peace.
From this pnfound conviction stem our basic policies
so familiar to all of you.
35. Since, as you are fully aware, we must crowd
into the brief period of the duration of the session
of the General Assembly thorough deliberations on so
many items touching upon such a vast number of world
problems, affecting the present and the future of
mankind, your full co-operation is indispensable.
36. My worthy predecessors in this office whose
gifts and virtues I cannot hope to match, have
demonstrated that this is possible. I should like to
pay a warm tribute to all of them, partiCUlarly my
immediate predecessor, the President of the General
Assembly at its twentieth session, His Excellency
Amintore Fanfani, Minister of Foreilro Affairs of
Italy, Who served me Assembly during the last
session with distinction and successfully fUlfilled the
responsibilities and the duties. of the Presidency.
I am confident that all of us listened very carefully

to the statement which he made this afternoon, in
which he drew the attention of the Assembly to the
tasks before it. This should be considered an outstanding additional contribution on his part.
37. In the accelerated urgency of the challenging
issues that we face in the first year of the third
decade of the Organization, the expediting of our
vast programme-both unfinished and neW-is crucial.
This Assembly, I am sure, is fully aware, of the
pressing urgency imposed upon us by the m~unting
crises facing the world today. To the political problems
are now added vast economic problems affecting so
profoundly the very lives of peoples and nations that
they have, themselves, assumed a new magnitude of
political importance.
38. Much has been said of late-too much perhapsabout the United Nations, its so-called weaknesses
and failures. Such criticism has a tendency to throw
the Organization into a posture of self-defence and to
generate an unfortunate atmosphere. There is always
room, however, for healthy self-criticism, and this is
essential in encouraging the Organization to utilize
its experience for the betterment ofthe unsatisfactory
conditions that prevail.
39. As an example of such healthy criticism, one may
refer to parts of the introduction to the annual report
of the -Secretary-General on the work of the Organization. In this connexion, however, we should keep in
mind the words of the Secretary-General that,
"The weaknesses and shortcomings of the United
Nations lie not in its constitutional purposes, objectives and procedures but in world conditions at the
present juncture othistory.~ [A!6301!Add.l,sec. X.]
40. Those who indulge in much ofthe notfully justified
downgrading, one may say, are generally to be divided
into two categories: those who still cling to the concept
of nationalistic power and are therefore pro ne to justify
their unilateral approach to international life with the
generalization that the United Nations is allegedly
"powerless"; and those who seek overnight solutions
to age-Old problems and who say "it isn't working".
41. But human frailties and the weaknesses ofhuman
institutions are only one side of the picture of history
and the human condition. There is also another side:
the concept of progress. It is progress, and not perfection, which must be the yardstick of our assessments.
42. What is important, in my view, IQ understand,
hO,wever, is that it is this very progress in our time,
thlS sudden convergence of changes, which is shaking
the pillars of the old order, and, in these violent
post-war tremors, the United Nations has done much
in the past two decades to stabilize the situation and
to keep the violence of change from becoming the
violence of self-destruction. In this connexion,one
may note that those crises in which the United Nations
ha~ been called upon to act have been kept in leash,
whl1e those out of the reach of the United Nations are
prone to intensify and to spread.
43. Those problems which transcend national and
regional bounds-racism, colonialism, human rights,
the relationship of States and all their common
problems, including the nuclear and space ages which

1409th meeting - 20 September 1966
know no political borders-the United Nations, with its
universal approach, has met head on, and continues
to meet with unflagging courage.
44. The United Nations has been instrumental in
giving national freedom to two-thirds of the population
of the world. It has held back the recurring tide of a
nuclear war. It has, with its specialized agencies,
set up standards of international progress in almost
every field of human endeavour, and it has. reared the
structure of a world machinery of co-operation through
its regional organizations.
45. I cannot begin to enumerate the impressive
achievements of the United Nations organs and agencies
working to improve the international economy, to
extend to more millions the benefits of modern science
and technology, and to contribute.to the creation of a
world community, one that is both viable in terms of
the needs of our age and, by the sheer range of its
work in a common effort, constitutes one of the noblest
and strongest pillars in the structure of our evolving
world order.
46. But, above all, the United Nations is a moral
force, pressing home hourly its message of the new
world order. It is thus an educative influence. It,
alone, represents the aspirations of all the peoples
of the world. In partnership with the human family,
from whom, in turn, it draws its moral inspiration,
it is the sole and supreme hope of the world. For this
reason alone, it cannot accept pessimism. In the
whirlwind of urgent changes, it has to accept optimism
as the ruling philosophy of life and it must make it
more than a sentiment. In our time, optimism is
becoming a political compulsion.
47. The United Nations, however, is a humaninstitution and does not live in a vacuum. Each Assembly
embarks on its course in a particular world climate
which, in turn, determines the approach of States to
their problems. What is the world climate today?
There are tensions now, and a war. But they are very
different from the tensions in the past. Today the
roots of trouble are no longer the basic principles
established by the Organization. The years have made
them the common consensus of mankind, and of Governments-twenty dramatic years which have Been the rise
of a world revolution in a renaissance of reason over
folly.
48. What does reason dictate? Reason dictates the
imperatives of our age: disarmament, racial equality,
self";determination of peoples, independence of nations,
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries, .
peaceful coexistence, and international co-operation.
Reason further dictates an economic revolution that
can fortify political with economic freedom. All these
are mighty issues and all are, in one form or another I
on our agenda.
49. The current tensions are no longer those of basic
principles, but of reaction to those principles,
emerging from the surgery, if I may use the word, of
implementation. They are the natural Side-effects
when universally accepted propositions come into
sharp conflict with special interests of nations or
groups.
50. Reason dictates that we press forward with the
principles that we have already elevated to the great

5

goals of mankind, that we press forward with general,
complete, and universal disarmament, especially in
those areas where agreement is more promising,
such as a total test ban and in a treaty on total disarmament of outer space including celestial bodies.
We must, in particular, make sure that outer space
is never used for military purposes. To this end we
must undertake all efforts in order to conclude, in
time, adequate legal and political agreements. The
work done so far on this subject by the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space has already yielded
some results. It is therefore to be hoped that political
wisdom will soon succeed and that the tremendous
scientific and technical progress in the field of outer
space will be matched in the legal and political field,
thus creating a vast realm of peace in the interest
ano. for the benefit of all mankind, remembe"l.'ing,
however, that what is good for the moon is surely
good for our own planet.
51. Reason dictates that we should honour, what can
at least be called the promissory note that all of us
have written to the African peoples for the complete
liberation of their newly emerged continent, in peace
and security, and with human rights safeguarded.
52. The crucial items on our agenda related to this
question are collectively designed to complete this
historic task, the task of avoiding bloodshed in the
areas of the world concerned and throughoutthe world,
which could not endure the most bitter of all conflicts
-a possible war of the races.
53. Reason dictates that, with the emergence of so
many new nations into the world of trade, the practices
of trade and their special relations to the development
of nations must be so adjusted that the world economy
will operate not in periodic eruptions of economic
wars but as a vital pillar in the structure of peace.
54. Sound international economics-that is to say,
economics related to peace-should expose the error
inherent in the contention that the development of
newly emerged nations is contrary to the economic
interests of the rich nations. Sound international
economics, based on reason, envisage an integrated
world system of trade as a partnership between the
large economic Powers and the more restricted
economies. to the benefit of all.
55. Reason suggests that if these problems can be
solved and resolved only through the concept of
international co-operation, it follows that every effort
must be exerted to make the United Nations stronger,
stronger in scope, stronger in structure and stronger
in function-stronger in every way: stronger in its
financial structure and stronger in its peace-keeping
machinery, in which the United Nations has already
shown an aptitude for success, even with all the
imperfections of improvisation.
56. In this context, a great tribute must be paid to
the Secretary-General, U Thant, whose resourceful
initiative has made the office of Secretary-General
a dynamic, political factor in the structure of peace.
On most occasions he has satisfied us all by extracting
unity out of division, to the extent that I think I may
say, with a measure of correctness, that after the
five years of his administration this House is less
divided on il'lsues than it has been at many other

6

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

moments and not divided at all on the question of his
person. Members have already heard the tribute paid
to the Secretary-General by President Fanfani. I am
sure that the sentiments he expressed are shared by
each and everyone of us.
57. My own friendship and friendly association with
the Secretary-General go back to Bandung, eleven
years ago. I have worked closely with him in his
capacity as a fellow Asian representing his country
and, during the past five years, as Secretary-General
, of the United Nations.
58. Recently he has announced his unwillingness to
offer himself for a second term. In the circumstances
his reluctance is wholly understandable. It is important, I believe, for us to give serious attention to the
issues he has raised, issues which need an early
salution if the Organization1s effectiveness is to be
maintained and strengthened, and if, indeed, world
peace is to be preserved. I hope that this session of
the General Assembly will give, serious consideration
to his concern on all issues. This will be a source of
encouragement not only to him but to all of us.
59. I am confident that the Secretary-General' s
statement, as reported, that he may consider serving
until the end of the present session, is a source of
encouragement to us all. I personally welcome with
great pleasure and gratitude this co-operation on the
part of the Secretary-General, which emanates from
his well-known devotion to the interests oftheOrganization. I consider it a gesture of collaboration with
the office of the Presidency, to which his experience,
wisdom and advice are indispensable.
60. The time is also ripe to invoke the force of
reason over obsolete policies in recognizing the
simple rule of our era that ours is a world with poor
tolerance for divisionism. The divisions that were
once perhaps considered vital temporary measures
to avert a direct confrontation have started to become
obstacles to world peace. The task of finding the right
approach to such problems presents enormous difficulties, but the possibility of making a beginning with
the acceptance, perhaps, of a common principle should
not be ruled out. Even that approach has its difficulties,
but it has the singular advantage of stemming, not
from the original roots of rivalry, but from a fresh
approach based on human reason and a spirit of
harmony and understanding.
61. An expression of concern about all grave situations in the world affecting world peace is a moral
responsibility of all, particularly when such situations
involve violence, loss of human lives and destruction.
These situations have been enumerated by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report
to the General Assembly, and all of us are fully aware
of their grave consequences in the absence of constructive and urgent endeavours in the interest of world
peace and international co-operation.

'! .

62. If, as is the case with the situation in South-East
Asia, the grim reality is such that the issues are not
within the zone of this Organization, an ironic contradiction is created because such situations affect nations
individually, and consequently any international institution primarily concerned with world peace and
security.

63. The clouds of such conflicts are bound to hang
heavily upon any gathering of nations concerned with
the peace and security of the world. That is true of
this Assembly as well.
64. We remember that some of these problems arose
at a time when the cold war had begun to subside and
when a relaxation of tensions had. begun to open the
doors to certain possible agreements in some of the
most important areas of international relations and
international co-operation, and partiCUlarly when the
principle of coexistence had struck root sufficiently
to warrant further planting. This is regrettable.
65. We know that some of these problems involve
proples which, after their emergence, should have
received the benefits of international co-operation, so
indispensable for the newly emerged countries. This
is more regrettable.
66. We know that these situations have become a
psychological obstacle to progress in many vital
fields of peace-building, affecting not only one people
but mankind as a whole. This is most regrettable.
67. There has been no dearth of suggestions and
formulae for peace. The substantial efforts of the
Secretary-General to find an acceptable way to stem
the tide of some of these most deplorable conflicts
and the endeavours of other statesmen are admirable
sources of satisfaction in relation to the expression
of concern which the issues deserve on behalf of all
nations of the world and their leaders. But in some
cases, unfortunately, there has been no beginning. And
the problem, it seems to me, is where to begin the
beginning. Reason dictates that, with the continuous
efforts of all peace-loving nations of the world,
wherever peace feelers and· overtures can be made,
serious concentration on the possibility of possibilities' should not be ruled out. The peoples of the
world, who abhor all war anp who lookto this Organization as a major hope for peace, expect this of usand partiCUlarly of those Powers which bear a special
responsibility under the Charter for the maintenance
of peace and security.
68. Among the world leaders, the Secretary-General
has generously announced that his door is open. I most
humbly suggest that all Members of the Assembly and
the responsible leaders of all nations leave their doors
no less open. If a beginning is sought on this starting
point, and if all parties manifest ·a powerful desire
-intended to be followed up by action-for peace, I
think a clue can be found which may lead to the
beginning of a solution.
69. Such a start would, undoubtedly, require great
political sacrifices beginning with the cessation of
rigid statements of position and the putting aside of
arguments as to who is to blame. It would require
concentration on the undeniable fact that war is wrong
and that no on<'l involved in this wrong could be quite
right.
70. The moral responsibility of those gathered in
this Assembly, not as Members of the United Nations
only, but as individual nations, cannot be denied. A
realization of this moral responsibility, in any form
anywhere, may be an effective. factor in achieving
the common goal of peace and security.

I·.'
I

~

I

1409th meeting - 20 September 1966 ,
71, The legacy of reason is a priceless legacy which
this Assembly should proudly accept and follow so that
at the end of its deliberations, it might be known as
the "Assembly of Reason" and, consequently, the AsseI!lbly of a stronger United Nations.
72. With faith in divine providence, faith in the might
of human reason, faith in the creative forces of history,
and above all, faith in the destinies of hundreds of
millions of peoples whose aspirations you represent
and whose hopes are centred upon you, I wish you
success as you go forward with zeal and determination
to the historic task that lies before you.
AGENDA ITEM 20

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
73. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the procedure followed in the past, I should now like to invite
the General Assembly to examine item 20 of its provisional agenda entitled "Admission of new Members
to the United Nations". This special procedure has
been applied previously in order to give newly independent States which have been recommended by the
Security Council for membership of our O!'ganization the opportunity, if the General Assembly acts
favourably on their request, of participating from the
outset in the work of this session. If there is no
objection, we shall proceed in this manner.
It was so decided.

74. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has
unanimously recommended [A/6353] that the General
Assembly should admit Guyana to membership of the
United Nations. The Assembly also has before it a
draft resolution [A/L.482] sponsored by twenty-two
delegations. May I consider that the General Assembly
decides by acclamation to accept the recommendation
of the Security Council and to adopt the draft resolution, thereby admitting Guyana to membershipofthe
United Nations?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

75. The PRESIDENT: I declare Guyana admitted to
membership of the United Nations.
The delegation of Guyana was escorted to 1.'S place
in the General Assembly hall.

76. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I am extremely happy to welcome Guyana as
a Member of the United Nations, and I wish to extend
to its Government and people the warm congratulations
of the Assembly on this happy occasion, together with
our best wishes for the future.
77. I now call on the representative of the United
Kingdom who has asked to make a statement.
78. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
I am happy to be the first to have the privilege, of
congratulating you in this Assembly on your electlOn
as our President.
79. No one imagines that your task will be easy as
you preside over this Assembly at its twenty-first
session a session which few of us expect to be dull.
But if 'there are storms ahead and if we face high
winds and heavy seas, then it is all the more important
that the captain on the bridge should be an experienced

7

and intrepid navigator, that he should be confident "in
the support of his crew and that he should be constantly
concerned for the safety of the ship.
80. May I respectfully say that, while you have ably
represented your country and its proud and brave
people, you have also shown the distinguishing quality
of the best United Nations representatives-the quality
of serving not only one country alone, but also the
higher interests of the United Nations as a whole. It
is with admiration for that quality that we pledge our
loyal and warm-hearted support to you, as you today
assume the high honour of your unique office.
81, I also wish most sincerely to express our
gratitude to the retiring President. We like to think
that amongst the many functions of the United Nations
is that of providing a college for the training of potential Foreign Ministers. A number of our representatives has already graduated to that advanced degree.
We are all the more delighted on that account when
Foreign Ministers themselves come here to give us
the benefit of their wise guidance and their successful
experience.
82. We are specially grateful to Signor Fanfani for
so ably controlling our deliberations, controlling them
with Roman confidence and skill and judgement, and
controlling them too with Italian good humour and
elegance and charm. I said [1332nd meeting] when
Signor Fanfani was elected as our Pre:sident a year
ago that I represented a country which had greatly
benefited from being colonized by his. I assure him
that 1.500 years of subsequent independence have not
dimmed our healthy British respect for the Romans.
83. We have further occasion today to reflect on
what happy relationships can be maintained and
developed between governed and governors when the
old association is put on a new basis of equality. It is
in that spirit that, on behalf of my country, I welcome
the State of Guyana to membership of the United
Nations.
84. This is happily the kind of occasion of which my
country has had long and wide experience. In 1964
I welcomed three new Member States. Last year I
welcomed three more. And at this session of the
Assembly we look forward to welcoming three more
countries to memt.3rship of the United Nations. They
follow a well-trodden path. For in the past twenty
year, twenty-seven countries previously under British
administration with a population not far short of a
quarter of the' population of the world, have attained
their independence.
85. In this perhaps the most revolutionary deve~op­
ment of this century-the emergence of new natIons
and the conversion of a subject empire into a free
Commonwealth-permit me to say proudly that my
country has played a constructive par~ second to no
other country in the history of the world.
86. Guyana is rich in potentialities-i~ he~ soil, in
forests in water-power, also, we hope, m mllleralsand in the diversity of her gay and lively and Vigoro~s
people. She is fortunate too in the ~otential ~O?trl­
bution she can make. A sister to JamalCa and Trmldad,
she can with them play a part in bringing harmony
between East and West and North and South, and, so I

8

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

like to think, between all those who speak English and
all those who speak Spanish. She can, moreover, play
an olltstanding part in what I believe is the most
important task which now faces our generation, the
task of achieving racial harmony.
87. A week ago I had the great good fortune to visit
Mexico. There I saw how happily modern harmony can
replace ancient conflict. There I saw how a people
with very different racial origins has been bound
together into a single nation with the ties of mutual
respect and proud independence and courageous economic and social reform and full equality of opportunity and emancipation from the evils of discrimination of every kind. Mexico's success has indeed been
a magnificient, a noble achievement.
88. Guyana has a similar opportunity. We confidently
wish her well in carrying out her solemn declaration
of intent made at the British Guiana Independence
Conference in London in November last year:
"... with the coming of Independence all Guyanese
... should strive together as one nation for the
peace and prosperity that are the right of all free
men". if
89. With that purpose in our minds, let me quote
these words from the statement unanimously agreed
to earlier this month at the Commonwealth Conference
in London, in which the Prime Minister of Guyana
played his part, and which was issued on 14 September:
liThe Prime Ministers declared that any political
system based on racial discrimination was intolerable. It diminished the freedom alike of those
who imposed it and of those who suffered under it.
They considered that the imposition of discriminatory conditions of political, social, economic and
educational nature upon the majority by any minority
for the benefit of a privileged few was an outrageous
violation of the fundamental principles of human
rights. "
On those principles I trust that we in the United Nations, as we in the Commonwealth, will show oursel ves to be unanimous.
90. To the people of Guyana who have embarked on
the exacting adventure of independence, to the Government of Guyana which has to tackle so many exciting
tasks of harnessing the natural and human resources
of a new young nation, to my honourable and learned
friend, the Prime Minister of Guyana, whom we
welcome today as he comes to raise his country's
flag in proud equality, we say our warmest welcome,
and with all our hearts we wish them well.
91. Mr. RAMANI (Malaysia): Mr. President, may I,
as the representative of one Asian State to another,
offer to you the felicitations of my delegation and my
own personal congratulations on your assuming the
Presidency of the General Assembly at its twentyfirst session.
92. I am privileged by the accidental and fortunate
circumstance of being this month's Chairman of the
Commonwealth Group of States, to come to this rostrum
t~ welcome into our midst the State of Guyana. I have
j j Cmnd. Paper No. 2849 (London, Pier Majesty's Stationery Office).
p.10.

been asked by the representative of Japa!l to associate
his great country with this welcome, and I am indeed
happy to do so. We are particularly pleased that the
delegation of Guyana has today taken its place in this
Assembly under the distinguished leadership of its
Prime Minister, Mr. L. F. S. Burnham.
93. Guyana's political history of recent years has
been one of toil and travail and its pathway to indep.mdence appeared to many deliberately punctuated
with perilous pitfalls. Perhaps in a sense this was as
it ought to be, so that independence, when it came just
four months ago, provided for those that strove for it
a sense of satisfaction born of the glow of a real
achievement, which it otherwise might not have had.
Throughout this chequered history, its present Prime
Minister was actively associated in the strife and the
striving to move forward in Gltyana I s every step from
representative to responsible government, and, finally,
to independence as the sovereign democratic State of
Guyana.
94. The new State has a written Constitution which
provides for a unicameral legislature comprising a
House of Assembly, all fifty-three members of which
are elected by the people of the State on the basis of
adult franchise. The Constitution of Guyana, ill common
with most modern constitutions, provides for the
conferment and safeguarding of fundamental freedoms
to all its citizens without distinction of race, or
religion, colour or sex. It also provides for the
manning of the services through the impartial
machinery of service commissions because, first and
last, it is the quality of the administration rather than
the nature of the Constitution that determines the
welfare of the people. All that and much else in the
Constitution accord with modern trends in democratic
government and, significantly enough for a multiracial
population, the Constitution has provided for elections
to the National Assembly by a system of proportional
representation.
95. This is hardly the occasion, when the State is at
the very threshold of its international existence, opening on to a great vista of achievements accessible to
its talented people, to dwell on the provisions of its
written Constitution, the real test of which will come
when it get going and begins its working life and
reflects in its continuous conduct, in the manner of its
deliberations as much as with the content of its decisions, the hopes and aspirations of a vigorous people.
But there are two special and significant aspects of
that Constitution to which I should like to refer.
96. Parliamentary democracies in practice, notwithstanding the sovereignty of the people that their
legislatures are intended to reflect, confer a plenitude
of proliferating power into the hands of the executive.
The complexities of modern life render this debilitating
devolution of power inevitable. The search for a balance
between the growing power of the executive through an
ever-expanding bureaucracy and the basic freedoms
of the citizen guaranteed by the Constitution involves
no easy pursuit and a solution is hard to come by.
97. But one of the pathways to this balance is the
establishment of an independent authority within the
State, whose duty it is to seek and secure a remedy
against the excessive use of the executive power, by

1409th meeting - 20 september 1966
interposing in front of it not merely the defensive
shield of the citizen's right to fundamental freedoms,
but also to have them fought for and upheld in and by
the organs of judicial power created for the purpose
within the state.
98. This authority is the system of the ombudsman,
with which even the oldest of the democracies within
the Commonwealth provided itself only just the other
day. As a long-time devotee of the law, to which in
this Assembly we endeavour to subordinate the
arbitrary will of the sovereign state so as to serve
the purposes of an international order, I respectfully
venture to suggest that with its provision for an
ombudsman in its written Constitution, not only has
this new State of Guyana manifested its profound
pre-occupation with translating the noble words of
the Constitution into the web of the people's daily
way of life, but, if I may say RO with respect, the
Prime Minister, as a great lawyer himself, would
appear to have combined the ,wisdom artdcircumspection of a statesman who creates those rights with the
uncommon zeal of the lawyer who is concerned primarily in defending them. "The history of liberty",
said Woodrow Wilson, "is a history of limitations of
governmental power, not the increase of it." The
Constitution of Guyana, let us hope, will be the living
symbol of that vital truth.
99. There is, as I said, one other significant fea.ture
of the Constitution to which I must refer. It is a clear
recognition, in the words of the Constitution itself
and not in any vague conventions that are the normal
outgrowth of it, of the role of the Leader of the
Opposition who has been given the right to be consulted
by the Prime Minister in the latter's discharge of
several of his more important functions. This is a
feature which is a particular and peculiar trait of
most of the States of the Commonwealth that follow
the pattern of parliamentary democracy, and to many
outside the Commonwealth it continues to remain
perhaps a meritorious but certainly a bafflingcharacteristic. Tp these latter may I be permitted to quote
the words of the late President Kennedy:
"The men who create power make an indispensable
contribution to the nation's greatness. But the men
who question power make a contribution just as
indispensable ...• For they determine whether we
use power or power uses· us.",2J
100. It was precisely a fortnight ago that Guyana was
formally welcomed into and united with the ranks of
Commonwealth States, a fact which alone !)as giv.en
me the pleasure and the privilege of welcoming it to
this Assembly. May I add to that welcome my personal
pleasure that it has been possible for us to meet, on
this auspicious occasion for Guyana, its most distinguished Prime Minister.
101. Mr. LICHTVELD (Netherlands): Mr. President,
it is a privilege that on this very first day of the
twenty-first session of the General Assembly. the
Netherlands delegation has the opportunity to congratulate you upon your election as our President.
We all know how much you deserve this universal
distinction. and we gladly submit ourselves to the

l' .Speech delivered at Arnherst College, Mass on 26 OCtober. 1963.

9

wisdom of your guidance, the joy of your forbearance
and the finesse of your diplomacy. Havingthis in mind,
we are looking forward to our future deliberations
with much hope for their fruitful results.
102. In the Security Council, the Netherlands delegation was one of the first to support Guyana for
admission to the United Nations. We also wish to be
among the first to congratulate our new fellow Member
for its ultimate success and to welcome Guyana to
this forum of the earth's peoples, large and small,
old and young.
103. When, more than four centuries ago, the five
great colonial Powers of those days approached the
then so-called Wild Coast of the Guianas, they chased
away the Caribs and Arawaks living in that territory,
where the soil still keeps its secrets about the
original inhabitants. and they carved up the land
among themselves. Fortunately, this operation. by
which they created a number of Guianas-Portuguese,
French, Dutch, British and Spanish-and even subdivisions like the colonies of Berbice, Demerara and
Essequibo. left no noticeable scars because the
divisions were made according to the courses of
rivers.
104. In the lowlands. the Netherlands, history has
taught us a plain but enormously important truth: that
mountains may separate. but rivers exist not to divide
but only to unite people, and that water is the most
natural way to establish contact and commerce among
men. This being the case, the most central part of the
old Guianas, Surinam, extends its very cordial congratulations to its neighbour country. the newly independent State of Guyana. across the river which does
not separate our two countries but which will certainly
prove to be a symbol of their intimate contact and
friendship. Across the Caribbean Sea, the Netherlands
Antilles join Surinam for the same purpose, and from
across the Atlantic Ocean the Netherlands adds its
voice to the chorus of well-wishers.
105. We all know that Guyana had to travel an arduous
way before attaining ~he fulfilment of its rightful
Ulpirations. It succeeded because it was prepared to
carry the full burden of independence and because it
had to deal with an ancient colonial Power which has
set a remarkable exampIe of willingness to decolonize
its former possessions. The United Kingdom, although
it has not always been able to solve all the problems
connected with the difficult task of decolonization, is
therefore also to be congratulated on this occasion.
106. My delegation, representing the three parts of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, sincerely hopes that
Guyana now will enter an era of prosperity. peace and
rapid development. not only for its own benefit hut also
for the benefit of all the Guianas and all the peoples
represented in this place.
107. Mr. ARENALES CATALAN (Guatemala) (translated from Spanish): Mr. President. I come to this
rostrum for the first time this session for a twofold
and pleasant purpose. First, I wish. on behalf of the
new Government of Guatemala, to congratulate you
on your well-deserved election to your high officei
and second, I wish to welcome the arrival of a sister
nation, Guyana, to strengthen the ranks of our Organization with the message which the noble people freed

10

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

at length brings with it. For Guatemala, your election
to the highest post in the Assembly is a fitting tribute
to your career as an outstanding international statesman and to your personal political philosophy, characterized by an independence and a will to surmount
obstacles that always enables you to rise above the
controversies dividing men from one another.
108. Our congratulations are twofold, because you
represent a friendly country standing at the historical
and geographical crossroads of a great continent,
ancient in its traditions and modern in its intellectual
outlook. a continent of nations witp. which-if I may
be permitted this tone of personal nostalgia-I enj oyed
the closest ties of friendship and co-operation while
I was with the United Nations several years ago.
109. It is not merely on behalf of Guatemala, but
also as Chairman of the Latin American group and
on behalf of its members that I have the honour to
extend to Guyana our most cordial welcome upon its
admission be> the United Nations. We are certain that
its contribution to the discussions, operations and
action of the United Nations will reflect the democratic
zeal with which long-oppressed peoples always seem
to be inspired as they emerge. Our welcome is all the
more earnest in that-as in the case of Mexico mentioned a short while ago by the representative of the
United Kingdom-racial harmony is a heart-warming
fact of daily life throughout the continent of Latin
America, including Brazil and Ecuador, Bolivia and
Guatemala, Colombia and Peru. We rejoice. too, that
a spirit of economic and social reform, backed up
by a widespread fellow-feeling and a sense of equality,
is shedding its light over our entire region.
110. The admission of Guyana holds special significance for the Latin American group. It marks
another step towards the liquidation offoreign domination on a continent born to be free. The anti-colonial
tradition of Latin America spurs us to greet with
fervent joy this new sister nation which today joins
our ranks amid such cordial goodwill, taking its place
among the United Nations and spurred on by the
revitalizing force of the principles of the Organization.
111. Mr. MARTIN (Canada): Mr. President, my first
words are addressed to you as the newly elected
President of the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session. Your long and distinguished period of service
to the United Nations is fittingly crowned by your
election to this high office, and I know you will preside
over our debates with that dignity and courtesy which
distinguish the people of Afghanistan.
112. I also wish to express the gratitude of my
country for the distinguished way in which Mr. Fanfani
has presided ever our deliberations.
113. As the representative of Canada. it is a great
honour to welcome Guyana to membership in this
Organization,and I am glad to note that the Prime
Minister of Guyana, Mr. Burnham, is with us for this
important occasion in the history of his country. As
the oldest Commonwealth. country in the Western
Hemisphere, Canada has watched with satisfaction
the emergence to independence of the new Commonwealth nations in the Caribbean. Guyana, which became
independent on 26 May of this year, is the most recent
of these. Historically, Canada has had a special
____ I

relationship with Guyana and the other Commonwealth
countries and territories in the Caribbean. Trade
and economic ties nave been of great importance in
this respect, but our special relationship has extended
to many other fields and has, I think, benefited us all.
114. Just over a month after his country became
independent, the Prime Minister of Guyana joined his
colleagues from the Commonwealth Caribbean and the
Canadian Prime Minister, Mr. Pearson, in a Conference at ottawa to explore ways of giving a new
meaning to the traditional relations which have linked
our countries, and of establishing a process of closer
consultation and practical co-operation. We in Canada
were proud that this Commonwealth Caribbean-Canada
Conference was one of the first international gatherings
of its kind attended by Guyana as a sovereign and
independent nation.
115. In welcoming Guyana to the United Nations, I
have also been asked to speak on behalf of my Nordic
colleagues. I know that we can count on Guyana's
representatives to make a positive and effective contribution to the deliberations of this Organization.
My country looks forward to a close and friendly
association with Guyana in our approach to important
international questions.
116. Mr. SHEARER (Jamaica): My first pleasant

duty on behalf of the delegation of Jamaica is to
extend congratulntions to you, Mr. President, on your
elevation to the high and distinguished post of President of the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session. The Jamaican delegation is particularly
pleased to witness your assumption of this office
because we have deeply admired your outstanding
qualities and talents, which have been so assiduously
devoted to furthering the work of our Organization.
We know that you will preside over this Assembly
with your usual wisdom, tact and immense patience,
at the same time displaying, as you always have, a
deep respect for proper procedures in this great body.
11 7. My second very pleasant duty is the purpose
for which my delegation asked for the floor, and that
is to issue a brief but profound welcome to the new
state of Guyana, which has ju st been admitted to
membership. It would have been impossible for the
Jamaican delegation not to speak on this occasion,
as the ties of friendship between Guyana and Jamaica
are particularly close and go back into our history,
We have collaborated for a long time with Guyana
in a variety of fields, and we look forward to a long
future of co-operation in the many areas of common
interest which we share.
118. We take this opportunity to record again our

admiration for the leaders and the people of Guyana
on the conclusion of their long struggle for freedom
and independence and on their determination to meet
the heavy responsibilities and challenges of nationhood.
119. The Jamaican delegation is confident that Guyana
will make important contributions to the work of this
Organization, as it will bring to our deliberations
considerable experience, talent and understanding.
Like Jamaica, Guyana is a multiracial society and thus
inherits the strength with which such societies are
blessed. Where there is genUine equality among all
groups in the community and the determination to

I
~,

II

1409th meeting - 20 September 1966
ensure it, whatever the transient difficulties might be,
it will always be possible to maintain proudly the

great motto of the new State of Guyana: "One people,
one nation, one destiny".
120. The Jamaican delegation extends the hand of
friendship to the Prime Minister of Guyana, His
Excellency the Honourable L. F. S. Burnham, who
has led his delegation into this session, and to the
other members of the delegation of Guyana. On behalf
of the Government and people of Jamaica, I wish to
assure them of our co-operation at all times in our
joint efforts at the United Nations.
121. Mr. Patrick SOLOMON (Trinidad and Tobago):
Mr. President, may I join with those representatives
who' have spoken before me in offering you heartfelt
congratulations on your almost unanimous election
to the Presidency of the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session. May I assure you that not
merely geographical considerations nor yet political
expediency decided the choice ofthis year's President,
but particularly those fine qualities which enable
men in any generation to recognize leaders among
men. May I also express the hope that the duties of
this high office, onerous though they may be, will sit
lightly on your very capable shoulders.
122. I come now to the question of the admission of
our friend and neighbour, Guyana, to the famI'ly of
nations. The Government and people of Trinidad and
Tobago have a particularly deep feeling of satisfaction
today on the occasion of the formal admission of the
independent State of Guyana to membership in the
United Nations. From a distance of not more than a
few hundred miles, and with a history of close
cultural and social intercourse, and with keen awareness of fraternity, our people in Trinidad and Tobago
have watched the people of Guyana move fitfully, and
sometimes convulsively, towards the fulfilment of
their very obvious destiny.
123. Independence for Guyana has been achieved at a
higher price and after far greater hardship than that
experienced by any other former colony in the
Caribbean area. We in Trinidad and Tobago watched
hopefully, and, when we though it appropriate, we
offered assistance and encouragement as she attempted
once more to stabilize her social order and free
herself from the costly irrelevancies that had frustrated her legitimate expectations since 1953.
124. Guyana's experience in the last fifteen years
has not been in vain. She has won her independence;
it has not been handed to her on a platter; and she
has thus demonstrated to the world a number of
very useful lessons about the extent to which and the
manner in which and the ease with which small countries with weak economies and minimal military
capacity may become prey to global forces to which
they do not contribute and which cannot in any way
serve their peoples' interests.
125. Those of us who have looked at Guyana's develo,\>ment with a sympathetic eye feel that we, too, have
benefited from her experience. We feel that her people
and our people enjoy a mutual cultural accessibility.
We share a common cultural idiom which has been
established over the years, inconspicuously it is true,
but at great depth and ineradicably. OUr peopleS have

11

traded together, worked together, intermarried, and
formed common institutions. We have also played
together. Now, in the moment of Guyana's greatest
achievement, we feel entitled to express our happiness
too. We most cordially welcome Guyana to the cornmunity of nations, and we are confident that her
contributions to the work of this Assembly will assist
in maintaining the peace of the world and in enhancing
the dignity of the human person.
126. Mr. EBAN (Israel): Mr. President, the delegation of Israel wishes you well as you embark on the
discharge of your high responsibilities. In the present
international situation, your readiness to assume that
office is both a testimony and a challenge to your
sense of duty and courage. You join a respected lineage
of sta.tesmen who have helped to establish a presidential tradition in the life of the international society.
That tradition was recently illuminated and erinobled
by the distinguished Foreign Minister of Italy, whose
leadership of our Councils has left the United Nations
in his debt.
127. We have today come much nearer to the moment
when, for the first time in history, all the peoples of
the Western Hemisphere will live under the flags of
their own sovereign States. This is the broad continental significance of Guyana's admission to membership in the United Nations. But we welcome that
membership also in its own right. It marks a reinforcement of the community of small States which
bring their traditions, their experiences, and their
diverse cultures to the task of fashioning anew international society.
128. Guyana can be assured that her friends in many
continents stand ready to co-operate with her in her
international relations and in her tasks of national
development. It is in the construction of new societies
that men achieve their highest sense of creativity,
and Guyana is essentia.lly an experience in the harmony
of races joined together in tolerance and mutual
co-operatien.
129. In bringing Israel's sincere and fraternal congratulations to Mr. Burnham and the Government and
delegation of Guyana, let me express the conviction
that the people of Guyana will never lose the memory
and the emotion of this day.
130. Mr-. PARTHASARATHI (India): Mr. President,
before I make a few remarks on the happy occasion
of the admission of Guyana as a Member State of the
United Nations, I should like to take this opportunity
of expressing the profound satisfaction of my delegation at your unanimous election to the exalted
position of President of the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session. Your election is a matter of
immense gratification for my delegation. We are happy
and prOUd that the President of this session of the
General Assembly, which may turn out to be one of
the most important sessions in the history of the
United Nations, comes from a close neighbour with
whom my country enjoys the most friendly and
brotherly relations. Afghanistan and India are bound
together by age-old ties of common culture and
neighbourly intercourse in commence and other fields
from which both the nations derived mutual benefits.
These ancient ties between our two peoples have been
further strengthened in modern times as a result of

12

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meeting~

sharing common aspirations in nation building and
close identity of outlook on world affairs. The recent
high-level exchange of visits between our two countries brought out further the spirit of co-operation and
friendliness which prevails in the relations between
Afghanistan and India. Moreover, it isa matter for
satisfaction to us that the great nation of Afghanistan
is represented in this high office of President of the
General Assembly by a person of your eminence who
is well known and respected in international circles
for his outstanding qualities of wisdom and knowledge.
131. As the Permanent Representati.ve of your country to the United Nations for the past several years,
you have made a most significant contribution to the
work of the Organization in all its fields. We have
greatly admired your tack, your patience and your
perseverance in dealing with most difficult and
intrieate issues. If I might add a personal note, it
had been my proud privilege to have been associated
with you ever since my arrival in New York and I
have greatly benefited from this association. My
delegation has no doubt that, under your wise and
enlightened guidance, the General Assembly will be
able to proceed with its work smoothly and bring it
to a successful conclusion. In this difficult task, let
me assure you of the whole-hearted support of my
delegation.
132. May I also take this opportunity to pay my delegation's tribute to the retiring President, His Excellency, Mr. Fanfani, who guided our deliberations
with such distinction and outstanding success last
year.
133. The independence of Guyana is a matter of
particular satisfaction for the United Nations since
it had been the subject of its consideration for many
years. W~ in India have had close links with the
leaders and people of Guyana for a considerable
length of time. Not only did we follow Guyana's fight
for freedom with deep interest and admiration, but
we also actively sought her independence through the
appropriate organs of the United Nations. We considered it our great privilege to join in the effort to
help accelerate the liberation of a country for whose
leaders and people we entertain feelings of the highest
respect and affection. It was, therefore, with great
joy that we welcomed the emergence of Guyana as an
independent State on 26 May 1966.
134. Guyana, with her vast and rich potentiaIs for
economic and social growth is at the thresho!d of the
exciting process of development which all nations of
the world are experiencing in varying degrees today.
The motto of "One people, one nation, one destiny"
inscribed in the national coat-of-arms of Guyana is
an inspiring one. Initially, Guyana's problems might
seem enormous, due to her long history of colonial
exploitation and her multiracial population. but her
soil, ri<;h in natural resources. her people, full of
courage and determination to progress, and her
dynamic leadership, ensure a glorious future.
135. In this most challenging task of development
that faces the people of Guyana, the international
community will, we are sure, offer its sincere cooperation and assistance so that they may t;"JY the
fruits of their fertile land in peace and harmony.

136. Guyana's membership of this world body is its
due and will bring a step nearer the realization of the
dream of universality of the United Nations. We have
no doubt whatsoever that, despite the problems and
pressures that inevitably absorb the attention of an
emerging nation, Guyana's contribution to the outside
world, and especially to the ideals expoused by the
United Nations, will be important and significant.
My delegation warmfy weleomes the admission of
Guyana to the United Nations, an admission which has
been unanimously endorsed by this Assembly. We
offer onr warmest congratulations and good wishes
to the Prime Minister of Guyana on this happy
occasion.
137. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America):
Mr. President, I associate myself in full measure
with the deserved tributes that have been paid to
Mr. Fanfani upon his retirement from the office of
President of the General A.ssembly and to tour
accession to the Presidency of the Assembly at its
twenty-first session.
138. Both Mr. Fanfani and you. sir, are associated
with me by close ties of friendship: in his case, old
ties; and in your case, new ties. Mr. Fanfani and I
were trained for diplomacy in the same school of hard
knocks, both of us having served as Minister of
Labour in our respective countries. You, sir, were
one of the first representatives with whom I had
association when I came here a litde more than a
year ago, and even at that time, in helping to negotiate
the consensus which led to the report of the Special
Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations to the
General Assembly, El you displayed those qualities of
resourcefulness, integrity and conciliation which, I
am sure, will dominate your work as President of the
General Assembly.
139. I believe, Mr. President, that you must feel
today as I have felt on occasion when I have been
designated to an office less exalted than yours; I have
hoped that my mother and father could be present on
such an occasion and could hear all the nice things
that were said about me because my father would have
appreciated the remarks and my mother would have
believed them.
140. I should like at this point to say just a few words,
because of the lateness of the hour, about Guyana, our
newest Member, and I trust that the brevity of my
remarks will in no way be taken as a measure of the
warmth of the welcome which I extend on behalf of the
United States to Guyana, its people and its delegation.
141. Guyana is the twenty-fifth independent State in
our hemisphere, a fact in which we all take pride, and
I congratulate Guyana. On 26 May our delegation to
its independence day ceremony saluted it as' a sovereign State and as a good neighbour in our hemisphere.
Today I salute it as a good neighbour in the international community, to which it pledged allegiance in
the speech from the Throne on that momentous
occasion.
142. I believe that a word of congratulation is in
order for the United Kingdom also. Despite many
j j OffIcIal Recordll of the General Assembly; Nineteenth Session,
Annexes, allllex No. 21, docwnent A/5916 and Add.l.

I

1409th meeting - 20 September 1966
difficulties and many obstacles, this independence
-this genuine independence-was brought about by
planning and in conditions of order and conditions
of agreement, which is the only way that independence
should be and can be achieved in a spirit of peace.
143. I should like also to say a word to an old friend,
the Prime Minister of Guyana. He too was trained in
the same school as Mr. Fanfani and myself, in the
labour movement of his country. He is an experienced
statesman and will be a great leader of his country.
He has already demonstrated these qualities. I congratulate him, I congratulate the people of his country,
and I welcome him to constructive partnership in the
work of our great Organization.
144. Mr. PIRZADA (Pakistan): Mr. President, first
let me offer to you the warmest felicitations on behalf
of the Government and people of Pakistan and on
behalf of my delegation on your elevation to the highest
office of this Assembly. Those who know' you-and
their number is legion-in this Organization have not
the least doubt that in your conduct of the difficult
session which lies ahead you will add lustre to the
brilliant tradition set by your predecessors.
145. Pakistan and Afghanistan, apart from being close
neighbours, share bonds of common CUlture and
history, and we are therefore particularly happy to
see you, Mr. President, occupy the highest elective
office of this body. The personal qualities of patience
and perseverance, together with the lr:mg experience
that you possess, make you eminently fit to head this
Assembly. We are confident that, given the benefit
of your able guidance and wise counsel, the task of
the General Assembly, in deliberating the vitalissues
which we face today, will be greatly facilitated, May I
once again offer the sincerest congratulations of my
delegation on your elevation to this high office.
146, Now it is my pleasant duty to welcome Guyana,
our new partner in the Commonwealth, as a Member
of the United Nations. Pakistan has always believed
in the concept of universality, and in the view of my
delegation, therefore, the more the number of Members of the Organization increases, the nearer this
concept comes to realization. I look forward to cordial
co-operation with the delegation of Guyana in the
deliberations and activities of the Organization.
147, I may add that I have been entrusted by the
delegations of Iran and Turkey with tb..e honour of
welcoming Guyana on their behalf also, which indeed
I am happy to do.
148. I should also like to take this opportunity to
warmly welcome the decision of the Government of
Indonesia to resume its full co-operation with the
United Nations and to participate in its activities
starting with this session of the General Assembly.
That step will greatly enhance the prestige and
effectiveness of this Organization and we have no
doubt it will lead towards the strengthening of this
world body. Indonesia is one of the largest countries
of Asia and the world, It is therefore only appropriate
that Indonesia should play its rightful role in the
comity of nations.
149. Mr. DIACONESCU (Romania) (translated from.
French): Mr. President, I am happy to add to the
sincere and warm congratulations addressed to you

13

on the occasion of your unanimous election to the
high office of President of the General Assembly.
150. Allow me to express to the delegation of Guyana
the most earnest congratulations on behalf of the
delegations of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Mongolia,
Poland. the. Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Romania.
151. The accession of Guyana toindependencerepresents the victorious climax of the heroic struggle
waged by the people of this new state to assert themselves as a nation. The event marks the nation's fiTst
step on the road to tree economic and social development in keeping with its own aspirations and desires.
152. The accession of the people of Guyana to independence also marks a new phase in the process of
total liquidation of the colonial system.
153. We see in the admission of Guyana to membership in the United Nations an expression of the universal purpose of this Organization and an essential
element for its effective operation.
154. On behalf of the delegations I have just mentioned, and on my own behalf, I am delighted to express to the delegation of Guyana our most sincere
wishes for the progress and prosperity of its people
in the interests of peace and international co-operation.
155. Mr. YIFRU (Ethiopia): Mr. President, at the
outset I should like to congratulate you on your election
as President of the General Assembly at its twentyfirst session. Your election to this high postis a credit
to your nation, Afghanistan, which has played a veTy
interesting and constructive role in the work of the
Organization ever since its founding. With your
country having followed a non-aligned policy in the
strict sense of the word. I am sure you, also, as
President of this session, will be guiding this sesSion
in a spirit of impartiality and in a spirit of constructiveness. I am sure that, under your guidance, this
session will bear fruitful results as much as the
past Assemblie s have done, If there is any fa.Uure,
I am sure the failure will not be attributed to you.
156. Having said that, I should like, on beha.lf of the
African countries, members of the Organization of
African Unity, of which group it is my privilege to be
Chairman this month, to welcome the admission of
Guyana to membership in the United Nations. Guyana's
admission has special significance to us, Its people
are linked with ours by strong ethnic and cultural
ties. In a much broader sense, Guyana as a country
and the Guyanese as a people represent a living
embodiment of Afro-Asian solidarity. By reason of
the composition of its population, coupled with the
fact of geography as well as its experience with
colonialism and economic and social under-development, it is a country which is destined to play a
constructive role in the work of the United Nations.
The way in which Guyana obtained its independence
is eloquent proof of to what constructive and diplomatic use the United Nations machinery could be put,
prOVided, of course, there is goodwill on all sides,
157, We-should also like to pay tribute to the United
Kingdom for its role and understand.ing, But we shall
not pass without pointing out the close parallel between
I

14

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

the case of Guyana and that of Rhodesia. We hope that
the United Kingdom can be guided in Rhodesia by thesame wisdom that has guided its action with respect
to Guyana.
158. In conclusion, on behalf of all the African countries, I should like to extend a welcome to Guyana and
its distinguished Prime Minister, Mr. Burnham, who
ia in our midst.
159. Mr. TOMER (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, it is my privilege to convey to you, on behalf
of the Arab States and the Kingdom of Nepal, the
expression of our sincerest congratulations and
brotherly joy on your unanimous election to the post
of the Presidency of the General Assembly. Yau come,
sir, to guide the world Organization in one of its most
difficult eras, entering as it is its third decade, and
facing as it is the crisis of its own existence and
of its future. But your ability, your deep sense of
impartiality and justice, your 'devoted service to the
better cause of mankind, in and outside the United
Nations, are all reflected in the admirable record of
your long years of service and ·contributions to the
work of the United Nations; and likewise in the record
of your great country, with which the Arab states have
the most solid ties of history, geography, common
aims and deep faith in the triumph of the ideals of
humanity so richly embedded in the culture of your
country which has brought so many contributions tc
human history and to manJ.dnd.
160, Our great appreciation goes as well to the distinguished retiring President, who, through relentlessly constant effort, wisdom and tact has held the
United Nations together, consolidated its chances of
success and guided it at one of the most memorable
of its sessions.
161. In sincerely congratulating Guyana on its admission to membership, we all voice our felicitations on
its liberation, its attainment of independence and its
determination to forge its own destiny. Indeed, the
liberation, self-determination and independence of
countries are for us basic principles that we actively
support and for which we constantly strive. Those
considerations increase our joy at welcoming Guyana
in our midst, to make its own contribution to the
world Organization.
162. Finally, we express to the Prime Minister and
the people of Guyana our heartfelt congratulations
on this great day,
163. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Since this is the first time
that the delegation of Italy has had an opportunity of
speaking at the twenty-first session of the General
Assembly, I should like at the outset to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, on
your election to that high office.
164. I have had the good fortune, since my arrival
at the United Nations, to know and appreciate your
great skill, capacity and perfect knowledge of international affairs and of the United Nations tasks,
machinery and objectives. The great respect you
have earned among all delegations and all Governments
is faithfully reflected in the election that has just
taken place, an election which is at the same time
the best acknowledgement of the great distinction with

which you have served the United Nations and your
own country.
165. I should like to add to the congratulations of the
Italian delegation our best Wishes for the successful
accomplishment of your very high and certainly difficult task-indeed, one of the most difficult tasks in
world affairs. We are confident that under your very
able guidance we shall not overlook the obj ectives
that you haTe pointed out to us.
166. May I also take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, and all the representatives who have
so kindly expressed appreciation to the President of
the General Assembly at its twentieth session, the
Foreign Minister of Italy, Mr.· Amintore Fanfani,
As Italians we have all been moved by the words used
by representatives in expressing their sentiments
of high esteem and regard for one of our compatriots.
167. I should now like to extend a warm welcome to
Guyana on behalf of the Italian delegation and an the
delegations of the western European Group, on this
happy occasion when Guyana is becoming associated
with our world Organization.
168. The representative of the United Kingdom, my
good friend Lord Caradon, has spoken in very glowing
terms of the very close links established through the
centuries between Britain and Italy. I would mention
that many of my countrymen have travelled abroad
since Julius Caesar did. Among them-much laterwas Christopher Columbus. I say that only to indicate
how sincerely happy the Italian delegation is to see
another American country take its place in our midst,
in international circles.
169. Reference has already been made to the many
human qualities and material resources that make of
Guyana a vigorous nation with a brilliant future, On
behalf of the Italian delegation and of the delegations
of the Western European group. I have the pleasant
duty of extending our warmest congratulations to the
delegation of Guyana on this happy day. Guyana can
count on the sincere friendship of all the Western
European countries. We are sure that. starting today,
we shall be able to co-operate in the many fields of
United Nations activities, and we rejoice at the prospect
of profitable and successful work together.
170. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): First, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, most warmly on behalf
of my Government and on my own behalf on your
unanimous election to the high and important office
of President of the General Assembly. During our
long association in the United Nations for the past
fifteen years, since the fifth· session of the General'
Assembly held in Paris in 1951, I have had more
than one occasion to appreciate the positive spirit of
international understanding, conciliation and moderation animating your statements on world problems; In
my view and that of my Government, it is an auspioious
event that you will be at the helm of the General Assembly and the United Nations during the present
crisis, a crisis in the United Nations itself and in the
world.
171. You have expressed the hope that this may be
the session of reason. Indeed, humanity is now in a
period of transition from the concept of force and war

1409th meeting - 20 September 1966
that has prevailed in the world over the ages to that of
reason and peace, which must come if mankind is to
survive. Reason means justice, right, equality, freedom. Force is the abrogation thereof, by virtue of
the concept of might makes right; it is therefore a
denial of justice. In our world of today there can be
no survival unless the spirit of reason prevails. I join
with you, Mr, President, in hoping that if this is not
the session of reason there will at least be some
indication that, in this period of transition, there can
be a move towards reason. Then-and this is very
important-the Secretary-General, U Thant, may find
it possible to accede to the universal demands for the
renewal of hiS mandate. I hope that that will be the
case.
172, I wish to congratulate the Government and the
people, of Guyana on the occasion of their independence
and the admission of Guyana as a Member of the
United Nations, a fact which in itself ensures its
complete independence and sovereignty, I welcome
the Prime Minister and the members of the delegation
of Guyana to the United Nations and look forward to
our close co-operation in the United Nations in the
interests of peace and international understanding.

I

I

173. Guyana is a small country and so is Cyprus.
We Come to the United Nations a very small geographical unit which is small in population,but we
hope to bring and have tried to bring our constructive
contribution in the interests of peace. Perhaps, by
our smallne ss, we might bring a more spiritual contribution to the world Organization, and we look forward
to Guyana's joining us in this humble effort to help
constructively towards world international peac~ and
international agreement.
174. The PRESIDENT: I take pleasure in inviting His
Excellency, Mr. L. F. S. Burnham, Prime Minister
of Guyana, to address the General Assembly.
175. Mr. BURNHAM (Guyana); Mr. President, permit
me to congratulate you upon your election to the high
office which you now hold and to wish that, bringing
to such office all your known qualities and experience,
you will guide this Assembly with success through the
difficult year which lies ahead.
176. May I also express my young nation's deep
gratitude to you, to the members of the Commonwealth
and to our Latin American neighbours, who have
sponsored our admission to this Organization, and to
others who have expressed such kind sentiments and
warm wishes.
177. Mine is a small country with a land mass
approximately equal to that of Britain and a population
of about 650,000. There are the indigenous Amerindians, there are the descendants of African slaves
and indentured Indians-who together form the bulk of
the people-descendants of Chinese, Portuguese and
others. All except the first have come to our part of
the world as part of that economic and political
process, imperialism.
178. Hence we share the experiences aild aspirations
of the newer nations and are determined to reconstruct
our whole life and institutions-economic, social and
political-to ensure for ourselve.s survival and a better
life.

15

179. In an ideal world a new nation might hope to go
it alone. But this is not an ideal world and, in this

age as in others, there is always some factor that
bedevils the existence of small, weak nations. In the
last century it was the imperialist dynamic-which
even now has not entirely disappeared, especially in
Africa. In our time it is the self-interest, albeit
sometimes enlightened, of great Powers and their
concomitant desire to control and patronize the
smaller and new nations. That is one of the reasons
why, in our relations with our sister Caribbean
natio~s, we devote every effort to the strengthening
of Caribbean unity, the development and maintenance
of regional co-operation and integration at all levels
and the building of a strong, viable Caribbean
community.
180. At the same time, situated as we are geographically on the Latin American continent, we
cherish the warmest feelings of friendship for our
neighbours, the Latin American nations, with whom
we look forward to more than a lifetime of meaningful
co-operation.
181. Mr. President, I hope that you will not find it
presumptuous if, on behalf of the newe st of the new
and one of the smaller of the small nations, I declare
that my Government's and peopie's passionate desire
for peace among the nations is second to none, In
Guyana we have experienced the misery of communal
strife, which I am happy to say is now a thing of the
past. But it is because we have lived with what on a
larger scale seems to be one of the maj or problems
of the world that we claim the right to challenge the
nations, great and small, to cease making war and
implements of war.
182. In Viet-Nam, for instance, it is my hope, which
I feel sure this Assembly shares, that an honourable
and acceptable means will be found to substitute
discussions around the conference table for the bullets
of the battlefield. And I say this, though I know how
badly reason oft limps beside the striding soldier.
183. Our nation has neither the capacity for nor the
intention of conquering or dominating others. We
want to survive and to help to build the brave new
world. OUr major contributions are and will be
moral suasion and, we hope, dispassionate thinking.
184. Guyana shares with its friends an active and
undying dedication to democracy-polftical and 80cialand to the democratic process and ideals and is not
committed ex mero motu to any major Power bloc.
We want to preserve our newly acquired independence,
to develop our resources with our own energies and
the assistance of friends. We know that we have to
live in a world of stark realities, not fanciful dreams,
but we are sure that, given an opportunity to be heard,
we can contribute to the stability of our hemisphere
and the peace of the world.
185. But what hope of peace is there when 4 million
Africans are oppressed by a small white minority
of a quarter of a million in Southern Rhodesia? When
Angola and Mozambique remain running sores? When
the inhuman policy of apartheid continues in South
Africa' and those who utter pious sentiments grapple
to their economic hearts former admirers, if not
supporters, of Adolf Hitler? When the people of

16

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

South West Africa are denied the right to selfdetermination? What has become of the loudprotestations-I am sometimes inclined to say cant-about the
dignity of the human being, the fatherhood of God and
the brotherhood of man? I pose these questions. We
shall not rest until they are answered and answered
satisfactorily. We share with Lincoln, that great
liberator, the conviction that the world cannot survive
half free and half slave.

congratulations of the Government of Venezuela upon
your election to the supreme office of the Assembly.
But I cannot mount this rostrum, Mr. President,
without offering you my warmest personnel congratUlations. A friendship of nearly ten year.s r standing
enables me to affirm that your great skill as an international statesman and your outstanding independence
of character will, I have no doubt,. make of you a great
President.

186. As we in Guyana see it, and here we claim no

192. I also wish to extend my cordial greetings to
the illustrious outgoing President, Mr. Fanfani.

originality, there is yet another threat to international
stability and therefore peace. I refer to the imbalance
between the rich and poor countries. It is accepted
that, in general, the gap between the under-developed
nations and the developed ones widens year by year
even though many of the former produce valuable
basic and strategic materials on which others grO\l'
fat,and rich.
187. In this the United Nations Development Decade
there has been a decline rather than increase in
real terms in the level of economic aid and flow of
resources to the developing from the developed
countries. The situation is grave and most urgent
consideration by this Organization is indicated. This
is not a question of charity, it is one of stability and
global prosperity.

193. Venezuela has confirmed with its affirmative
vote the support it previously expressed for the
admission of the new State of Guyana to this Organization. My country nevertheless wishes to state
formally that this affirmative vote in no way implies
a renunciation of its rights of sovereignty over the
territory situated on the left bank of the Essequibo
River, nor does Venezuela in any way recognize the
so-called Arbitral Award of Paris of 1899 concerning
.the boundary between Venezuela and British Guiana.
A similar reservation was expressed by Venezuela
in the Security Council on 21 June, as well as at the
time of recognizing the new State.
194. We repeat that Venezuela merely wishes to

United Nations, it has faith in this Organization, of
which it hopes to be an active rather than a sleeping
Member. It also hopes for and will work towards the
United Nations being truly representative of all the
peoples of the world, regardless of ideological and
mythological differences.

reaffirm its national rights, and in no way desires
to initiate a discussion on the substance of the dispute
in this august Assembly. It is a matter that should be
dealt with only-as is actually the case-through the
channels established in the Geneva Agre'lment of
17 February 1966. We are pleased to report that the
Mixed Comm:'ssion set up under that Agreement
has just concluded its second meeting at Georgetown.

189. Again, Mr. President, thank you and your

195. The people and Government of Venezuela wel-

colleagues for admitting and welcoming Guyana. May
I hope that, as we trudge along the difficult road and
wander through the tortuous paths, we can rely on the
helping hands of our older colleagues and the advice
of our more experienced friends, and in our turn
contribute from our experience to the deliberations
of this Assembly.

come the accession of Guyana to independence and
hope that the close ties of friendship and co-operation
established between the two neighbours from the outset
will grow stronger as time goes by.

188. My Government subscribes to the Charter of the

190. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Venezuela, who wishes to speak in explanation of his
vote.
191. Mr. ZULOAGA (Venezuela) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, during the general debate,
the Venezuelan Minister for Foreign Affairs will
express to you, at the highest government level, the

Litho In U.N.

196. We also wish to welcome the members of the
Government of Guyana represented here, as well as
our distinguished colleagues who have come to
represent the new State in the United Nations.

The PRESIDENT: Before we adjourn, I should
like to announce that the flag of Guyana will be raised
during the course of a ceremony to be held at 3.15 p.m,
tomorrow in front of the delegates' entrance.
197.

The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

nOOl-December 1967-2,2()()
