UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/44
11 August 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3416th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 August 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR)", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the letter of the
Secretary-General dated 26 July 1994 (S/1994/888) and by further reports
from the Secretariat of continuing difficulties that have arisen for the
operations of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Croatia
owing to blockades of UNPROFOR traffic into the United Nations Protected
Areas (UNPAs) by demonstrators. The Council considers that such blockades
by Croatian citizens as well as related impediments imposed by the Croatian
authorities on the freedom of movement of UNPROFOR are inadmissible. In
that context, the Council deplores the remaining blockades of access roads
to the United Nations Protected Areas in the Republic of Croatia.
"The Council is encouraged by the signing on 4 August of an agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Croatia and UNPROFOR regarding
the procedures regulating UNPROFOR traffic to and from the UNPAs and calls
on the Croatian authorities to faithfully implement its provisions. The
Council welcomes the progress that has been made since the signature of
this agreement to open eleven of nineteen crossing points. However, the
Council reminds the Government of the Republic of Croatia of its obligation
to facilitate UNPROFOR’s unimpeded access to all 19 crossing points agreed
upon in the cease-fire agreement of 29 March 1994.
"In this context, the Council is also concerned about the continuing
unacceptable practice of the Government of the Republic of Croatia of
levying tolls and other taxes on the Force for the use of roads and
airports in the Republic of Croatia. The Council strongly disapproves of
any action that would both impede the functioning of UNPROFOR and add to
the already high cost of the peace-keeping operation in Croatia. Recalling
operative paragraph 7 of its resolution 908 (1994), the Council again urges
the Government of the Republic of Croatia to conclude without further delay
a Status of Forces Agreement with UNPROFOR and to resolve the above and any
other issues in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.

94-32582 (E)

110894

/...

S/PRST/1994/44
English
Page 2

"The Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia and the right of all
displaced persons and refugees to return to their homes. The Council
expects the Government of the Republic of Croatia to cooperate fully with
the efforts of UNPROFOR."

-----
