S/PV.8568

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8568th meeting

Friday, 28 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Fiallo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Goebel
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Repkin
Ms. Mogashoa
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2019/454)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-19981 (E)
*1919981*

S/PV.8568

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2019/454)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/532, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/454, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft resolution
received 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has
been adopted unanimously as resolution 2480 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) within its current scope for one
year. I welcome the presence of the Ambassador of
Mali among us here today.
The resolution we just adopted sends a firm
message with regard to urgently needed progress
2/12

28/06/2019

in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. It defines five concrete
and achievable measures that the Council would like
to see fully implemented in a year’s time, and the
implementation of which will be subject to an initial
mid-term assessment by the Secretary-General in six
months’ time. The consequences of not meeting those
targets are also clearly established. Those who block
the implementation of the agreement will be faced
with sanctions. In that respect, we have just initiated a
designation procedure with respect to five individuals
responsible for obstructions, following the failure to
achieve the priority objectives defined by the Council
in June 2018 in the previous MINUSMA mandate. The
Council has also established that any person placed on
the Mali sanctions list will in practice not enjoy any
support from MINUSMA or the United Nations.
Resolution 2480 (2019) also draws conclusions
from the deteriorating situation in the centre of Mali.
It calls upon the Malian authorities to immediately
develop a comprehensive strategy to bring an end to the
violence and ensure the return of the State. It encourages
MINUSMA to strengthen its work in the region, which
is now elevated to the level of a second strategic priority.
Without questioning the primacy of support for the
implementation of the peace agreement in the north, the
resolution requests the Mission to ensure that sufficient
resources are devoted to its mandate in the centre,
building upon the efforts that have already been made
in recent months, notably through the development of
an emergency plan for the Mopti region and the creation
of a dedicated sector. The resolution also requests the
Secretary-General to conduct an assessment in six
months’ time of the Mission’s capacity to implement
all of the tasks that are assigned to it by the resolution
in its current configuration and to potentially make
recommendations in that respect.
Resolution 2480 (2019) also outlines a clear view of
MINUSMA’s future by establishing that its withdrawal
strategy is based on the redeployment of the Malian
armed forces across the territory of Mali as well as the
full operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), without in any way
jeopardizing the concerted efforts that have been made
thus far to stabilize Mali and the Sahel. In that respect,
the Security Council continues to promote partnerships
among the various security presences deployed on the
ground in keeping with each of their mandates. Notably
in that respect, it extends the geographic perimeter of
19-19981

28/06/2019

The situation in Mali

MINUSMA’s support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in
the framework of the technical agreement, provided
that any delivery beyond Mali’s borders is carried out
by a third party and that there is a commitment from
the Council to reconsider the provision put in place by
resolution 2391 (2017) in a year’s time. It is for all actors
involved to demonstrate that this is useful in the months
ahead. The Council also calls on the European Union
and the United Nations to strengthen the coordination
of their actions in support of security sector reform
and the restoration of the presence of the State in the
centre, including, if necessary, through the signing of
new technical agreements between MINUSMA and the
European missions.
All the security presences deployed on the ground
are, lastly, encouraged to ensure that their actions are
complementary, through regular consultation within
the national coordination body. In accordance with the
recommendations made in the context of Action for
Peacekeeping, resolution 2480 (2019) gives MINUSMA
a clear, practical and concise mandate. It supports the
implementation of the adaptation options presented in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/454)
that will allow it to continue to increase the Mission’s
efficiency and effectiveness. It welcomes the measures
taken in recent months to strengthen MINUSMA’s
posture and encourages the continuation of efforts to
strengthen the security of its personnel.
I would like to reiterate our unstinting support
for the irreplaceable role played by the International
Criminal Court for peace and security in Mali.
Resolution 2480 (2019) recalls the importance of Mali
respecting its obligations under the Rome Statute.
That is an absolutely essential step on the path
towards lasting stability. I would also like to recall our
conviction that in the Sahel more than anywhere else it
is important that the actions of the United Nations and
local Governments fully take into account the impact
of climate change and other environmental factors on
security. Resolution 2480 (2019) recalls that, but we
would like to continue to work with our partners with
a view to going even further to develop the climate and
security agenda within the Council.
I will conclude my statement by warmly thanking
all the members of the Security Council for the open and
constructive spirit that they demonstrated throughout
this negotiation. The unity that is traditionally
characteristic of the Council on the Malian dossier is
a major advantage, allowing us to continue to play a

S/PV. 8568

decisive role in the promotion of peace and security in
the country. We must do everything we can to maintain
that and to derive the maximum benefit possible from
it. That is the rationale on which the resolution we
adopted today is predicated.
As this is the last time I will participate in a Security
Council meeting, I would like to express my gratitude
to each Council member for the partnership and the
friendship that we have established and developed over
the past few years. Allow me also to very sincerely
congratulate my team sitting behind me, who are a
credit to public service and do France great honour.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Following the adoption of resolution 2480 (2019),
which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for a period of 12 months until June
2020, I would like to make this statement explaining the
vote of the African members of the Security Council,
namely, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and Côte
d’Ivoire.
We voted in favour of renewing the mandate of
MINUSMA in the interests of peace, security and
stability in Mali and the Sahel region. We are of the view
that the continued presence of MINUSMA in Mali is
essential to the stability of the country and of the entire
Sahel region. The situation in Mali remains worrisome,
and the security environment is fragile. Persistent
asymmetrical threats are a source of serious concern
and exacerbate the current humanitarian challenges.
In his most recent briefing to the Council,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali (see S/PV.8547), told
us of the achievements of the Government of Mali in
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We recognize that the ongoing
political process, carried out by the new Government of
national unity, is a step in the right direction and that
the Security Council should make every effort to fully
support this process, including through holding an
inclusive political dialogue to address issues related to
the revision of the Constitution and the reaffirmation of
the commitment of the signatory parties to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We are also aware that the Malian parties must do
more to make progress in other important areas of
the peace agreement, including the redeployment of
the reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and

19-199813/12

S/PV.8568

The situation in Mali

security forces, decentralization and the establishment
of the northern economic development zone. With the
renewal of this mandate, we encourage the Malian
authorities to redouble their efforts, with the support of
MINUSMA, to fully implement the peace agreement,
which is essential for the realization of its political,
economic and development vision and is in the best
interests of the Malian people.
It is disturbing to note that questions concerning
the MINUSMA transition and withdrawal strategy
have already been raised even though the situation in
Mali is still unstable. We believe that discussions on the
transitions and mandates of peacekeeping operations
must be based on a factual and thorough assessment
of political and security conditions on the ground.
Moreover, such discussions should be considered only
when the circumstances on the ground have improved
substantially. We have also reiterated that we are in
favour of MINUSMA providing support to the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We welcome
the fact that the issue continues to remain on the
Security Council’s agenda.
In principle, we believe that sanctions can be
adopted as useful instruments to constructively
contribute to a political process, as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations. We are concerned
about an approach whereby sanctions might be used
and could have unintended consequences on political
processes. We therefore wish to draw the attention of
Council members to the need for due process of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, and we stress
the importance of leaving sufficient time for Council
members to deliberate on the issues before them.
In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa
and Côte d’Ivoire encourage all Malian stakeholders,
especially women, to participate fully and inclusively
in the political process to put an end to the crisis in
Mali. We remain firmly convinced of the need for an
inclusive approach and strong national ownership so
that the political process can fulfil its potential and
bring about the dividends of lasting peace, security and
stability for the brotherly people of Mali.
As Ambassador François Delattre is preparing
to leave his position as Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations, I wish to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Permanent Representatives of the three
African members of the Council, to a highly skilled
4/12

28/06/2019

diplomat and talented negotiator. Throughout some
of the Council’s most sensitive moments, he has been
able to bring about a sense of compromise in order to
find consensus-based solutions to the often-complex
challenges we face. We wish him the very best in his
new role and hope that our paths will cross again, in
other forums, as we continue working together towards
our common goal of peace, security and development
throughout the world.
Mr. Fiallo (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, we wish to congratulate France
for the excellent work and efforts made in drafting and
seeking points of convergence among Member States
in order to reach the consensus that led us to adopt
resolution 2480 (2019) today.
The Dominican Republic voted in favour of this
resolution because we are aware of the worrisome
security situation prevailing in Mali. It is essential
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continue
supporting the people of Mali in the consolidation of
political gains made through the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We
understand that this resolution establishes a satisfactory
balance between the challenges existing in the country,
especially in the centre and north. In order to address
those challenges, the Malian parties, MINUSMA
and other international actors must advance the
implementation of clearly defined concrete measures.
We have witnessed a reduction in the representation
of women in institutions that support the implementation
of the agreement in Mali. Despite the balance struck
in this resolution and certain paragraphs devoted to
the issue of women, we would have preferred to retain
some references to ensuring the equal and meaningful
participation of women, as established in resolution
2423 (2018).
Likewise, we regret that it was not possible to
incorporate the undeniable negative impact of climate
change on the economic and social stability of Mali
in the operative part of the resolution. We consider
this a missed opportunity to pay particular attention
to one of the main challenges that Mali faces in the
scope of its development and sustainable peace. We are
convinced that this one-year renewal of the MINUSMA
mandate creates a window of opportunity for the full
implementation of the agreement and is a step in the
19-19981

28/06/2019

The situation in Mali

right direction to achieve the long-sought stability and
peace in Mali.
Finally, we cannot miss this opportunity to formally
bid farewell to the Permanent Representative of France.
We recognize the valuable work he has done and
appreciate his undeniable commitment and dedication.
We thank him for his inspiring service.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is very nice to see
you, Mr. President, presiding over today’s meeting,
and I thank our French colleagues for their work on
resolution 2480 (2019). I must also bid Ambassador
Delattre farewell and thank him for his leadership in
the Security Council. I am grateful for his friendship to
me personally, as well as for the friendship between our
Missions and our countries, which I know will remain
strong in all circumstances.
The Council has heard appalling accounts of
intercommunal violence in central Mali in recent
months, including the massacre of 160 people during
the Council’s visit to Mali in March. Urgent action to
tackle the root causes of violence in central Mali is
needed to save lives and reduce human suffering. It is
also important with respect to wider regional stability.
The mandate agreed today will crucially allow
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to support
a comprehensive strategy to stabilize central Mali but,
while MINUSMA has a role to play, any efforts in
central Mali must be Malian-owned, politically led and
genuinely inclusive, including through the participation
of women and civil society actors.
It is right that the primary strategic objective of
MINUSMA remains focused on support for the peace
agreement. It has been six years since the Council
adopted resolution 2100 (2013), which established
MINUSMA, four years since the parties signed the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
over a year since the parties committed to a road map
for the implementation of priority actions.
Yet the key political actors are still failing to
deliver their commitments to their people, while brave
peacekeepers and innocent Malian civilians continue to
lose their lives. Once again, we urge all the parties to
redouble their efforts to meet the benchmarks set out in
this resolution. All Malians deserve to live their lives
free of fear and insecurity and to reap the dividends of
a lasting peace.

S/PV. 8568

Ms. Goebel (Germany): Germany welcomes the
adoption of the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for another year. I would
like to highlight four aspects of resolution 2480 (2019)
that are particularly important to us.
First, Germany welcomes that the primary
strategic priority for MINUSMA remains support to
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
Secondly, we support the fact that MINUSMA now
has a clear set of tasks in order to support the Malian
Government in confronting the crisis in the centre
of Mali.
Thirdly, we welcome the fact that the need for
operational support from MINUSMA to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel has been recognized.
Fourthly, we were very clear throughout
negotiations that the adverse effects of climate change
on the stability and security of Mali needed to be
explicitly referenced in the resolution. Those are key
challenges that the international community needs to
address collectively and urgently.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the French
delegation for its leadership in the negotiations. On
behalf of Germany, I would like to thank Ambassador
Delattre for the excellent cooperation between our
two countries, exemplified by our dual presidency
throughout March and April, and wish him all the best.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium welcomes the adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and better reflects the
two main challenges to stability in Mali, that is, the
slow implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the situation in the centre
of the country.
Belgium attaches great importance to MINUSMA,
as demonstrated in particular by the fact that MINUSMA
remains the principal commitment of the Belgian army
across all United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Belgium welcomes the fact that the resolution states
that the responsibility for stabilizing the country rests
primarily with the Malians themselves.

19-199815/12

S/PV.8568

The situation in Mali

Belgium also thanks all members for responding to
the appeal of the member countries of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) for facilitating MINUSMA
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. An evaluation of
that mechanism in 12 months’ time is also something to
be welcomed.
Nevertheless, Belgium regrets the fact that the
resolution does not sufficiently recognize the negative
impact of climate change on the security situation.
The evidence of climate change as a multiplier of risks
in Mali and the Sahel is clear. I call upon Mali and
the United Nations to take climate change and other
environmental changes into account in their activities,
programmes and strategies.
Lastly, Belgium congratulates France for its
willingness to shorten and clarify the mandate.
Allow me to say a few words of thanks to
Ambassador Delattre. I must say that I have been very
impressed by his team’s invasion of the Council’s seats.
The presence of the French team is not only tribute
to the exceptional diplomat that Mr. Delattre is, but
it also demonstrates the excellent way in which he
has represented his country for the past five years in
New York. I would like to thank him personally and
on behalf of my Mission and my country and from the
bottom of my heart for his commitment, friendship
and collaboration. He has inspired all of us, not only
with his critical mindset, eloquence and, even, I would
say, his elegance, but also through his humane and
fair approach. I wish him every success in heading the
Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs at the Quai
d’Orsay. I ask him to come back to see us very soon
during the high-level week. I thank him very much.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation would like to congratulate the
Kuwaiti presidency for its excellent and participatory
work in guiding the Security Council’s efforts during
this particularly busy month, which is reflected in the
number of resolutions that have been adopted.
Peru voted in favour of resolution 2480 (2019), as
we believe it is vital to continue to support Mali in its
efforts to assert the State authority, protect civilians
and achieve peace and national reconciliation.
We would like to thank France for its efforts
undertaken during the discussions on the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
6/12

28/06/2019

in order to achieve consensus among all members of
the Council, bearing in mind the importance of this
peacekeeping operation. We welcome in particular
the fact that this resolution establishes clear and
specific criteria for the effective implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
which we reiterate must remain the priority for the
people and Government of Mali. We also underscore
that the resolution includes a more appropriate mandate
for MINUSMA, which can help it address the dramatic
situation in the centre of the country. Once again, we
stress the importance of Council members continuing
to work together to provide MINUSMA with the
necessary tools, because its presence on the ground is
essential for achieving stability in Mali.
Before concluding, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to convey to Ambassador
François Delattre, Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations, our best wishes for success in the
high-level functions that have been entrusted to him by
his Government, which he will soon take up. We are
sure that his outstanding contribution in the new role
that he is taking will be as valuable as it has been in the
Council, during which time he has worked effectively
to address the issues on the Council’s agenda, such as
the maintenance of international peace and security.
I warmly congratulate him and extend to him the
friendship of the Peruvian delegation.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank Security Council members for
a collaborative negotiation and express our gratitude for
France’s extraordinary efforts in developing resolution
2480 (2019) and conducting the negotiations. I also
want to join our colleagues today in bidding farewell
and expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Delattre.
He has served France honourably both in New York and
in Washington, D.C., and his service to this organ has
been instrumental in maintaining international peace
and security, as well as promoting liberty and equality
around the world. We will truly miss him, and we wish
him all the best.
With another year of insufficient progress in
implementing the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, agreed in Algiers, and worsening
insecurity in central Mali, we cannot accept the status
quo for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We needed
to create the right mandate to respond to the escalating
19-19981

28/06/2019

The situation in Mali

violence and hold the signatory parties accountable.
Resolution 2480 (2019) will help accomplish both.
First, we have made the significant decision to
create a second strategic priority for MINUSMA
focused on central Mali, the most dangerous region
in the country. The number of attacks, human rights
violations and abuses and civilians killed has reached a
level not seen in Mali since 2012. This second strategic
priority shows Malians that MINUSMA, with more
than 16,000 personnel and a budget over $1 billion a
year, will prioritize support to the Malian Government’s
efforts to improve civilian protection and respect for
human rights by re-establishing a constructive and
rights-respecting State presence in the centre. The
Government has the primary responsibility for ensuring
security, opportunity and access to services there, and
it needs to act accordingly.
Secondly, this mandate again makes clear that the
Mission’s key focus is to support implementation of the
peace agreement, as it has done for the past four years.
The United States has consistently noted our deep
disappointment with the parties’ lack of progress on
that agreement. This resolution includes new specific
and measurable benchmarks focused primarily on the
political and security pillars of the agreement. We
expect the parties to make significant progress on those
benchmarks, and to do so soon.
To reinforce that expectation, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), concerning Mali, is on the verge of designating
more individuals under the regime of resolution 2374
(2017). The timely message of these designations
makes clear to all the parties that the Council will hold
accountable those who block progress on the agreement
to clear the way for leaders who will work together to
achieve the agreement’s goals: power-sharing through
institutional reform, redistricting and more elections.
This is no ordinary mandate renewal, because
MINUSMA is no ordinary peacekeeping Mission.
Since its creation, in 2013, MINUSMA has operated
in a challenging, dangerous and asymmetrical
environment. It is a peacekeeping Mission in a counterterrorism environment. MINUSMA peacekeepers are
consistently and purposefully attacked by unrelenting
violent extremists who are mobile, smart and organized.
Mindful of those unique and deadly challenges,
this mandate more adequately focuses its attention on
MINUSMA’s troops, which make up more than 80 per

S/PV. 8568

cent of the Mission and the main share of its budget. It
calls for improved troop and police performance, more
control and flexibility for the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Force Commander and
better predeployment training for incoming troopcontributing countries.
Significantly, it asks for a level of detailed
reporting that we have not received so far. Resolution
2480 (2019) mandates bi-annual assessments by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
in coordination with the Force Commander, on
performance, operations, rotations and the Mission’s
work with the other security actors in Mali. It also calls
for the Mission to work with those other security actors
to develop a transition plan to coordinate the eventual
transfer of security responsibilities. We very much look
forward to hearing about those plans. The United States
intends to ask both the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Force Commander to present
them in person next year.
We note that the resolution contains references to
the International Criminal Court (ICC), and refer to the
United States policy on the International Criminal Court
as announced by the United States on 10 September
2018. In particular, the United States reiterates its
continuing and long-standing principled objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute, such as
the United States and Israel, absent a Security Council
referral or the consent of such a State. Mali, as a State
party to the Rome Statute, has consented to the ICC’s
jurisdiction and, as noted in the resolution, has referred
the situation to the ICC.
The United States remains a leader in the fight
to end impunity and continues to support justice and
accountability for international crimes, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We
respect the decision of those nations that have chosen
to join the ICC, and in turn we expect that our decision
not to join and not to place our citizens under the ICC’s
jurisdiction will also be respected.
Finally, the Council expressed support in the
resolution for the delivery of life support consumables
to the contingents of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) operating outside
Mali through the reimbursable support mechanism
originally detailed in resolution 2391 (2017) and
later in the United Nations, European Union and G-5

19-199817/12

S/PV.8568

The situation in Mali

Sahel’s technical agreement. We have seen minimal
use of this option inside Mali itself and look forward
to the Secretary-General’s assessment next June as we
consider whether to continue this mechanism.
On that note, the threat of terrorism is a reality
across all of West Africa, not just the Sahel, and the
Council should review the problem comprehensively. It
is time to transform the stand-alone report and briefing
on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
into a broader discussion of terrorism challenges across
West Africa, including the devastating conflict with
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West Africa
Province, and the increased threat to littoral countries.
This broader discussion should draw attention to the
conflict’s impact on millions of people across the
region and the efforts of all regional forces to combat
terrorism. We have not had a dedicated meeting on the
Lake Chad basin region since April 2018 or a meeting
dedicated to security and humanitarian issues there
since September 2017. It is high time we merged those
subjects into one, rather than focusing exclusively on
the Group of Five for the Sahel.
In conclusion, we salute the soldiers, civilians and
contractors in MINUSMA who risk their lives for a
brighter and more secure future for the people of Mali.
The United States honours the sacrifices that they and
their families make each day, and most of all we hope
that the Malian parties see in this resolution a clear,
collective message that they must take urgent steps
to implement the Peace Agreement in order to create
stability in Mali and an opportunity for its people.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): I would like at the outset
to thank Ambassador Delattre for his professionalism,
calm and leadership. He has served not only his country,
France, but also the European Union and the whole
United Nations family in an exemplary manner. I also
want to express our deep appreciation for the excellent
cooperation we have had with both François and his
team, and I hope that in his new assignment back in
Paris he will further contribute to strengthening the
traditionally strong links between Poland and France.
I wish him every success, and I share the sentiments
expressed in that we hope to see him back very soon in
New York in September.
Let me take this opportunity to thank France for
its efforts in coordinating the negotiations. Poland
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which is an important one. Today the Security
8/12

28/06/2019

Council has sent a message of unity in support of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
stability in Mali. We voted for the resolution in order to
express our full support for the efforts of MINUSMA,
whose role in promoting stability and reconciliation in
the country remains essential, despite the very complex
security situation on the ground. The presence of the
Mission in northern Mali is essential to preserving
the gains that have been made since the signing of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
At the same time, we believe it is necessary to
strengthen MINUSMA’s efforts in central Mali so as
to facilitate the restoration of State institutions. Poland
believes that support for the implementation of the
Agreement remains MINUSMA’s core priority. There
can be no doubt that to be successful, its implementation
requires full inclusivity, especially for women, as well
as a strong commitment on the part of all relevant
stakeholders. Those who are trying to obstruct this
process must face the consequences.
In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, as well as to the personnel
of MINUSMA, the United Nations country team and
the troop- and police-contributing countries for their
commitment in extreme and challenging conditions.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to join others in echoing the
expressions of gratitude that we have heard today and
conveying our best wishes to our colleague François
Delattre, the Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, with whom we have had the honour
of working for the past five years. We wish him every
success in his new, high-level post.
The Russian delegation supported the adoption
of resolution 2480 (2019), which extends the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We
support the peacekeepers deployed in the country,
who are making a major contribution to ensuring
stability and security in Mali. Given the discussions
we have had and the provisions in the document we
have just adopted, we want to once again underscore
that the Mission’s main priority continues to be helping
Malians to implement the 2015 Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali and restoring a full State
and military presence throughout the country. These
19-19981

28/06/2019

The situation in Mali

measures are fundamental prerequisites for normalizing
the situation in the country and preventing inter-ethnic
violence in central Mali.
We believe that a Security Council tool such as
sanctions should be used with a great deal of caution
and consideration and only in the most extreme cases.
In our view, the existing restrictive measures have
to prove their effectiveness and be subject to regular
independent review by the Panel of Experts. We also
hope that Mali’s law-enforcement agencies will take
a more active role in curbing the illegal activities of
both sanctioned individuals and other spoilers of the
political process.
We would like to recall that general questions of
peacekeeping that have an impact on all United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be discussed in the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, with the participation of troop-contributing
countries. Such issues also include the Secretariat’s as
yet unfinished strategy for improving peacekeeping
performance, which is mentioned in the resolution. We
are puzzled by the attempts to actively integrate it into
every mission’s mandate even before its content has
been presented to Member States. Circumventing the
Special Committee is unacceptable. Unfortunately, our
arguments in this regard, which other delegations also
raised during the process of the negotiations on today’s
resolution, were only partially taken into account. We
believe that a useful tool for correcting the so-called
penholders’ misuse of their role as curators of dossiers
would be a Security Council presidential note aimed at
the fair distribution of those responsibilities among all
the States members of the Council.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would first like to
take this opportunity, on behalf of my Permanent
Representative and the whole Indonesian delegation,
to bid farewell to Ambassador François Delattre and
extend all best wishes to him. He has always contributed
very constructively to the work of the Council, and that
has been instrumental in promoting its unity. We very
much admire his exemplary diplomatic skill. We wish
him the very best, bon voyage and au revoir.
Indonesia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2480
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for one year. We thank France for
its efforts as penholder and all delegations for their

S/PV. 8568

constructive spirit in crafting a balanced, consensusbased resolution.
Indonesia concurs with the view expressed in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/454) that
MINUSMA’s presence in Mali remains crucial. In this
regard, the renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate, which
includes a prioritization of its tasks, coordination with
other security presences in Mali and the Sahel region,
and division of labour with the United Nations country
team, will enable further progress and prevent any
deterioration of the situation in Mali. Granted, there
are many areas in which further progress is necessary.
Today we adopted a resolution that contains a set of
priority measures, on which we hope to see progress
in the coming months. As we said during the briefing
on MINUSMA earlier this month (see S/PV.8547),
all parties in Mali have to muster the political will to
accelerate the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Allow me to reiterate our support and appreciation
to MINUSMA and all its personnel in delivering its
mandate as well as possible under increasingly difficult
circumstances. We hope that the resolution that we
have just adopted will contribute to the achievement of
lasting peace, stability and prosperity in Mali.
Before I conclude, let me reiterate our sincere
thanks and appreciation to the Kuwaiti delegation for a
very effective and productive presidency.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to begin by congratulating Kuwait on its
successful stewardship of the Security Council’s work
as rotating President for June. Thanks to the efforts
of Ambassador Alotaibi and everyone in the Kuwaiti
Mission, this month the Council’s work has been
orderly and highly efficient, which China appreciates.
On behalf of Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu, I also extend our
sincere greetings to Ambassador Delattre and thank
him for his contributions to the Council’s work. I also
wish him every success.
As we speak, the peace process in Mali is
at a critical juncture, facing security, economic,
development and other challenges, and requires the
active assistance of the international community. The
smooth renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), with the current strength
unchanged, can facilitate the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations and the international community to

19-199819/12

S/PV.8568

The situation in Mali

continue to help the Malian Government and people
in advancing the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and in bolstering
its security capacities. We are keen that MINUSMA
should fully implement the Council’s mandates and
strengthen measures to increase the protection of the
safety and security of its peacekeepers.
As the situation in Mali is closely linked to that
of its neighbours and the Sahel region, we hope that
MINUSMA can continue to support the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel in accordance with the
Council’s resolutions.
China is ready to join the other Council members
and the international community in contributing to
peace, stability and development in Mali.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.
We would like to begin by thanking the French
delegation, which, as penholder, put forward resolution
2480 (2019). We also thank the French delegation for
its collaboration with all Council members during the
deliberations on this resolution.
We voted in favour of today’s resolution because we
are fully convinced that the situation in Mali requires
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to be a
peacekeeping mission with a robust and comprehensive
mandate. We underscore the importance of renewing
the Mission’s mandate for another year with a view to
ensuring continuity in its work, in particular given the
many political challenges and security threats in the
north and centre of Mali.
We believe that the tasks set out in the resolution
presented by France today address the situation in the
best way. The Mission is called upon to implement the
objectives in accordance with the priorities entrusted to
it by the Security Council. That would undoubtedly lead
to making progress on the political track with a view
to addressing the situation in Mali. We also welcome
the expansion of the Mission’s mandate in the centre
of Mali, a region that recently faced many difficult
security challenges.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
10/12

28/06/2019

Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to take the floor on the occasion
of the adoption of resolution 2480 (2019), which is
extremely important for Mali. I warmly congratulate
the delegation of Kuwait, under the excellent leadership
of Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, on a successful
presidency of the Security Council.
Mali welcomes the unanimous adoption of this
extremely important resolution renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for an
additional year. I would like to commend the leadership
of the French delegation, penholder of the resolution, as
well as every member of the Council for their positive
contributions and their spirit of compromise, which led
to this result.
I would like to pay special tribute to Ambassador
François Delattre for his kindness, his leadership, his
heightened ability to listen and his willingness, as well
as his constant support for Mali and the countries of
the Sahel. He chose to devote his last appearance in
the Council to Mali. Mali is grateful for that, and I am
particularly so. We are very honoured to see him here
in the Council, and I wish him a good return to Paris
and every success at the Quai d’Orsay. He leaves behind
in New York only friends. I reiterate my invitation:
the Malian residence is always large enough to host a
true friend.
Mali understands the significance of the important
resolution that the Council has just unanimously
adopted. I know that, in addition to renewing the
mandate of MINUSMA for an additional year, the
Council also reaffirms the support and commitment of
the international community to Mali and its people in
order to help us to restore lasting peace and stability,
with full respect for the sovereignty, national unity,
territorial integrity and unitary and secular character
of the State of Mali.
Before going any further, I would therefore like
to convey to the members of the Council the warm
thanks of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
President of the Republic of Mali, the Government
and all the people of Mali for the extremely important
resolution that they have just adopted. I would like
to express my gratitude to our Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and to all the men and women of
MINUSMA, who, I know, work every day in extremely
19-19981

28/06/2019

The situation in Mali

difficult conditions to help the Malian people to bring
about peace.
I have taken due note of all the comments and
high expectations that Council members have just
expressed, and I promise to faithfully bring them to
the attention of my authorities. For our part, I would
first like to assure the Council that the Government,
under the authority and leadership of the President
of the Republic, will tirelessly continue to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process, in an inclusive
manner, in particular with the active participation
of the signatory movements. The Malian parties are
already working on a new road map, which includes
realistic and achievable tasks and timelines that are in
line with the benchmarks contained in the resolution
just adopted.
Turning to the situation in central Mali, Foreign
Minister Tiébilé Dramé was here on 12 June
(see S/PV.8547). He informed the Council of the
developments in the situation in Mali and announced
a series of measures taken by the Government for
the long-term settlement of the critical situation in
the central region of Mali, including in particular the
political framework for crisis management in central
Mali, aimed at a holistic response combining the
political and the military and security approaches.
In addition to those measures, the President of the
Republic appointed Dioncounda Traoré, former interim
President of Mali, as the High Representative of the
Centre, with a view towards unifying all measures
taken by the State to achieve a rapid and lasting return
to peace and stability in that part of our country.
In parallel with those measures, as part of the
efforts to find a comprehensive solution to the crisis in
Mali, the process of organizing the inclusive political
dialogue, called for by the Head of State, has entered
its operational phase, with the 26 June appointment
of eminent Malian persons who have been entrusted
with leading the national dialogue and the anticipated
political and institutional reforms to that end.
With regard to resolution 2480 (2019), which the
Council just adopted, the Government of Mali welcomes
the fact that the Security Council first, granted its
request that MINUSMA continue to accord strategic
priority to its mandate in support of the implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali, which emerged from the Algiers process; and,

S/PV. 8568

secondly, MINUSMA’s second strategic priority be
to support Mali and its armed and security forces,
with a view to ensuring the lasting stabilization of the
situation in the central regions of Mali. In that regard,
I welcome the establishment of the dedicated military
sector in central Mali a few days ago. With regard to
regional considerations, I welcome the decision to
extend the benefits of the technical agreement to all
deployment areas of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
The mandate that the Council has just conferred
upon MINUSMA requires the provision of adequate
material, financial and human resources for its
implementation. I know that deliberations are under way
in the Fifth Committee today to mobilize the relevant
resources. I would like to make a political appeal. It is
one thing to confer the mandate upon MINUSMA, and
it is another to provide MINUSMA with the adequate
means to realize it. On behalf of the Government of
Mali, I therefore call for the provision of the resources
needed for MINUSMA to fulfil its mandate. In that
regard, we hope that the report of the SecretaryGeneral expected to be issued in six months’ time will
help to raise the level of resources commensurate with
the mandate and challenges on the ground.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and the
people of Mali, I once again pay tribute to the memory
of all civilian, military, foreign and Malian victims who
fell on the field of honour in Mali.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before adjourning
this Council meeting, as it is the last scheduled one for
June, I would like to express the sincere appreciation of
the delegation of the State of Kuwait to Council members
and its secretariat for all their support to us this month.
It has indeed been a busy and special month, during
which we achieved consensus on several important
issues before us. We could not have done it alone or
without the hard work, unlimited support and positive
contributions of every delegation in the Council, as
well as the representatives of the Secretariat, including
officers of the conference services, interpreters,
translators, verbatim reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency today, we wish every
success to the delegation of Peru in presiding over the
Council for the month of July. In addition, given that
this Council meeting is the last for His Excellency
Ambassador François Delattre, we wish him every
success on behalf of the members of the Council in his

19-1998111/12

S/PV.8568

The situation in Mali

future endeavours. Undoubtedly, we will miss him and
miss his effective participation in the Council’s work.
He has been an outstanding representative of France.
He has also left a meaningful mark on the work of the

12/12

28/06/2019

Council, and we have seen how much he is appreciated
when members of his delegation and Council members
gave him a big round of applause.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

19-19981
