UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3292
14 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY-SECOND MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 14 October 1993, at 6.40 p.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. JESUS
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. OLHAYE
Mr. MERIMEE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. SARDENBERG

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86891 (E)

S/PV.3292
2
The meeting was called to order at 6.40 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION RELATING TO NAGORNY-KARABAKH
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its

consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document S/26582,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of members of the Council
to the following documents:

S/26522, letter dated 1 October 1993

from the Permanent Representative of Italy to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; S/26543, letter
dated 6 October 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Armenia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; and S/26556 and S/26577, letters dated 8 and
13 October 1993, respectively, from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to
the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I hear any

objection, I shall put the draft resolution (S/26582) to the vote
now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

S/PV.3292
3
The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 874 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States):

Through the resolution we

have just adopted, the international community expresses its strong
support for the vital, continuing efforts of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) Minsk Group to help
resolve the conflict in the Nagorny-Karabakh region.

In the spirit

of this resolution and previous Council resolutions, the Minsk
Group has developed a plan that envisages international monitoring
of a phased cease-fire and negotiations among all the parties
through early convocation of the Minsk Conference.
The situation in the region has worsened considerably.

Recent

military actions have increased the possibility that the conflict
could spread.

The tide of refugees has swelled, just at the onset

of winter, to more than 900,000.

The international community and

the parties to the conflict, working together through the Minsk
process, must act to alleviate the human suffering and find a
peaceful solution.
We hope that the parties to the conflict, encouraged by all
those who are working for a negotiated solution, will seize the key
opportunity offered by the Minsk Group’s plan.

To let it pass

would be a tragic mistake.
Mr. LADSOUS (France) (interpretation from French):

My

delegation welcomes today’s adoption by our Council of a resolution
on the situation in Nagorny-Karabakh.

In my Government’s view,

this text, thanks to the Council’s support for a timetable of
urgent steps proposed to the parties by the Chairman of the Minsk
Group, ought to allow for decisive progress towards the settlement
of the conflict.

S/PV.3292
4
(Mr. Ladsous, France)
My delegation also notes that through this resolution our
Council has reaffirmed its support for the process undertaken
within the framework of the CSCE, a process to which France is
particularly committed.
This resolution addresses a clear message to the parties by
asking them to agree to the timetable of urgent measures.

My

delegation hopes that they will grasp its meaning and soon inform
Ambassador Raffaelli of their acceptance of the timetable, an
essential step towards the negotiation which is to open under the
auspices of the Minsk Conference.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian Federation is making concerted efforts to

assist in ending the Nagorny-Karabakh conflict.

On 24 and

25 September in Moscow, on the initiative of the Government of the
Russian Federation, important meetings were held among all the
parties to the Karabakh conflict.

It was agreed to continue direct

contacts and to prepare an agreement on a full and universal
cease-fire and on ending all military action.
The cease-fire, despite isolated incidents, has been observed
since the beginning of September and that is very important.
Azerbaijan and Armenia turned to Russia for assistance in
formalizing the fundamental agreement achieved during the Moscow
meetings on extending the cease-fire in the Nagorny-Karabakh
conflict for one more month.

On 1 October, such a cease-fire was

extended to 5 November.
The Russian Federation attaches great significance to a
complete cease-fire and end to military actions, but the main
attention is on the most reliable machinery for making sure that
fighting does not resume.

The fact that just now it has been

possible to cool down the military activities using a number of
short-term cease-fires is too fragile a thing, and does not ensure

S/PV.3292
5
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
that this necessary calm will last for a longer period.

It is

necessary to reach agreement as soon as possible on a firm
cease-fire.
In light of all the complexities of this problem, we feel that
a constructive joining of efforts by all parties and all
organizations is necessary, primarily those of the CSCE and its
Minsk Group, who stand to gain from a rapid, peaceful solution to
this long drawn out, bloody conflict.
The Russian Federation is carrying out a consistent policy of
harmonizing its own efforts in helping a settlement in the Karabakh
conflict with actions taken by the CSCE Minsk Group.

Moreover,

Russia is focusing its efforts on ensuring a reliable end to
military actions and on establishing genuine guarantees against a
resumption of armed resistance.
Our assumption is that in the concrete steps to settle the
Nagorny-Karabakh conflict, the efforts of the CSCE Minsk Group and
of the Russian Federation can be undertaken in parallel and
mutually complement one another.
constructive joint efforts.

Russia is also open to any other

The problem of Nagorny-Karabakh was

given great attention at the meeting of the heads of State of the
Russian Federation, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia in Moscow on
8 October.
As a follow-up to the Moscow meeting, useful talks took place
in Baku a day or two ago between the President of Azerbaijan,
Mr. Heydar Aliyev, and the personal representative of the President
of Russia, Mr. Anatoly Adamishin, First Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation.

S/PV.3292
6
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
During the discussion of ways to settle the Nagorny-Karabakh
conflict, President Aliyev emphasized Azerbaijan’s desire to make
use of the present opportunity to achieve a breakthrough towards
settling this long-drawn-out conflict.
On 13 October Anatoly Adamishin flew to Yerevan to meet with
the President of the Republic of Armenia, Levon Ter-Petrosian, and
the leader of the Armenians in Nagorny-Karabakh, Rodert Kocherian.
The Russian delegation supported the resolution that we have
just adopted, and we hope that that will promote the rapid
achievement of the goal we all have.

We attach special

significance to the appeal in the resolution that the cease-fire,
which is presently holding, be made a lasting one.
a priority task.

That is indeed

Having solved that problem, we can get down to

taking mutual, urgent measures to reach a full settlement to the
conflict.
We count on the parties’ heeding the appeal of the Security
Council.

The Russian Federation will do everything possible to

bring that about.
The PRESIDENT:

There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m.
