UNITED NATIOivS

S
CORDS
TWENTY-SECOND

th
1377

YEAR

MEETING: 15 NOVEMBER 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1377)
Adoption of the agenda

,...,..,......................

...,.,.....,. ,. ,.., .. ....... ...... ... I

Page

1
1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
Unitkd Arab Republic addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8226)

. . . , . , . . . , , . . , , , . . , . . , , . . . . . , . . . , , . . . . , , . a. . .

1

,,S/PV.1377

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
of $he Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supj?lement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secutity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wedneday, 15 November 1967, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE (Mali).
Preselzt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of’
Sovie; Socialist Republics,- United -Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1377)

I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/8226).
Adoption of the agenda
l%e agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
letter dated 7 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/8226)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1373rd meeting on
9 November and at the 1375th meeting on 13 November, I
propose with the consent of the Council to invite the
representatives of the United Arab Republic, Israel, Jordan
and Syria to take places at the Council table and to
participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mahmoud Riad
(United Arab Republic), Mr. A, Eban (Israel), Mr. A. M.
Rifa’i (Jordan) and Mr. A. Daoudy (Syria) took places at
the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The Council will now resume its consideration of the item before it.
The first speaker on my list is the representative of Syria on
whom I now call.
3. Mr. DAOUDY (Syria): The Security Council reconvenes
today to consider once more the Israel war of aggression of
S-June. against the Arab countries and the tragic consequences of that war, which have still not received an
adequate United Nations solution despite their grave
implications for international peace and security and their
issue in increasing human suffering.

4. While nursing the hope, as a Member State and as one
of the victims of that aggression, that the wrong would be
redressed, right restored and justice re-established, my
country observed regretfully that the Security Council and
later the General Assembly at its fifth emergency special
session, had not succeeded in devising finally the right
course, applying strictly the principles of the Charter-and
this in spite of the fact that the overwhelming majority of
the Member States had denounced the Israel occupation of
Arab territories and endorsed the principle of withdrawal.
5. The Government of the Syrian Arab RepubIic has
instructed my delegation to put on record at this stage of
the deliberations of the Council its basic stand vis-a-vis this
grave situation, with its far-reaching consequences.
6. The Security Council, in its ardent search for peace,
must undoubtedly be guided and inspired by the United
Nations Charter. In this connexion, three fundamental
considerations, on which present and future deliberations
should be based and from which action and conclusions
must necessarily follow, should be made clear: first, that
one of the cornerstones of the Charter is the non-recognition of the fruits of aggression; second, that any solution of
the present crisis which does not recognize that principle is
a negation of the Charter itself; third, that the new
international order envisaged in the Charter and inspired by
the tragic experiences of mankind involved the renunciation
for ever of the use of force for aggressive purposes,
recognition of the illegitimacy of and non-recognition of
any right based on conquest.
7. In our view, these essential principles must be ever
present in the minds of those who are seeking peace and
justice in the Middle East lest, trapped by rhetoric,
sophistry and biased mass media, they tend to facilitate the
consolidation of the fruits of aggression.
8. It follows that none of the draft resolutions submitted
to the Security Council so far is accepted by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic because they subject
withdrawal to conditions. No other draft resolution which
subjected withdrawal to any condition whatsoever would
be accepted by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic. We wish to make this unequivocally clear.
9. The Council is faced with one issue only, with one basic
issue. It is the issue of a well-planned, well-prepared
premeditated war of aggression waged by IsraeI against the
Arab countries. All other elements introduced are artificial,
spurious and misleading. It is the view of my Government,
of the Arab people, that the Security Council and the
United Nations should deal with that war of aggression and
its consequences.

10, Day by day it becomes increasingly clear that that
aggression was precisely calculated and planned in advance
as if by a computer. The numerous statements of highranking Israel spokesmen, quoted on many occasions,
confirm this, if ever confirmation be needed. But let me
quote an illuminating paragraph concerning what transpired
with regard to the total mobilization of Israel forces for the
definite purpose of aggression. This is taken from a book
entitled Six Days in June by Robert J. Donovan and the
staff of the Los Angeles Times,* which was written
especially to glorify the so-called heroic deeds of Israel:

14. But if such defiant statements are not enough, Isr,ael’s
acts give the concrete answer. Has Israel attached any value
to the will of the United Nations, so clearly expressed in
the resohltions of the Security Council calling on Israel to
permit the return of Syrian, Jordanian Bnd Egy@an
displaced persons to their lands? Has it collaborated with,
or has it obstructed, the efforts of the Secretary-General
and the International Red Cross, with a view to facilitating
the return of the Syrians and Jordanians? And have morg
than only a few thousand Jordanians been permitted to go
back to the west bank, while a much greater number have
been forced out?

“Robert C. Toth, Los Angeles Times correspondent in
Israel, was able to circumvent military censorship on the
scope of the Israel mobilization before hostilities. To
keep the extent of the call-up secret, Israel said it had
undertaken ‘partial mobilization’. Censors would pass no
other phrase. Deep in a story on war preparations filed
three days before the fighting began, Toth inserted the
phrase, ‘Israel’s partial mobilization was Ivory-pure.’ The
story cleared. On the foreign desk in Los Angeles, editors
quickly realized Toth was referring to the Ivory soap
slogan-99 and 44/1OOths per cent pure-and rewrote
Toth’s lead paragraph to say that Israel was ‘fully
mobilized’.”

15. As for the two resolutions [2253 (ES-V), Z.754
(ES-V)] adopted almost unanimously by the fifth emer.
gency special session of the General Assembly, calling on
Israel to rescind its unlawful measures for the annexation of
the Jordanian part of Jerusalem, they were blatantly
ignored and the arrogant Israel authorities made no secret
of their plan to annex the city, bulldoze its Arab qua.rtcn
and face the whole international community with a.fuir
accompli.

16. The various statements made by the Israel spokesmen,
whether in the United Nations or elsewhere, point to that
defiant attitude, and the United Nations has by now in ilr
possession a large number of documents and reports
testifying to the contempt with which Israel met the call of
the international community on the status of Jerusalem.
Not only did Israel refuse to allow the new refugees, victims
of the Israel aggression, to go back to their homes: the
Israel authorities embarked upon a systematic and well*
planned policy of looting of the property of I.ho~
absentees.
17. The Syrian delegation has on various occasions drawn
the attention of the Security Council to what the Israelis
were doing in the Syrian occupied territory, and the
international press has expressed the shock felt by inter.
national Christian public opinion at the fact that the divine
treasures of the Holy Places in the occupied areas have also
been looted. A very recent example was referred to a few
days ago in press reports, showing how the Dead SeaScrolls
which had been in the possession of private Arab citizens
on the occupied west bank, had been confiscated, without
any compensation by the Israel authorities.

11. Thus any doubt which may still be entertained by
anyone regarding the identity of the real aggressor is
removed, even by sourcessympathetic to the Israel point of
view.
12. Before such irrefutable proof of Israel guilt it is
difficult to understand why there should be such a wide gap
between what the United Nations ought to do, by virtue of
its very Charter, and what it has actually done or been
prevented from doing. We may be asked “Why, in the
circumstances, are you resorting once again to the United
Nations and to its highest organ, the Security Council, to
state your position? ” We do so because we still believe that
the United Nations is the instrument for the achievement
and maintenance of international peace. We still believe it is
the place to which small nations turn, seeking redress of
their grievances. We would like to believe that all the States
represented in the Security Council were fully conscious of
the responsibilities laid upon them and of the expectations
that the community of nations rightly entertains as to the
faithful discharge of their duties by those selected representative Members.

18. To crown all of those acts of lawlessness,Mr. EX~kol
only a few days ago unmasked Israel’s real inteotionr.
Greater Israel is now his goal. Annexation of occupied
territories and their settlement by immigrants from all over
the world, to the detriment of the rightful inhabitant!;,--just
as Israel did before with the Palestinian people-are now for
him, United Nations or no United Nations, matters of
course.

13. That is how we look to the Security Council, despite
some bitter experiences, but that cannot lead us to say
what the representative of Israel said the other day during a
recess of a recent meeting, when, according to the The New
York Times of 10 November, he cynically commented to
the press that the Council wasa “kangaroo court”. Indeed,
the Foreign Minister of Israel himself preceded his own
representative in showing scorn for and disregard of the
United Nations when he stated publicly on 16 June: “if the
General Assembly were to vote by 121 to 1 in favour of
Israel returning to the armistice lines tomorrow, Israel
would refuse to comply with that decision.”

19. Is that an isolated bit of policy? It is far from being
that. According to The New York Timesof 4 Novemk an
example of how far-reaching and deeply penetrating are its
tentacles is contained in the observation of Dr. NortQn
Mezvinsky, at the American Council for Judaism on 3
November, that:
“900 Israel teachers in American Jewish schoo1s weti
‘being directed to infuse the spirit of aliyah (migration to
Israel) into the children’ . . .

1 Six Days in June: Israel’s Fight for Survival (New York, New
American Library, 1967).

2

“This can only be done by deprecating American
Jewishlife and glorifying Israel Jewish life.”

actions that cannot pass without mention. When any Arab
speaker makes the slightest hint of objection to the support
the United States of America and some of its allies give to
Israel, he encounters immediate protests of indignation and
immence. But is it out of context to refer to the great
divergence between what the spokesmen of the United
States were advocating before the events of 5 June, what its
spokesmen advocated during those events, and what they
are advocating now? It is a divergence that is well
illustrated in the words of an eminent American jurist, who
in August 1967 said:

20, In addition to that disregard for the international
cbmmunity, Israel 110~ denounces its commitments and
decidesto ignore the United Nations machinery in the
Middle East and unilaterally to put an end to the armistice
@me, which was the instrumental framework of the
GeneralArmistice Agreements, under which the Arab-Israel
Mixed Armistice Commissions were established to solve the
relevantproblems.
21. mereas Mr. Abba Eban is now denouncing the
Armistice Agreements and declaring that they are obsolete,
it washe who held a contrary position in the past. On 4
August 1949 he told the Security Council: “these Agreementshaveno time limit, and can be altered only by agreed
amendments.“’

“Indeed, the United States must recognize the utter
inconsistency between its policy announced in the United
Nations in May, prior to the hostilities, and its policy
announced on 19 June by President Johnson after the
Israel victory. Prior to the hostilities Ambassador
Goldberg stated in the Security Council that ‘meaningful
peace negotiations’ could not take place unless the Gulf
of Aqaba were reopened to Israel shipping thereby
restoring the status quo ante. The Ambassador went on to
say that it would not be possible to negotiate and explore
the ‘underlying causes’ of the Arab-Israel dispute in the
tense atmosphere created by the closing of the Gulf of
Aqaba.

22. The Secretary-General has given a most apt summation
of the situation with respect to these agreements, as
follows:
“ , , , there has been no indication either in the General
Assemblyor in the Security Council that the validity and
applicability of the Armistice Agreements have been
changedas a result of the recent hostilities or of the war
of 1956; each Agreement, in fact, contains a provision
that it will remain in force ‘until a peaceful settlement
betweenthe parties is achieved’. Nor has the Security
Council or the General Assembly taken any steps to
changethe pertinent resolutions of either organ relating
to the Armistice Agreements or to the earlier cease-fire
demands.The Agreements provide that by mutual consent the signatories can revise or suspend them. There is
no provision in them for unilateral termination of their
application. This has been the United Nations position all
along and will continue to be the position until a
competent organ decides otherwise.“3

“Following the Israel military victory the United States
had adopted an entirely contrary position. The Ambassador announced in the United Nations that restoration
of the status quo ante, i.e., the withdrawal of Israel forces,
together with international guarantees of Israel shipping
rights and territorial integrity, constitutes a ‘prescription
for war’ and not a ‘prelude to peace’ as has been
suggested prior to the outbreak of war on 5 June. Such
inconsistency by the United States, particularly in light of
positive commitments regarding territorial integrity ‘of all
parties’, does not enhance prospects for permanent
peace.“4
26. Unfortunately, inconsistency has not been the sole
characteristic of the official American policy 011 this
question. President Johnson, in the midst of the Council’s
consideration of this tragic problem, found it fit to appear
before Jewish trade union leaders in New York, and all he
had to say about this tragedy was to equate Israel with
South Viet-Nam, as though Israel occupation of large
portions of Arab territories did not exist.

23, This is only the recent part of the record of Israel.
This is not to mention the dark record of Israel, its
numerous, murderous unprovoked attacks and wanton
massacres
of innocent Arabs, so many times condemned by
this Council. These condemnations constitute by themselvesthe most eloquent answer to Mr. Eban’s falsehood. In
fltct it would take me as long if not longer to answerthe
Israel representative, but the records of the SecuritY
Councilspeak for themselves.

27. We have been accustomed to unpleasant statements
from official United States spokesmen, but feel comforted
at the same time by the fact that these statements do not
reflect the intentions or the feelings of the American
people, with whom we have no feud, and for whom we
indeed have the highest admiration. In fact, it is a great
honour for the Arabs or any struggling people to be
compared to the forces of liberation in Viet-Nam which are
waging their heroic fight against foreign domination.
However, the conclusion which could be drawn from the
comparison is that there seemingly exists an equation for
Washington between Israel and Viet-Nam.

24, The question now arises how such a group of 2 million
people has the audacity to defy the whole community of
nations, disregard the United Nations resolutions and
violate the most basic principles of international law-and
all with impunity.
25, To understand this question it is of particular importanceto review only the most recent attitude of the United
StatesGovernment. Here too there are words and there are
’ Offic~l Records of the Semrity

Wrd meeting,p. 13.

Council, Fourth Year, NO. 36

3 Offic~l Records of the General Assembly,
Session,SaWement NO. IA, para. 43.

4 James F. Sames, “United States Policy and Middle East Crisis”.
Newsletter, vol. I, No. 1 (Boston, American Arab
ReIations Association, January, 1968h pp. 8-9.

The AMA&l

Twenty-second

3

28. In this connexion, the visit made by General Dayan to
Viet-Nam last year is only a confirmation of the intimate
relationship between the three sides. We have been given
clearly to know how dear, yet expensive, South Viet-Nam is
for the American administration, but this is the first time a
very high official statement has come to equate Israel with
South Viet-Nam.

Israel aggressor; and third, it insists upon the discharge by
the United Nations of those responsibilities incumbelnt
upon it by virtue of the provisions of the Charter,
international law and international morality-and this wi,th
a view to the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the
area.
33. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish this
morning to speak shortly on the need for urgent and
effective action. We have for long been anxious to see this
Council take action. We have long maintained that the
Council should have met rnL[ch earlier and acted much
sooner. There have been dreadful and damaging delays and
persistent and frustrating disagreements. But now there is a
realization amongst all of us-of this I am sure-that fhe
time to decide has come. This week we must conclude our
debate. This week we hope to see the work of finding a way
to permanent peace transferred from this Council to the
Middle East. This week we hope to see an end of talk here
and the beginning of action on the ground.

29. But here, too, actions are more significant than
statements. On the very day of the aggression by Israel
against Suez and its installations and the merciless burning
of the industrial projects that had been achieved by the
effort and sweat and great belt-tightening
sacrifices
accepted by the Egyptian people who were trying to raise
their standard of living-on the day all this was going on,
the American Government unfortunately found it appropriate to announce its decision to supply Israel with
forty-eight Skyhawk bomber aircraft, the sole use of which
cannot but be offensive, hence necessarily aggressive.What
guarantee is there that this untimely supply of such
offensive weapons within such a grave context cannot be
used by Israel for further aggression? Indeed, my delegation has not failed in its duty to draw the attention of the
Security Council, as recently as 27 September 1967
[S/81 711, to the new Israel plans of further expansion and
aggression.

34. And I would also say, Mr. President, that having
listened to the speech of the distinguished representative of
Syria just now, I would only say that a just settlement will
not be found or facilitated by partisan speeches directed
not to finding a basis for peace but to the perpetuation of
discord and discontent and deadlock. We in the Council
have a very different purpose and a very different obli;gation and a very different duty. I believe that we members of
the Council are all very conscious of the momentous
responsibility which lies on us at this time. Webelieve that
within the next few fateful days we can take a new road
forward leading to justice and peace. We know that the
alternative is to stumble back again hopelesslq’ and
miserably along the tragic road which the peoples of the
Middle East have travelled for the past two decades-the
road of hate and suffering, Before this week is over we shall
decide whether to take the road forward or the road belck.
On that decision the hopes and fate and indeed the livesof
countless innocent people will depend.

30. Our delegation has made it clear time and again, and
wishes to emphasize it once more, that the rights of the
Arab people of Palestine are not and can never become the
subject of bargaining. Those Arab rights are inalienable.
Any solution that does not take these realities into full
consideration, that ignores Arab rights, that does not
restore full justice, will amount to nothing more than a
time-bomb which may explode unexpectedly. Those who
continuously pressure the Arabs to recognize what they call
the rights of Israel are in the wrong when they ignore the
rights of the Arabs and the obligations of Israel towards
those rights.
31. At this juncture, so crucial to the whole future of the
United Nations and of international law, I wish to put on
record that the only draft resolution which is in harmony
with the Charter is the one submitted by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the fifth emergency special
session of the General Assembly5 which asks for, first,
condemnation of Israel aggression; second, withdrawal of
Israel troops to the positions occupied by them on 4 June;
and third, compensation to the Arabs for damages sustained
by them.

35. If we were to fail now, the representatives with us
from all the countries concerned would go home to a
terrible future: a future of renewed belligerence, of
mounting hostility and all-pervading fear, and the certainty
that death and destruction will before long return. lli is
within the next few days what we here have it in our power
to decide whether the peoples of the Middle East set lout
next week on a road of hope or on a road of despair.
36. The extent of the danger is the extent of IJur
opportunity, and 1 confidently maintain that there is sure,
sound, common ground on which we can go forward.

32. Finally, my delegation wishes to put on record in the
clearest terms the position of the Syrian Arab Republic.
While it wishes to reserve its right to speak on all draft
resolutions when they are discussed in the Council, it would
in the meantime like to state the position of the Syrian
Arab Republic as follows: first, it will never submit to
aggression or recognize any consequence based on that
aggression; second, it does not subscribe to any resolution
that fails to be guided by justice and the principles of the
Charter but leads to rewarding instead of condemning the

37. The Arab countries insist that we must direct our
special attention to the recovery and restoration of their
territories. The issue of withdrawal is to them of top
priority. The Arabs want not charity but justice. They seek
a just settlement to end the long and bitter suffering of ithe
refugees. There is a recognition on all sides that a new,
comprehensive, imaginative plan, as we have advocated, to
deal with this desperately urgent problem is essential.

5 Ojflcial Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Special hssion, Annexes, agendaitem 5, document A/L.519.

38. The Israelis tell us that withdrawal must never be to
the old precarious truce. It must be to a permanent Peace,
4
--

to secure boundaries, to a new era of freedom from the use
or the threat or the fear of hostility and force,

those who charge the United States with delay have been
from the very beginnings of this conflict the prime
instruments of delay in our proceedings and of effective
Security Council action. A charge like that was made on 13
November by my friend, the representative of Bulgaria,
Ambassador Tarabanov. He said that the responsibility for
delay in dealing with the matter before the Council rests on
Governments-presumably
including my own-because it
was they “who refused to act” [1375th
nzeetiizg,
para. 10U] in the matter,

39. Both are right. The aims of the two sides do not
conflict. They converge. They supplement and they support
each other, To imagine that one can be secured without the
other is a delusion. They are of equal validity and equal
necessity, The recent consultations which have been going
forward so energetically and continuously strongly reinforce my conviction that we in this Council now have a
supreme opportunity to serve the interests of all those
concerned. Every day it is more clear what should be done.
Every day it is more apparent that we are not dealing with
conflicting interests but with complementary interests.
Justice and peace are not in conflict; they are asinseparable
as they are indispensable. One must go hand in hand with
the other.

45. HOW this can be said by my colleague is beyond me. It
was he who, at the height of the crisis, said on 24 May,
when we in this Council pleaded the need for urgent action,
that this would be indulging in “futile exercises” [1342nd
meeting, para. 901. And then the representative of Bulgaria
went SO far as to tell the Council that: “We are not available
for consultations on a draft resolution or on any other
measure that might be planned” [ibid., para. 91/. Similar
efforts were made by the Soviet representative who, in a
phrase well remembered in this Council, said that we were
attempting to dramatize the situation.

40. Mr. President, since so much is at stake, since
agreement between us all is so near, and since the need is so
desperately urgent and since we must not fail at this critical
time, I wish most earnestly to put it to you, Sir, and to my
fellow members of the Council that when we finish our
debate this morning we should at once allow a short time to
conclude our consultations. I would suggest that we should
reassemble tomorrow afternoon or on Friday morning, and
that in the meantime we should make a final and supreme
and successful effort to set aside all differences, many of
which are in wording and not in substance, and concentrate
on the common ground of agreed purpose and principle.

46. The efforts of the United States throughout this crisis
have been to prevent the conflict before it started, and,
after the conflict commenced, to bring it to a speedy end
and to start the process of making peace in the area. I have
only to refer the Security Council to the draft resolution
offered by the United States on 1 June, in which we
proposed:

41. I trust that before this week is over we shall have
taken perhaps the most important decision which the
United Nations has ever taken, I trust that by the end of
this week we shall have taken the first essential step to
bring the blessings of a just and peaceful settlement to
peoples who have lived in enmity too long. We must pass a
resolution. I hope we can do so unanimously. That will be
the best way to discharge our responsibility and to do so in
such a way that action is effective in the interests of all the
peoples concerned, We are not interested in mere voting
victories. We want not a victory in New York but a success
in the Middle East, What we must surely strive for is to put
the full weight of this Council behind urgent effective
action to achieve a just and durable peace.

‘Notilzg that the Secretary-General has in his report
expressed the view that ‘a peaceful outcome to the
present crisis will depend upon a breathing spell which
will allow tension to subside from its present explosive
level’, and that he therefore urged ‘all the partics
concerned to exercise special restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all other actions which could
increase tension, to allow the Council to deal with the
underlying causes of the present crisis and to seek
solutions’,
“1. Calls OIZ all the parties concerned as a first step to
comply with the Secretary-General’s appeal;
“2. ,!i’rzcourages the immediate pursuit of international
diplomacy in the interests of pacifying the situation and
seeking reasonable, peacefIt and just solutions;

42. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): Inasmuch as the United States has submitted a draft resolution
[z/8229] in this Council, and since several delegations have
commented on it, it is only appropriate that I now reply to
those comments.

“3. Decides to keep this issue under urgent and
continuous review so that the Council may determine
what further steps it might take in the exercise of its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace
and security.” (S/7916/Rev.l].

43. More than six months ago, even before the fighting
began last June, some Governments represented in the
Council, including my own, sought to avert the war and to
begin to seek new ways to open at long last a road towards
real, stable and enduring peace in that region which has
known no genuine peace for a generation.

47. That draft resolution foandered on the opposition of
those who now seek to ascribe responsibility for delay to
others, Every member of this Council knows that when the
conflict broke out on 5 June it was the United States, along
with some other members of the Council, which were the
principal proponents, initiators and supporters of action by
this Council, calling for an immediate cease-fire. Here, too,
it was the opposition of certain members which made it
impossible for the Council to act urgently and without

44. In this connexion there is one point of fact which
must be set straight as a result of comments that have been
made in our present series of meetings. There have been
truly Orwellian efforts by the communist members on this
Council to re-write history. And it is exceedingly ironic that
5

debate in the interests af peace and stopping the fighting
before it developed, as it subsequently did.

before us is his reference to the arms situation. It is
interesting that in commenting upon a recent decision ef
our Government to meet prior commitments with respect
to military armaments he did not refer to the fact that ear
decision was designed to meet commitments not only to
the State of Israel, but also to several Arab countries, Nor
did he talk about the outpouring of military armaments te
the countries of the Middle East, including Syria, which has
gone on for years and which continues to this day, If the
representative of Syria were genuinely interested in seeking
limits to be placed on the wasteful and dangerous arms race
which has gone on in the Middle East for years, one would
have expected him to express support for the ides
contained in the draft resolution we have placed before the
Council, which calls upon the Council to consider the
necessity of limiting “the wasteful and destructive arms
race in the area”[S/8229/. No such words of support were
forthcoming. We do not need words of the character that
have been uttered. The words that are now needed are
words that clearly point to practical action for a just and
durable peace that shall be fair and equitable to all parties.

48. There were two opportunities before the Council at
that time. One arose from an initiative by the Governments
of Canada and Denmark, and that was to send a special
representative to the area; and the other arose from the
draft resolution that we offered. I ask the members of the
Council to think of where we would be today had the
Council endorsed the proposals made by Canada and
Denmark, supported by the United States, in the interest of
accelerating the peace-making process. We could have had a
United Nations representative in the area since last June
working on the complcated task of restoring peace. Several
precious months have been lost and the question recurs:
How much more time is to be wasted arguing over rhetoric
when what is needed is reconcifiation.
49. There have been rumours spread in the corridors that
the United States is now seeking delay. Nothing could be
farther From the truth. We have sought immediate action
throughout; we seek immediate action today-and I mean
action, nor words. These are the facts. What we need is a
truce in the Security Council against recrimination. Let us
have an end to the ceaselessly repeated use of old and
discredited charges to sow new hostility. As far as we are
concerned, let there be no more delay. Let there be no
more attempts to pervert this Council, this instrument of
peace, into a centre of defamation and incendiary charges.
For such abuse of the United Nations instrumentalities
simply compounds the difficulties of the peace-making
process which are already fomridable enough.

53. It is for such a peace that my delegation, despite all
difficulties, continues to strive. To this end last month,
while the non-permanent members of the Council were
actively seeking an acceptable formula for action by the
Council, my delegation, at the specific request of some of
the parties concerned, deferred to their efforts. When their
efforts did not succeed you, Mr. President, quite appropriately in your capacity as President of the SecuritY
Council, and with the agreement of the non-permanent
members, turned to the permanent members of the Council
to ask that they join fully and actively in the search.My
delegation responded promptly to your call and as soon’as
possible formulated its concept of appropriate and attainable Council action. And we so reported to you,Mr, President.

50. In this spirit I do not intend to make any detailed
reply, for example, to the statement made by the represen
tative of Syria. I have previously had occasion in this
Council to state that the internal affairs of the United
States, its leaders and its policies are not the subject of
legitimate comment by representatives in this Council. In
no statement made by the United States during the many
meetings of the past few months have we ever even
repeated any utterances made by the leaders of Syria or
attempted to characterize those utterances, as has been
done by the representative of Syria today with respect to
the political leaders of the United States. I do not intend to
depart from this practice despite the provocation which has
been offered. It is a legitimate matter of discussion in this
Council to deal with the substance of the problem before

54. On an urgent basis we likewise proceeded to discuss
our concept with other members, permanent and nonpermanent, and with the parties on both sides. We were
guided throughout by certain axioms of negotiation,
axioms which stemmed in part from the unanimous view
that the Council should act under Chapter Vl of the
Charter.
5.5. First, only the parties themselves, through mutual
accommodation, compromise and peaceful means of their
own choice, can make peace and impose peace. Peace,
whether imposed by one side on the other or on both sides
by any outside authority, including this Council, cannot
endure.

US.

51. A statement has been made by the representative of
Syria that the United States has been inconsistent in its
position with respect to the Middle East crisis. I have before
me a document which I shall make available to you,
Mr. President, to the members of the Council and to the
representatives of the parties immediately concerned, containing every policy statement made by the United States
since this crisis first broke out: before the conflict, during
the Security Council considerations and up to the present
time. I am content to rest on the record of our statements
which demonstrates that they have been consistent
throughout. We adhere to the statements that have been
made; we do not depart from them.

56. Second, members of this Council, both individualIY
and collectively, by virtue of their very great influence,
individual or combined, and by virtue of the Ccllac~‘s
responsibility under the Charter, can and must assistthe
process of accommodation between the parties.
57. Third, to serve this purpose the Council must find a
formula which will not prejudice the known positions cf
the parties on either side and which will not preclude the
acceptance by either side of the assistance, encouragement,
help and guidance the United Nations can properly offer.

52. Illustrative of the double standard which the representative of Syria applies in his discussion of the grave issues
6

4

58. Fourth, to arrive at such a formulation, it is essential
that consultations be held with the parties on both sides aa
well as with the members of the Council, The process of
consultations we had initiated had not run its course when
the request for the convening of the Council made it
necessary to circulate the product of our efforts on 7
November. While we would have preferred to hold back our
draft resolution until the final results of our consultations
were in, I have no hesitation in saying that our draft
resolution, in our view, is the only resolution now before
the Council which conforms to the axioms set forth both in
content and in the procedures used in drawing it up.
Moreover, even since its circulation we have remained
intensively engaged in the search for the right formula for
Council action-right in terms of the balance it strikes
between conflicting views and emotions and in terms of the
co.operation it will elicit from all involved in the peacemaking process it would put in train.

withdrawal of armed forces from occupied territories. I
should like to be quite clear about the meaning that we
attach to that language, In the first place it obviously refers,
and was always intended to refer, to the armed forces of
Israel. Let me also state and make clear that this is
completely on a par with the other essentials listed in the
same paragraph, such as “termination of claims or states of
belligerence”-which,
of course, refers primarily to the
Arab States. Let me add that it also embraces a necessary
ingredient for peace in the area: mutual termination by
Israel and the Arab States of the state of war, which
unhappily still persists in the area, and “mutual recognition
and respect for the right of every State in the area to
sovereign existence, territorial integrity, political independence, secure and recognized boundaries, and freedom
from the threat or use of force” (S/8229/, We had thought
that that concept was very clear in our draft resolution.
However, since doubts had been expressed on that point,
we have considered it necessary to make it explicitly clear
in our statement today.

59. Ever since the Council was convened we have continued our efforts. And let me make it explicitly clear that
our interest is not in having an American label on the
successful formula. If it would in any way facilitate the
search we are all engaged in, that label can be rapidly
dispensed with. Pride of authorship has no place in the
serious business at hand.

64. We believe that the language of operative paragraph 1
as stated in the draft resolution and as amplified by me here
today is both intrinsically sound and carefully balanced in
what it requires of the respective parties. I should like to
repeat them for emphasis, Israel must withdraw; the Arab
States must renounce the state of belligerence and claim of
be.Uigerence, which they have maintained for many years;
and the States on both sides must terminate the present
state of war and must mutually recognize each other’s
rights which are set forth explicitly in Article 2 of the
Charter. Lest there be any ambiguity, let me also make it
clear that, despite the references that have been made to
that phrase, by the word “recognition” we do not mean
diplomatic recognition, although at the same time we do
not mean to exclude it. That is a matter for the parties
concerned to settle among themselves. We mean recognition
of what the Charter provides, recognition of the sovereign
existence of all nations, to which all States in the area are
committed by the Charter. We mean respect for territorial
integrity, political independence and freedom from the
threat or use of force, and we mean that the parties should
determine that in order to be free from the threat or use of
force, secure and recognized boundaries should be fixed.

60. In my statement on 9 November [1373rd meeting] I
pointed out that we of the United States had sought to stay
within those requirements by basing the substanca,of our
draft resolution on a set of principles, namely the five
principles enunciated by President Johnson in his address
on 19 June. We did so, as I pointed out, not merely because
our President had set them forth, but because both parties
had in various statements indicated that those principles
were an acceptable basis for Security Council action. And I
have not heard a repudiation on the part of those who have
spoken to the effect that those principles do not still
constitute an acceptable basis for progress in the interests
of peace in the area.

,

61. I shall briefly recall those principles: (1) the recognition of national life, (2) justice for the refugees, (3) innocent maritime passage, (4) limits on the arms race, and
(5) political independence and territorial integrity for all.
We have sought to embody those five principles in our draft
resolution in a way which would be fairly and prudently
balanced and which would, as I have said, not prejudice the
vital interests or the stated positions of either side. We have
taken into account the known differences between the
parties in regard both to the goals sought and to the means
towards those goals. We have sought to develop and express
as well as we knew how the maximum of common ground
as a starting point for the peace-making process that should
have commenced with the blessing of this Council months
ago.

65. Now I cannot emphasize too strongly that those
principles are interdependent. There is nothing artificial
about this interdependence. We did not manufacture it. It is
in the nature of the situation and of the history of this
conflict. To seek withdrawal without secure and recognized
boundaries, for example, would be just as fruitless as to
seek secure and recognized boundaries without withdrawal.
Historically there have never been secure or recognized
boundaries in the area. Neither the armistice lines of 1949
nor the cease-fire lines of 1967 have answered that
description, although the General Armistice Agreements
explicitly recognize the necessity to proceed to permanent
peace, which necessarily entails the recognition of boundaries between the parties, Now such boundaries have yet to
be agreed upon. An agreement on that point is an absolute
essential to a just and lasting peace just as withdrawal is.
Secure boundaries cannot be determined by force; they
cannot be determined by the unilateral action of any of the
States; and they cannot be imposed from the outside. For

62. In my statement to the Council on 9 November I
outlined the general considerations underlying our draft
resolution. Let me now add certain specific comments on
particular provisions in the hope of clarifying their meaning
and intent in the light of the comments made with respect
to those clauses in the course of our debate.
63. In operative paragraph I, among the elements enclosed
in the concept of a state of just and lasting peace is the
7

the framework of the peace settlement. The needs of the
refugee and the needs of peace in the Middle East are not in
conflict; they are inseparable from each other; they must be
attended to together. The needs of the international
community and of all nations to free accessto international
waterways, and the needs of peace in the Middle East, are
not in conflict: they are inseparable from each other; they
must be attended to together.

history shows that imposed boundaries are not secure and
that secure boundaries must be mutually worked out and
recognizecl by the parties themselves as part Of the
peace-making process.
66. I would add one further observation with respect to
timing. Clearly the timing of steps to be taken by the
parties in fulfilment of the objectives set forth in our draft
resolution would need to be worked out carefully wit11the
assistance of the special representative. *It is llOt OUT
conception that any one step or provision should be
relegated to the end of the process. In short, our draft
resolution reflects the conviction that progress towards
peace can be made only if there is a careful and just balance
of obligations among the parties. Such a balance must take
account of the just aspirations of all, without harming the
vital interests of any. It must recognize and seek to relieve
the legitimate
grievances of all, without creating new
grievances for any. It must be a balance which all will have
a strong interest in maintaining. Only thus can it provide
the foundation for a durable peace.

71. Such are my main comments concerning the provisions of the United States draft resolution. Before
concluding, let me only add three general observations
which, I hope, may prove constructive.
72. First, an observation about the special representative
and his role. I have no hesitation in saying that the key
provision in the entire draft resolution is the appointment
of the special representative. The principles in operative
paragraph 1 will be useful only to the extent that they may
help him in working out with the parties solutions that will
lead to a just and lasting peace in the area. I have already
mentioned that a draft resolution was introduced in the
Council by Canada and Denmark on 24 May 1967
/S/7905/, asking the Secretary-General to seek solutions to
the dangerous tension then prevailing. It was a good draft
resolution; it was criticized at the time becauseit contained
no detailed principles to guide the Secretary-General.

67. Let me turn briefly to operative paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution, since I have been speaking about operative
paragraph 1. In our view, the provisions of operative
paragraph 2 are no less vital to a durable solution than are
those of operative paragraph 1. The provisions relating to
guaranteeing freedom of navigation for all nations through
international
waterways in the area and to the refugee
problem deal with grievances of the first order of importance, which clearly could not be left out of a peace
settlement. The other two provisions of the paragraph are
,designed chiefly to ensure that the peace settlement shall
be, as it clearly must be, insulated from violence and from
excessive competition in the means of violence.

73. Now, let us look back upon the history in this
particular area. We may well recall the resolutions of the
Security Council, under which the General Armistice
Agreements of 1949 were negotiated by Mr. Ralph
Bunche-Agreements which, despite the later tragic course
of events, helped at that time to stop war. But those
resolutions likewise contained no detailed principles to
guide the negotiations.

68. As to freedom of navigation in international waterways for all nations, it is a matter of historical record that
the principal factor which precipitated the conflict in early
June was the decision by the United Arab Republic not to
permit ships of all States to passthrough the Strait of Tiran
with equal freedom. It has been a plain fact of life that a
return to peace will require guarantees concerning freedom
of navigation in the Strait, as well as in the Suez Canal, for
their closure has been inconsistent with a state of peace, as
has been recognized by past decisions of this Co~mil.

74. Our draft resolution goes far beyond the resolutions of
the Security Council under which Mr. Bunche so successfully operated. Our draft proposes a far more specific
mandate. But it seems to my delegation and to the Ullited
States Government that what is far more important than a
list of written principles is the existence on both sides of a
sufficient practical will to make peace. The peace-making
process is not quick or easy, not is it a kind of magic which
enables each side to realize its maximum demands. The
only magic in peace-making is the awarenessof each side
that the benefits of peace and tranquillity are valuable
enough to justify very great efforts in the search for it, as
well as the acceptance of compromise and accommodation
by both sides on the actual terms. And the terms cannot be
spelled out in advance; they must be spelled out on the
ground.

69. I should like also to comment on the refugee problem,
for it is far more than merely a political grievance: it is a
profoundly humanitarian problem, and it must at long last
be solved. Those who are homeless or displaced because of
both the recent and the previous conflict have a desperate
need for help and for justice. The nations of the area, with
the help of the world community, must act with new
determination
and new energy to meet that end. And in the
solution of the problem my Government is prepared to do
its share-and to do more than its share-just as throughout
the years it has been doing in relieving the distress of the
refugees in the area.

75. The crucial role which the special representative can
play is to foster on both sides the frame of mind essential
to peace-making-the pragmatic will to peace-which can
face and overcome the undeniable difficulties in defining
mutually acceptable terms.

70. But it is not mere continuance of temporary relief to
which we have largely contributed that is needed: more
than ever before, this problem cries out for a permanent
and a humane solution. Such a solution must be a part of

76: Greater and more complicated conflicts even than this
grave and complicated conflict have been resolved at the
peace table. Peace is indeed difficult, but it is not
8

impossible where a genuine will exists on both sides, and
where the necessarysupport and encouragement is afforded
by third parties, including this great Organization.

and notwithstanding the conflicting interpretati*ns
heard of motives, intention and, indeed, of event%
to me that certain things are becoming clear.

77. This leads me to my second observation, In Our
consultation on possible action by the Security Council, the
question we encountered most frequently from the parties
concerned on both sides was not about any particular
provision of a draft resolution, but, rather, about what the
United States would be prepared to do in the interests of
bringing about peace in the area. Would the United
States-it has been put to me very explicitly-place
its
influence and political support behind a just and durable
peace in the area and the steps necessary to achieve such a
peace? Let me give here, in public, in this Councfi, the
same answer we have given in private to that question: We
are committed to the achievement of a just and lasting
peace in the area, From this commitment there flows a
willingness to do our full share towards achieving that goal.
AS President Johnson said on 19 June, “I offer assurance to
all that this Government of ours, the Government of the
United States, will do its part for peace in every forum, at
everylevel, at every hour.”

83. First of all, I do believe that there
is o ‘trong
momentum in this Council in favour of making
a further
effort to reach agreement. Many of my colleagues
have
openly supported this approach; none has rejected
it* It is
also significant that the representatives
of’ the States
directly concerned in the area, whatever their views Onthe
draft resolutions before us, have not rejected efforts to find
a formula designed to enable a special representative
to go
out to the area, provided that this mission
does not
preju&ce their respective basic positions.

we llave
it se’ems

84. Secondly, there seems to be a more general aooePtance
than ever before that Council action at this tinlo Iras to be
within the framework of Chapter VI of the Charter, a
framework which enables us to seek agreement
on a
diplomatic initiative designed to open the way to a Peaceful
settlement.
85. In this connexion, I welcome the constructive
contribution of the representative of India, as set fort11 at our
meeting on 13 November, when he recalled the terms Of
Article 33, which enjoins the parties to any dispute, the
continuance of which is likely to endanger international
peace and security, to seek a solution
by any of the
methods of peaceful settlement open to them under the
Charter. Now, I may not have been able to agree so far with
my Indian and some other colleagues on the exact terms Of
a resolution by which the responsibilities
of the Council
might be fulI’ilIed, but I do not differ with them on this
basic approach.

78. On behalf of my Government, I now renew the pledge
I made to the Council and to the parties themselves when I
introduced the United States draft resolution on 9 November. Under the terms of that draft resolution-and
this
includes every portion of the text-the United States could,
and will, exert its full diplomatic and political influence in
support of the efforts of the United Nations representatives
to achieve a fair and equitable settlement.
79. Finally, I would stress once again the spirit in which
the United States still approaches the question of peace in
the Middle East. As the President of the United States
emphasized at the very outset of the crisis last May: “The
United States has consistently sought to have good relations
with all the States of the Middle East”. And he added:
“This has not always been possible”-and indeed it has not
proved to be possible even to this day. But today, six
months later, our resolve to seek such good relations
remains undimmed, despite the tragic events of June and all
that has taken place in the aftermath,

86. This approach is that the mandate
of the special
representative should be clearly within Chapter VI, that the
principles and guidelines should be balanced
and nonprejudicial to both sides and that the objective is to initiate
the process of peaceful settlement of the crisis without
delay.
87. The third area of common grotind
relates
to the
dispatch of a special representative within the kirld of
framework we have been discussing. I take it there is basic
agreement that we in the Council are not, as severs]
members have pointed out, trying to impose a settlorrrent or
the terms of a settlement. I believe that what we are trying
to do is to follow up the cease-fire by fac%tatiIlg
die
settlement of the issues in dispute with the help of a special
representative of the Secretary-General. Clearly the mission
of this intermediary must be without prejudice
to the
rights, claims Or positions of the States .concoryrod with
regard to those issues. Furthermore, it most bo acceptable
to the Council and be acquiesced in by b&h sides if it is to
get under way as soon as possible and to have arly lrope of
success.

80. Now, we are well aware that neither side in the
dispute-judging by their expressions in and out of this
Council-is likely to be well pleased with all aspects of our
position. But that is inevitable, considering that they are
the parties involved. And for us it is a small price to pay if
we can thereby contribute to the progress towards peace
which the peoples of the Mid,dle East, and, indeed, of all
the world, so sadly need.
81. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): My delegation has listened
with the greatest care and attention to the statements made
at our meetings on 9 and 13 November [1373rd and
1375th meetings], as well as to the statements made today.
I have also been, as I am sure all of us around this table
have been, reflecting on the situation facing the Council,
and this leads me to offer a few additional comments at this
time on the best way that I seewe might proceed if we are
to avoid an impasse.

88. I would therefore urge, in conclusion,
that we now
make that additional and determined effort
in further
private consultations, as was proposed by the United
Kingdom representative earlier today, to see if tl,e dlf.
ferences among us that remain can be reconciled.
89. The PRESIDENT (translated from French), 1 now call
upon the representative of Israel, who has requested
to
speak in exercise of the right of reply.

82. Despite the firm and to some extent contradictory
positions adopted by the parties involved in the dispute,
9

90. Mr. EBAN (Israel): It is very difficult for me to reply
to the address of the Syrian representative without taking
the level of this debate below the level that it has reached. I
am a much less assiduous reader than he is of the Los
Angeles l%?zes, and I know very little about the qualities of
Ivory soap. Nor do I feel that I have to analyse again the
address of mine to which he took exception. I said what I
said on Monday /I37.5rh nzeetingl, and I have noted the
reports of what I have said throughout the world, and I am
content that Israel’s meaning is clear.

their right to show indulgence and to give helter aad
support to those incursions. Certainly any histcdaa would
have to record that the Syrian doctrine of constant,
implacable daily war was the first link in the ch&
of conflict.
96. During that period we heard from the Syrian Govern.
ment violent abuse not only of Israel but of any Arab
leader or any Arab Government which gave any sign of
realism or moderation, however provisional and however
relative. There was abuse of the Jordanian Government on
those too few occasions on which it acted for the
suppression of terrorist raids. There was constant abuse of
the United Arab Republic for not inviting war by &
imposition of a full belligerent blockade.

91. The Syrian representative began with a long and rather
sinister description of the fact that Israel armed forces were
mobilized in the first days of June. Of course the Cabinet
of which I am a member ordered nobilization in the early
days of June. Ninety thousand Egyptian troops in the Sinai;
45,000 poised on the Syrian heights; the entire Jordan
army in order of battle; all surrounding airfields with
operation orders about targets for attack; a complete naval
blockade of our southern frontiers: if, in these conditions,
Israel mobilized its forces for defence, this simply proves
that the Israel Government was possessed of a normal
sanity.

97. This, then, is Syria’s record-a constant, militant
refusal to give Israel or the Middle East a single day of
peace. It was Syrian policy that influenced the United Arab
Republic to seek a confrontation in the early summer, lt
was Syria and the United Arab Republic together which
involved Jordan in that tragic conflict. It was Syria, the
United Arab Republic and Jordan together which invited
contingents from Algeria, Kuwait, Morocco, Tunisia, Libya
and other States-some of which, incidentally, have still not
accepted the cease-fire agreement. That is what I mean by
saying that Syria does not come here as the victim of
aggression but as its first and primary architect. Never has
self-criticism been less practised; never has it been more
justified.

92. I do not want to enter into the other charges the
Syrian representative made. He digressed into the problem
of the Dead Sea Scrolls. We believe that the treasures of
humanity should not be looted and allowed to perish, but
should become the public and the universal domain. Let
me, then, not linger on these matters, which have some
degree of levity; let me address myself to the central issue.

98. Indeed; in October 1966 the majority of the Security
Council membership, composed of representatives of the
five continents of the world, addressed to Syria a mild but
clear request to change its policy on this question of
terrorist infiltration and incursions. That very mild proposal
was subjected, of course, to the usual veto, but it expressed
world opinion in attaching great importance to the explosive results, to the chain reaction that might develop if the
policy of terrorist infiltration, incursion and violence were
allowed to continue.

93. It is the very nature of the Middle Eastern problem
that was vividly illustrated by the address .made this
morning on behalf of the Government of Syria. The essence
of the problem is that Syria and other Arab States have
refused and still refuse to recognize and respect Israel’s
rights to sovereignty, peace, security, economic development, maritime freedom-indeed,
to national existence and
survival. And in the spirit of that policy we heard from the
Syrian representative a hymn of hate with no proposal
whatsoever for bringing about peace between Syria and
Israel. Syria does not come here as the victim of aggression.
Syria played a special part in the explosion which convulsed
the peace of the Middle East in the summer months.
94, Surely every member of the Security Council recalls
that at the beginning of this year there still seemed to be
some prospect of stability for the Middle East. The
arrangements concerted in 1957 were in force. There were
long periods of tranquillity on the Lebanese, Egyptian and
Jordanian demarcation lines. Hostility was still the policy
of the neighbouring Arab States, but it was not always
effectively and practically applied day by day. Into this
situation of relative, fragile, precarious stability came Syria
with its revolutionary doctrine of constant and perpetual
war.
95. The Syrian doctrine was that the war not only had to
be proclaimed, it had to be practised; it was not enough to
practise it sometimes, it had to be practised every day. If it
could not be practised with regular forces, then it must be
practised through the agency of organized terrorist incursions. At this very table, Syrian representatives announced

99. At our last meeting, the representative of Jordan had a
lot to say about current events in the Middle East. I will say
only one thing about his references to the ancient part of
Jerusalem. It is much better to build houses and synagogues
than it is to destroy them. We were shocked bY the
desecration and the sacrilege we found, by the fact that not
a single synagogue had been left standing and that not for a
single day had there been freedom of accessto the oldest of
mankind’s holiest places. Certainly the satisfaction of
universal religious interests must be, as it is, a primrY
objective of my Government, both in the present and in the
future.
100. Of much more general significance is the questiofl Of
what Jordan’s policy is. On 22 October that PolicY was
given the kind of expression that explains my Govemmeatk
apprehension. Amman ‘Radio described the policy of the
Jordanian
Government in this way: “The Arabs’ foreflosi
desire is Israel’s withdrawal to the pre-5th June borders
without the need for direct negotiation, reconciliation “‘,
1 recognition.” There it is, bluntly expressed restoration vi
the situation which led to the war, without negotiation*
I
10

without reconciliation and without recognition. That is the
precise doctrine that has been described so often in the
General Assembly ,and the Security Council as a prescription for a renewal of the war. If you bring together and
unite all the conditions which led to the explosion, you are
inviting a renewal of that explosion. It is to that policy,
that backward-looking policy of reconstructing the explosion, that Israel is implacably opposed.

the will, wishes and interests of the other party.” [6#4th
meeting, paras. 46-18.1

104. That is a lucid and eloquent statement of the
philosophy underlying Chapter VI of the Charter. Either
these things are true or they are not. If they are true, then
they are true for Israel as for any State, International
relationships can only flourish on the basis of reciprocity. If
Egypt has the right for sixteen years not to accept
international recommendations, then Israel has an equal
right. On the more affirmative side, if it was necessary to
secure Arab consent to a resolution in 1954, is surely no
less important and vital and indispensable to secure Israel’s
consent in 1967. Indeed, the general feeling for a consensual result seems to me so far to be the most salient
conclusion to emerge from this discussion.

101. To the representative of India I would say that my
remarks were not addressed to the specific conflict in the
Indian sub-continent, about which, as a member, I should
be glad to learn more. I was quoting statements by his
Government on the general principle of pacific settlement,
and that general principle, which spokesmen of his Govemment have so often stated, boils down to this-that when
the Security Council operates under Chapter VI of the
Charter, and especially if it wishes to send a representative
to engage in a diplomatic effort, then the prior assent of the
parties most directly concerned should be secured and the
Security Council should not itself predetermine the question at issue. That is the doctrine that was expressed in
many quotations which I gave and in many others which I
could give. In other words, if you wish the parties to
co-operate in your efforts-so said the Indian delegation on
many occasions-then do not adopt resolutions which
prejudice the positions or the policies or the negotiating
positions of the parties in advance.

105. Israel’s policy need not be restated in full. We shall
maintain and respect the cease-fire situation until it is
replaced by peace treaties ending the state of war,
determining the agreed and secure national frontiers of
States and ensuring a stable and mutually guaranteed
security. We cannot return to the shattered armistice
rCgime. We should not seek to return to any system of
relations other than a permanent, contractually binding
peace; and we agree with those who have said, in the
General Assembly and elsewhere, that fragile armistices and
armistice lines must be superseded by agreed and secure
national boundaries.

102. It is not only the non-permanent members of the
Security Council which have so often expressed that
doctrine; it has been expressed by the permanent members,
which have primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. For example, on 29 March
1954 [644th meeting] a debate took place in the Security
Council on a draft resolution to which the Government of
Egypt was opposed. That draft would simply have called
upon Egypt to respect a previous judgement of the Security
Council in favour of cancelling the state of belligerency,
acts of belligerency and acts of blockade. If Egypt had not
defied that resolution for sixteen years the Council would
probably not be sitting on this problem today.

106. After the cease-fire, therefore, our destination must
be nothing less than peace-a permanent and mutually
contracted peace with a recognized territorial boundary and
the definition by the States concerned of all the conditions
for their coexistence.
107. In conclusion, it seems to me that the Security
Council is in a position to define what its priorities are.
Does it want an effective diplomatic action or does it insist
on a specific and controversial statement, which might
prejudice and prevent the launching of that diplomatic
action? That, I think, is the dilemma. That is the choice.
108. It seems to me that the most salutary thing to do
would be to utilize the fact that both parties, all parties, are
willing to co-operate with the proposed diplomatic action,
provided that their essential positions are not prejudiced in
advance, In that spirit we have been offering, and shall
offer, constructive comment to various proposals and drafts
that have been presented, but our central theme is
unvarying: only an integral, specific and contractual peace
settlement can settle the grave issues which have cast a
shadow over the Middle East for so many years. If we
proceed to such an integral and specific and contractual
peace settlement, defining the boundaries of States, maritime freedom, security for all, then the Middle East may
have seen the last of its wars and the first glow of its peace.

103. In March 1954 also there was an effort to restate that
policy. On that occasion, the representative of the Soviet
Union enunciated a general doctrine of peaceful settlement
in these words:
‘YI stress]. . . the impossibility of settling international
problems by the method which it seems to me is . . ,
being fostered here and is being unnecessarily given a
serious significance-the method of imposing upon one of
the parties a decision which . . . has been stated by that
party to be absolutely unacceptable from the outset.

“Such methods are no admitted in international law;
and indeed there is no authority in international law
suggesting that international problems can really be
settled by any method other than that of agreement
between the interested parties.

109. Mr. KUZNETSOV

(Union of Soviet Socialist RepubThe Soviet delegation
intended to comment briefly on the subject of the
statements made this morning. We had hoped that the
speakers would throw light on many questions which they
have not made clear so far, and which they have not
answered, though it is most important that they should do
lics)

“ . I . among the methods recommended in Chapter VI
there is no such method as that of imposing on one party
a decision which is contrary to and completely disregards
11

(translated

from

Russian):

SO if we really wish to make a constructive contribution,
here in the Security Council, to solving the Middle East
problem.

Today, though we tried hard to find a clear answerto that
question somewhere in the very long statement of the
United States representative, our efforts were unsuccessful,
I should therefore like to return to that part of the Soviet
statement which referred to this matter and draw the
attention of the Council to it, We said at the time:

110. TO be perfectly frank, I must say that the statements
of some speakers, and in particular that of the representative of the United States, show that certain countries
continue to maintain positions which can be summed up by
saying that their efforts are not directed towards enabling
the Security Council to adopt, as soon as possible, an
appropriate decision and thus take a step forward towards
solving this urgent international problem.

“The absence from the United States text of anY
substantial clarification of what is meant by the withdrawal of troops ‘from all’ territories, and the exclusion
Of any reference to the fact that the subject under
discussion is the recent conflict, must be considered in
conjunction with the appearance in the United States
draft of phrases such as ‘secure and recognized bound.
aries’. What boundaries does this refer to? What is behind
the idea of ‘secure and recognized boundaries’? Who is to
decide how secure these boundaries are and who has to
recognize them? To all these questions the United States
draft provides no answer but leaves the field wide open
for different interpretations and constructions, including
interpretations which still make it possible for Israel itself
arbitrarily to establish new boundaries and to withdraw
its forces only to those lines it considers appropriate, And
the interpretations by Israel, which asserts that the
General Armistice Agreements of 1949 approved by the
Security Council are not binding on it, go very far.”

1 Il.
In this connexion I should like to say that many
delegations to the United Nations and many members of
the Security Council are showing great concern at the
situation which has arisen in the Middle East, and are
striving to do everything possible within the framework of
the United Nations Charter and to give the Grganization an
active role in the solution of this most urgent and
important problem. I would remind you that three nonpermanent members of the Security Council showed
definite initiative and made an important contribution by
submitting a draft resolution specifically designed to make
that useful step towards solving the problem.
112. Today? however, we are witnessing, as I have already
mentioned, a tendency on the part of the representatives of
the Western Powers to block the adoption of such a
decision, to divert the Security Council and world public
opinion from the problem, and to revert to the discussion
of general principles and of questions which we have in fact
been discussing for the past five months, both openly in the
meetings and at closed informal consultations.

[1373rd meeting, para. 1X?.]

116. We know from the statements of Israel statesmen,
and in particular from that made yesterday by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Israel and just published in The New
York Times, that Israel makes a definite claim to keep some
of the territories seized from the Arab States.
117. Consequently, the United States draft leaves open
the possibility that Israel’s forces may not be withdrawn
from all the Arab territories they have seized and that part.
of these territories may be kept by Israel. If this is not SO,
we hope that the United States representative will give us a
clear and unambiguous explanation to the effect that the:
United States supports the withdrawal of Israel’s forces
from all the occupied territories to the positions occupied
prior to 5 June 1967. It is obvious that the provision for
the withdrawal of troops must be so.clearly formulated as
to leave no loopholes whereby anyone can interpret it in his
own way. This is of course our basic position, and we
require a clear answer with respect to it.

113. As an example of the attitude to which I am
referring, I should like to mention one problem. The
proposals set forth in the three-Power resolution of 7
November (S/82.27/ contain provisions which plainly and
clearly state the necessity for the withdrawal of Israel
forces from all Arab territories occupied during the recent
conflict. The draft also contains provisions designed to
safeguard peace in the region and to ensure that all the
peoples of the area should adopt and carry out measures,
based on the United Nations Charter, which would lead to
the consolidation of peace on a firm foundation.
I 14. Nevertheless, as many members of the Security
Council have said at previous meetings, and as was stated at
the fifth emergency special session and also during the
present twenty-second session of the Assembly, if we are
seriously considering the effective strengthening of peace in
the Middle East, then the resolution must obviously contain
a clear statement on the withdrawal of Israel troops from
the occupied territories. However, if we look at the
proposals for soIving this problem in the draft resolution
submitted by the United States [S/8229], we see that the
whole question is concealed and completely lost in the
midst of other questions.

118. I should like to say a few words concerning the
consuhations which are continuing. Speakers here have
dwelt at length on the need for continuing consultath~,
for giving time and so on and so forth. I must say in this
connexion that the Soviet delegation and the Soviet Unio;a
are not opposed to consultation; we have not refused anld
we do not refuse to exchange views and to maintain
contacts. However, we categorically oppose a situation in
which, on the pretext of consultation, attempts would be
made to delay a solution to the problem, so asgenerally to
divert attention from a solution and gradually withdraw the
problem from discussion. We can certainly not be a Party to
this l&d of “consultation”. We want these consultations te
be held and to yield positive results, but we do not wish fo
see them prolonged, because the problem is urgent and
must be settled.

11.5. You will recall that at the 1373rd meeting of the
Security Council the Soviet delegation drew attention to
this very important
part of the United States draft
resolution and asked the United States delegation what its
attitude was to the question of the withdrawal of troops.
12

119. The PRESIDENT (translated from French]: I call on
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to exercise
the right of reply.

among those Arab countries that are going to receive arms
from the United States? He also referred to the supply of
arms to Syria and the United Arab Republic. Does it
surprise him that we are trying to obtain arms with which
to defend ourselves and to replace those we lost during the
Israel aggression against our countries? Or does he expect
us to wait like sitting ducks for further Israel aggression to
take place?

120. Mr. DAOUDY (Syria): I have just outlined the
position of my Government regarding the draft resolution
submitted to the Security Council. I have also stated what,
in our view, is the way to settlement of the grave problems
in the Middle East, namely, the withdrawal of Israel forces
from the occupied Arab territories. I should like to say a
few words in reply to statements made by the representatives of the United Kingdom, the United States of America,
and Israel.

125. Now I wish to say a few words regarding the
statement made by the Israel representative. Apparently my
reference to Robert J. Donovan’s book called Six Days in
June, which I have here in my hand, was not to the liking
of the Foreign Minister of Israel. But that book was not
written by an Arab, nor is it considered to be pro-Arab.
That book, which is being sold in New York by the
thousands, was written precisely to propagate the Israel
point of view and is definitely a pro-Israel book. Naturally,
the Israel authorities do not like the fact that the Los
Angeles Times correspondent was able to convey to his
paper, despite the Israel censorship, the fact that Israel had
totally mobilized its troops while the Israel authorities were
deceiving the world in stating that there was no mobilization whatsoever. Whether Mr. Eban reads the Los Angeles
Times or not is beside the point. I can assure him that I
have no special knowledge of Ivory soap or the slogans put
out by the Ivory soap company, My stay in this country has
been very short, and he should know better about these
things in view of the fact that his stay has been much longer
and he has very intimate and very vahrable connexions in
this COUiltry.

121. The representative of the United Kingdom called my
statement partisan. Is it being partisan when you call for
the liberation of your country and the withdrawal of
occupying forces from your soil? If that is so, I am proud
to be partisan and I will continue to be so. Here I should
like to ask the representative of the United Kingdom
whether he would apply the same definition to the struggle
of the British people during the Second World War and to
the statement made by the then leaders of Great Britain
calling for the liberation of Europe and the defeat of Nazi
Germany.
122. Now I come to the statement made by the representative of the United States of America. In his statement, he
said that I was meddling in the internal affairs of the United
States of America. Naturally nobody has the right to
question the rights and privileges of the United States
authorities, nor to meddle in their internal affairs. But
when the chief executive of the United States of America
went out of his way to tell his audience that in his view
Israel and South Viet-Nam were facing the same kind of
danger, the matter is no longer one of internal affairs. How
can anyone say that these statements are part and parcel of
the internal affairs of the United States? If this criterion is
to be applied to every similar issue, then the whole world
would become an internal affair of the United States of
America.

126. Now we come to the matter of the starting of the
war. The Israel Foreign Minister sought to convey the
impression that Israel started its preparation around the end
of May in order to face the massing of Arab troops, This is
not a true picture. As a matter of fact, the whole trouble
started during the middle of April, when the Israelis massed
their troops on the Syrian border and Syria drew the
attention of the whole world to the imminent danger and
denounced the troops that were being massed on its border.
But the Israelis denied the fact that they were massing their
troops, and the reason for the anger of Mr. Eban at this
book is, apparently, that it has confirmed the veracity of
the Syrian charges that were made during the middle of
April.

123. Allow me, Sir, to refer to what The New York Times,
in its issue of 12 November, said about that statement,
delivered by the President of the United States:
“Last week, addressing a predominantly
Jewish audience in New York, President Johnson broadened the
target by declaring that ‘the same kind of issues’ are at
stake in Vietnam as in the Middle East-thus apparently
equating the South Vietnamese and the Israelis as victims
of aggression and vastly complicating Ambassador Goldberg’s peace-making role at the United Nations.”

127. As for the Palestinian patriots who have been
fighting, are still fighting and will continue to fight in their
own territory, Syria cannot be held responsible for their
acts and for their struggle, which is only natural and
human.
128. The Israel Minister comes here and tells us about the
peacefuul intentions of his Government. I wish only to refer
him to the statement made by his own Prime Minister
regarding what he called “Greater Israel”. This sinister
proclamation is reminiscent of another similar proclamation
which the world heard during the Second World War. But
all of us know what happened to those calling for a
“Greater Reich”, and we all know about their fate.

Apparently the Ambassador does not share the conclusions
reached by The New York Times on this matter.
124. In another point raised by the representative of the
United States he referred to the supply of arms to certain
Arab countries, as well as those to Israel. But what he
forgot or omitted to say was that none of the Arab
countries he referred to was involved in the recent conflict
in the Middle East, that all of them are far from the field of
operations. Is Jordan, the United Arab Republic or Syria

129, Finally, let me say a few words about an article
which appeared in a French newspaper called Tgmoignage
13

C&f%%. 1 would recommend that every member of the
Security Council read this fantastic account depicting the
onslaught of the Israel forces against everything that existed
in Jerusalem, whether it was a Holy Place, a human being or
a piece of Arab property, This account appeared in
Timoignage ChrPtien on 27 July 1967. I hope that the
Israel representative will not come here and say that it is
Arab propaganda or that the account was written by an
Arab or by a pro-Arab nun -who was living in Jerusalem.
130. Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): I have listened with
great care to the suggestion made by the representative of
the United Kingdom earlier in this meeting. I take great
pleasure in confirming, if that were necessary, that Lord
Caradon has been good enough to be in touch with me,
amongst others, and has exchanged with me certain ideas
which he considers might provide a way out of the apparent
deadlock we have reached in the Council. In line with the
statement I made in the Council on the night of 9 November /1373rd meeting], I have naturally encouraged him to
persevere in his efforts and wished him godspeed. It will be
realized that the Council has already delayed considerably
effective action in regard to the grave situation in West
Asia. We hope therefore that the delay now asked for will
be the last. We would earnestly urge that the Council reach
a definitive conclusion when it reconvenes on Thursday
afternoon.

Republic
Israel.“6

would not initiate

offensive action against

133. As we pointed out the other day, the Arab countries
kept their word. They did not commit aggressiveacts, they
did not embark on aggression against Israel. Meanwhile,
Israel troops undertook more than one aggressiveoperation,
in a manner of which the whole world is now aware,They
embarked on all-out aggression against the Arab countries,
accompanied by massive destruction as described by the
Syrian representative just now. We have said, and we repeat
it once again, that we were unaware that Israel troops were
preparing to strike on 5 June. We therefore regarded as a
pointless exercise the attempt-which we now realize was
being made at the time-to condemn in advance the future
victims. That is what the representative of the United States
and other representatives were trying to do at the time. It
would simply have given the aggressor a chance to find
another pretext and another opening for aggression.
134. But if we had been informed that Israel troops were
even at that time preparing to strike on 5 June or at any
other date, we should certainly have joined with the United
States and the other countries which wanted to raise the
question, though we would not have accused the Arab
States, which made no move to start anything. We could
have joined with the United States to prevent the aggression
if it had informed us that aggression by Israel was being
prepared.

131. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
At the beginning of his statement today the
representative of the United States, Mr. Goldberg, tried to
exonerate the United States of America from its responsibility, which the whole world recognizes, in respect of the
dangerous situation created in the Middle East by Israel’s
aggression of 5 June. He alleged that the representatives of
the socialist countries, including the representative of the
People’s Repubiic of Bulgaria, had accused the United States
of delaying tactics. We did not imply that the United States
had dragged its feet before hostilities broke out. What we
said, and I emphasize this, was that the United States had
been anxious at that time to represent the future victims as
potential aggressors. That is what it was trying to do. Its
efforts to hold up our work came after the aggression, when
Israel’s aggression had already been perpetrated. We may
return later to the over-all scope of Ambassador Goldberg’s
arguments after we have read the record and have not only
listened to his statement of today but have re-read certain
others along the same lines.
French):

135. It is regrettable, however, because we definitely felt
at the time that what they were trying to do wasto bring to
book not the future aggressor-of whose intentions they
were aware-but the potential victims of the aggression.
Thus if the United States had been anxious to prevent the
aggression about which it had information and which it
knew was going to happen, it should have made itself clear
at the decisive moment instead of trying to portray the
potential victims of the aggression as the aggressors.
136. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call on
the representative of Israel in exercise of the right of reply.
13’7. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): I shall be very brief. The
representative of Syria has established a reputation of being
an avid reader of newspapers and reciter of quotations. 1
wish to enrich his collection from his own sources and
those of his allies, sources which clearly indicate what are
the true motives of Syrian policies-not only preceding the
hostilities but at this particular stage when we are here in
the Security Council involved in a debate to find a way out
through a peaceful solution.

132. At the time of which Mr. Goldberg speaks, when we
are said to have accused the United States of delaying
tactics it will be recalled that we heard statements by Arab
statesmen. We also read in the report of the SecretaryGeneral that he had been given an assurance by those same
statesmen and Governments that they had no intention of
committing acts of aggression or embarking on large-scale
military aggression against Israel. This is corroborated by
the Secretary-General’s report which I have before me; it
says:

138. Radio Damascus of 23 October enlightened its
listeners in the following way:
“The only way is that of total struggle and a definite
elimination of the focuses of the forces that threaten the
Arab homeland. The duty of the revolutionary forces at
this decisive stage is to translate the will of the masses
into practical deeds which may ensure an available
situation for the Arab nation to stand against the

“He had received assurances from both President Nasser
and Mr, Mahmoud Riad, the Foreign Minister”-who
is
sitting at this table with us-“that
the United Arab

6 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Supphent No. 1, P 3.

14

aggressive forces, push them, and initiate an assault
against them, instead of waiting in defensive positions.
The United Arab Republic forces demonstrated a magniflcent example in sinking the Israel destroyer and encouraged the resistance of our masses to continue the struggles
on all fronts. The terror that befell Israel after the sinking
of the destroyer, and the jubilation that enveloped Arab
countries stresses the efficiency of this system and its
effectiveness.”

142. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I caIl on
the representative of Syria in exercise of the right of reply.
143. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syria): I shall be very brief and shall
not repeat the kind of insults and words which are not
usually used in the Council by any respectable representative-such as lies. I shall confine myself to a brief reply.
144. The Israel representative finds it strange that Radio
Damascus calls for the mobilization of the national forces
to fight the forces which in his words, “threaten the Arab
homeland”. Yet the Foreign Minister of Israel presented ‘a
thesis a few minutes ago and also yesterday, and the whole
thesis in his long speeches was that Israel is justified in its
war because it is defending itself. So defence for Israel is
permissible. When we call-for defence the Israel representative finds it very strange. One wonders which of the views
of the two Israel spokesmen we should believe.

139. The representative of Syria finds a particular enjoyment in presenting to the Council his comparisons with
Nazism. I wish to enlighten him in that regard, too. I have
before me two quotations, which are not from Israel
sources but which refer to his country; one quotation is
from the Egyptian paper A/&bar el-Yom of 2 June 1963,
referring to the party which is in power now in Syria. That
article in Akhbar el-Yom says: “We know now that the
Baath party wants a Nazi-Fascist regime which will freely
enable its members to impose their will on the public.” And
if that is not enough, in the other, a Cairo Radio
commentator on 21 August 1963 had the following to say:
“The Baath party will not succeed in masking its face as the
Nazi party was unable to do it.” I repeat, both these
quotations are from Egyptian sources.

145. The Israel representative said his country was not like
the Nazis. He did not prove that. As proof he quoted a
paper saying that Syria is like the Nazis. I submit that we
should not believe in one paper or two papers; we should
believe acts because acts speak louder than words. We have
an Arab proverb which says: “When the hunter cries you
should not see what he has in his eyes as tears and sorrow,
but you should see the blood on his hands”. Israel is very
similar to the Nazis because it has blood on its hands and it
cannot escape its guilt.

140. Another favourite pastime of the Syrian representative is to dish up again and again the utterly false allegation
of Israel concentration of forces in April, or at any other
time, on the Syrian border. Again and again we have drawn
the attention of the Security Council to the independent
statement and finding contained in the report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council dated 19 May
1967 /S/7896], in which he says that his investigation and
the investigation of his observers have clearly established
that there were no such troop concentrations on the Syrian
border or anywhere else at the time.

146. The PRESIDENT (translated from French]: The list
of speakers is exhausted. As a result of informal consultations, it would appear that the members of the council are
agreed that our next meeting on the situation in the Middle
East should be set for tomorrow, Thursday, at 4 p.m. If
there is no objection, I shall consider that this proposal is
adopted.

141. These things are on record and it will not change
anything if the Syrian representative believes that by the
alchemy of a process of constant repetition he can
transmute the big lie into a golden truth.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p. m

15

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publicationr.moy
be obtained
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or write
or Geneva.

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Ler publications
der Notions
Unies
sent en vente
dons
ler libroiries
et Ies ogenccs
diposi)oirer
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libroirie
ou odrerrer-vous
bt
Notions
Unies, Section der venles, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocioner
de Ias Nacioner
Unidor
ertdn
en lodes porfer
def mundo.
Conrulle
a IV librero
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho in U.N.

UNIDAS

en vento en librerias
o dirliose
q : Nocioner

y cosos dirtribuidoror
Unidos,
Secci6n

Price: $u.S. 0.50 (or equivalent in other currencies)

de
