S/2018/353

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2018
Original: English

Eighteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4
of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of my previous report, dated 15 January
(S/2018/40).
2.
On 11 January 2018 in Kuwait, my Special Representative and Deputy Special
Representative met with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah, who underlined that,
notwithstanding positive steps taken by the Government of Iraq over the past few
years, no concrete progress had been achieved on the file of missing Kuwaiti persons
and property. Sheikh Al Sabah highlighted the importance of the relevant government
institutions of Iraq exerting greater effort in the search for both missing persons and
missing property, in particular the national archives. My Special Representative
reaffirmed the commitment of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) to implementing the Security Council mandate, outlining some of the
Mission’s current activities, including accessing high-resolution and satellite imagery
and facilitating the transfer of technical skills.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
3.
During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to
investigate a number of potential burial locations, including the Sabahiyah and naval
base sites in Kuwait and the Khamisiyah, Radwaniyah, Suleimaniyah and Salman Pak
sites in Iraq. As part of those efforts, the Ministry followed up with witnesses, as well
as with relevant government bodies, to verify all acquired information in an effort to
identify exact burial locations. While no new developments were registered, the sites
in question will remain open as the Ministry continues to search for more information.
The technical team of the Ministry also undertook exploration and excavation works
at the Khamisiyah, Karbala’ and Samawah sites. No human remains or grave-like
features were found. Results from the exhumations conducted in October 2017 at
potential burial locations in Basrah and Najaf were, unfortunately, negative. Calls for
witnesses, most recently on 29 January 2018, inviting tho se with information on
missing Kuwaiti persons and missing Kuwaiti property to come forward, continue to

18-05982 (E)

190418

*1805982*

S/2018/353

be broadcast regularly on satellite television channels by the Office of the
Spokesperson of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq. The International Committ ee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) has provided much needed technical assistance to the Ministry,
donating forensic equipment in support of field work.
4.
On 6 February 2018 in Kuwait, UNAMI attended, in its observer capacity, the
102nd session of the Technical Subcommittee of the tripartite mechanism. The Iraqi,
Kuwaiti and ICRC delegations emphasized the critical importance of satellite and
aerial imagery in identifying potential burial locations and reiterated a request to other
members of the mechanism to provide imagery or analysis of imagery from 1990 and
1991. In support of this, members approved the offer by UNAMI to share areas of
interest with the Global Service Centre in Brindisi, Italy, in order to check the
availability of satellite imagery. The Iraqi delegation also submitted a request to the
members of the tripartite mechanism for technical assistance, including training on
the use of ground-penetrating radar, as well as on properly documenting field work
in compliance with the ICRC review project recommendations relating to the
application of appropriate methodology. ICRC and UNAMI are currently studying
how best to assist, drawing on available expertise and resources. As a follow -up to
the 13 November 2017 visit to the Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus, UNAMI
explored the possible use of metal detectors in search of potential burial sites.
Consultations with the United Nations Mine Action Service in Iraq have, however,
revealed that metal detectors would not be suitable as a primary search tool, although
they could prove useful in complementing the search. The members of the tripartite
mechanism have decided to hold a one-day meeting of the sub-advisory working
group on 22 April 2018 specifically to consider the findings and recommendations of
the ICRC review project. Comments from members will form the basis of a plan of
action intended to streamline and prioritize the work of the mechanism and guide its
future efforts.
5.
On 26 March 2018, my Special Representative met in Baghdad with the Minist er
of Defence of Iraq, Irfan al-Hayali, and underlined that the file of missing Kuwaiti
persons remained high on my agenda. He further welcomed the hosting by Iraq of the
next meetings of the tripartite mechanism in Baghdad. Mr. Al-Hayali stressed the
resolve of the Ministry to continue playing a proactive role with respect to this
important humanitarian dossier.

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
6.
During the reporting period, UNAMI reiterated to the Minis try of Foreign
Affairs of Iraq its readiness to facilitate and observe the official handover of located
Kuwaiti property and offered assistance in transporting by air the itemized Kuwaiti
books currently located at the Ministry, once agreement has been rea ched between the
two States on the dates of the handover. UNAMI continues to work with the Ministry
on how best to implement and expedite the process.

IV. Observations
7.
Achieving concrete results on the file of missing Kuwaiti and third -country
nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, is essential
for the full normalization of relations between Iraq and Kuwait. I welcome the
dedication demonstrated by both Member States in ensuring that this file receives
substantial and continued attention.

2/3

18-05982

S/2018/353

8.
I commend the efforts of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq on reviving the search
for missing Kuwaiti persons and its disposition to take on board requests,
recommendations and advice from Kuwaiti counterparts and members of the tr ipartite
mechanism. Moving the file forward after a 13-year absence of tangible results
requires commitment, determination and a willingness to employ new and innovative
methods. I look forward to constructive discussions between members of the tripartite
mechanism on implementing recommendations and findings arising from the ICRC
review project, which have the potential to reinvigorate the file. UNAMI stands ready
to provide support and assistance, guided by the valuable advice of ICRC and the
needs of the tripartite mechanism. With this in mind, I strongly encourage Member
States, and particularly members of the mechanism, to provide any information or
documentation available that could help to identify burial locations and respond to
the requests of the Government of Iraq for technical and forensic assistance.
9.
I remain disappointed that there have been no developments with regard to the
missing Kuwaiti property and reiterate the call for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Iraq to expedite the official handover of located Kuwaiti books. Much more needs to
be done to bolster the search for the invaluable Kuwaiti national archives.
10. I reaffirm the unwavering commitment of my Special Representative and
Deputy Special Representative, as well as of UNAMI staff, to playing an active role
in this important humanitarian endeavour by continuing to promote, support and
facilitate the efforts of the Government of Iraq towards this end.

18-05982

3/3
