A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/93
28 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/51/619/Add.2)]
51/93.

Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling that all States have pledged themselves, under the Charter of
the United Nations, to promote and encourage universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Reaffirming that discrimination against human beings on the grounds of
religion or belief constitutes an affront to human dignity and a disavowal of
the principles of the Charter,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981, by which it
proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief,
Recalling article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,1
Emphasizing that the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion
and belief is far-reaching and profound and that it encompasses freedom of
thought on all matters, personal conviction and the commitment to religion or
belief, whether manifested individually or in community with others,
Reaffirming the call of the World Conference on Human Rights for all
Governments to take all appropriate measures in compliance with their

1

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

97-76981

/...

A/RES/51/93
Page 2

international obligations and with due regard to their respective legal
systems to counter intolerance and related violence based on religion or
belief, including practices of discrimination against women and the
desecration of religious sites, recognizing that every individual has the
right to freedom of thought, conscience, expression and religion,2
Calling upon all Governments to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur of
the Commission on Human Rights on religious intolerance to enable him to carry
out his mandate fully,
Alarmed that serious instances of intolerance and discrimination on the
grounds of religion or belief, including acts of violence, intimidation and
coercion motivated by religious intolerance, occur in many parts of the world
and threaten the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Deeply concerned that, as reported by the Special Rapporteur, the rights
violated on religious grounds include the right to life, the right to physical
integrity and to liberty and security of person, the right to freedom of
expression, the right not to be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment and the right not to be arbitrarily
arrested or detained,3
1.
Reaffirms that freedom of thought, conscience, religion and belief
is a human right derived from the inherent dignity of the human person and
guaranteed to all without discrimination;
2.
Urges States to ensure that their constitutional and legal systems
provide adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of thought, conscience,
religion and belief, including the provision of effective remedies in cases
where the right to freedom of religion or belief is violated;
3.
Also urges States to ensure, in particular, that no one within
their jurisdiction is, because of their religion or belief, deprived of the
right to life or the right to liberty and security of person, or subjected to
torture or arbitrary arrest or detention;
4.
Further urges States, in conformity with international standards
of human rights, to take all necessary action to prevent such instances, to
take all appropriate measures to combat hatred, intolerance and acts of
violence, intimidation and coercion motivated by religious intolerance and to
encourage, through the educational system and by other means, understanding,
tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief;
5.
Recognizes that legislation alone is not enough to prevent
violations of human rights, including the right to freedom of religion or
belief;
6.
Emphasizes that, as underlined by the Human Rights Committee,
restrictions on the freedom to manifest religion or belief are permitted only
if limitations are prescribed by law, are necessary to protect public safety,
order, health or morals, or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others, and

2

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 22.

3

See E/CN.4/1994/79, para. 103.
/...

A/RES/51/93
Page 3

are applied in a manner that does not vitiate the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion;
7.
Urges States to ensure that, in the course of their official
duties, members of law enforcement bodies, civil servants, educators and other
public officials respect different religions and beliefs and do not
discriminate against persons professing other religions or beliefs;
8.
Calls upon all States to recognize, as provided in the Declaration
on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, the right of all persons to worship or assemble in
connection with a religion or belief and to establish and maintain places for
those purposes;
9.
Expresses its grave concern at any attack upon religious places,
sites and shrines, and calls upon all States, in accordance with their
national legislation and in conformity with international human rights
standards, to exert utmost efforts to ensure that such places, sites and
shrines are fully respected and protected;
10.
Recognizes that the exercise of tolerance and non-discrimination
by persons and groups is necessary for the full realization of the aims of the
Declaration;
11.
Encourages the continued efforts on the part of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on religious intolerance,
appointed to examine incidents and governmental actions in all parts of the
world that are incompatible with the provisions of the Declaration and to
recommend remedial measures as appropriate;
12.
Encourages Governments to give serious consideration to inviting
the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries so as to enable him to fulfil
his mandate even more effectively;
13.
Also encourages Governments, when seeking the assistance of the
United Nations programme of advisory services and technical assistance in the
field of human rights, to consider, where appropriate, including requests for
assistance in the field of the promotion and protection of the right to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion;
14.
Welcomes and encourages the efforts of non-governmental
organizations and religious bodies and groups to promote the implementation of
the Declaration, and invites them to consider what further contribution they
could make to its implementation and dissemination in all parts of the world;
15.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue its
consideration of measures to implement the Declaration;
16.
Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
17.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Special
Rapporteur receives the necessary staffing, financial and material resources
to enable him to discharge in full and on time his mandate;

/...

A/RES/51/93
Page 4

18.
Decides to consider the question of the elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance at its fifty-second session under the item entitled
"Human rights questions".

82nd plenary meeting
12 December 1996
