for oppression
bns. My Governin movements in
,Cil last we were
irpresentatives of
uth Africa, and
f the talks, We
Binous policy of
esibility, as this

umanity and an
ion can assist in

smise is doomed,
nous resolutions
rim6 Cksaire, an

UNITED

NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCII,
OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

RECORDS
YEAR

-us of displacing

n internal affair.
: it, to extirpate
d, to tear up its

MEEI ING: 28 OCTOBER

~804’”

*

1974

Bnization will be

NEW YORK
t.
p.t?f.

CONTENTS
Provjsiq&l

agenda (S/Agenda/l804)

.I.,.II..I,,.,.I..I.....I...I.,,.I...

1

Adoption of the agenda ,.,......,,.o,...,.,,o,................,......

1

Relationship between the United Nations and South Africa:
(u) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1525);
(6) Lc+ter dated 9 October 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1532) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I...................O..................

’

1

S/PV. 1804

NOTE
Symbolsof United Nationsdocumentsare composedof capital letterscombinedwith figures.Mention of sucha symbolindicatesa referenceto a United
Nationsdocument.
Documentsof the Security Council(symbolS/ . , .) are normallypublishedin
quarterly Supplements of the Oj]kicrl Records of the Security Council. The date
of the documentindicatesthe supplementin which it appearsor in which informationabout it is given.
The resolutionsof the Security Council, numberedin accordancewith a
systemadoptedin 1964,are publishedin yearly volumesof Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutionsadoptedbefore 1January1965,becamefully operative
on that date.
Page

1
.
Y

1
’

kl
:I1
,.

I.1804

-

1

~..

EIGHTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FOURTH

Held in New York on Monday,

MEETINC~

28 October 1974, at 3 p.m.

Presic/en/: Mr, Michel NJINti
(United Republicof Cameroon),

Mali, Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan,Qatar,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Present: The representatives
of thefollowingStates: Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yugoslavia
-1. Republic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, and Zaire to participate, without the right to vote,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet in the Council’sdiscussionof the questionbeforeit.
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
At the invitution of the President, Mr, Rahal
Cameroonand United Statesof America.
(Algeriu), Mr. Karim (Bungludesh),
Mr. WaldronRutnsey
(Burhados),
Mr,
Moncjjo
(Congo),
Mr. Alwdn
(Cuba), Mr. Smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. AaibadP (Duhomey), Mr. Abdel Meguid, (Egypt),
Mr. Florin (Gertnun Democratic Republic), Mr. Boaten
(Ghanu),
Mrs. Jeanne M@in
CissP (Guinea),
Mr. Juckson (Guyana), Mr. Juipul (India), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait),
Mr. Hurtnon
(Liberia),
Mr. Maghur
(Libyan Arub Republic), t Mr. Rabetyfika (Madagccscar), Mr. TrccorP (Mali), Mr. Rumphul (Muuritius),
Slwtui
(Morocco),
‘Mr.
Ogbu (Nigeria),
$1:
Akhund
(Pctkistun),
Mr.
Jamal
(Qatar),
Mr. Dotcu (Romania), Mr. Bnroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Painter (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussein (Somalia),
Mr. Borha (South Africa), Mr. Kelani (Syrirtn Arab
Republic), Mr. Driss (Tunisia), Mr. Kinene (Uganda),
Mr. Htrmnidctn (United Arab Emirures), Mr. Salim
(United
Republic
of Tnnzctniu),
Mr. Ynguibou
(Upper
Voha),
Mr,
Perrit
(Yugosluvia)
and
Mr. Muruccle (Zaire), took rhe places reserved for
them ut the side of rhe Council chumber.

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda/l804)
I,

Adoption of the agenda

-2, -Relationshipbetween the United Nations and
South Africa:
(rc) Letter dated 30 September 1974from the
~-Presidentof the General Assembly to the
Presidentof the Security Council(S/l 1525);
(I?) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the
,PermanentRepresentativeof Tunisia to the
United Nationsaddressed
to the Presidentof
the Security Council(S/l 1532)
The tneeting ws called to order ut 3.45 p.m.

Adoptionof thd agenda
Tlw ctgenclrr wis’ udop ted.

Relationshipbetweenthe United Nationsand South
Africa:
(a) Letter dated30 September1974from the President
of the GeneralAssemblyto the Presidentof the
Security Council(S/l 1525);
(b) -Letter dated 9 October 1974from the Permanent
Representative.
of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed
to the Presidentof the Wurlty Council
(S/l 1532)

2. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerution

from Fretich):

Furthermore, I wish to draw the attention of members
of the Council to documents S/11545 and S/11546,
which contain the texts of two letters dated 25 October
to the Presidentof the Security Council by the
representatives of Kenya and Mauritania, in which
a request is made that the Council extend an invitation

under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to Mr, Notil Mukono, Secretary for External Affairs
of ZANU [Zimbabwe Aji.icNtt Ncttiotwl Union],
1I l’he PRESIDENT
(ittlerpt’lJt~tliott ,fi*otn French):
In accordancewith the decisionstaken previously Mr. T. George Silundika, Secretary for Publicity
[1796/h-17YHth crttcl I800th-IN03r~I tneetittg.s] under andInformationof ZAPU [Zitnbctbw AJi+ccttt People’s
Article 31 of the Charter and in accordancewith the Union] and Mr. Theo-BenGurirab, Chief Representapertinent provisions of the provisional rules of tive of the SWAP0 [South West AJ>icct People’s
procedure, I invite the representativesof Algeria, Orgtrtrizcrriott] missionto the United Nations.If I hear
Bangladesh,Barbados,the Congo,Cuba, Czechoslo- no objectionsI shalltake it that the Councilagreesto
vakia, Dahomey, Egypt, the German Democratic that request.
Republic, Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, India, Kuwait,
l.iheria, the Libya11Arab Republic, Madagascar,
I

hatar,

Imalia,
Inisia,
United
Bslavia
_vote,
u-e it.
&ha/
[dronmyo),
‘@kia),
‘gYPO*
roaren
I+zea),
iShara
‘&ghur
Mada-

M4s),
reria) ,
War),
tibia),
ralia),
-Arab
wda),
Salim
,bibou
- and

bid for

F&h):

nbers
JS46,
dober
t the
khich
tation
edurc
Xfairs
&Ml],
piicity
2ple’s
centa>ple’s
I hear
3cs to

3, The PRESIDENT (intcrpreMou
,fiwm French):
I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the draft resolution contained in
document S/11547. This draft resolution has been
submitted by the Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia in accordance with the provisions of rule 38
of the provisional rules of procedure, since Saudi
Arabia was invited to participate in the discussion
under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
by a decision of the Council adopted at its 1796th
meeting,

international community is now realizing more and
more that upctr~heid
not only is a problem that
concerns a specific region, but has implications which
go’well beyond the borders of the country where the
policy is pursued.
10, This realizntion is not reflected merely in
verbal condemnation of the South African Idgime, but
is tending increasingly to take the form of effective
measures to be applied against that regime. Indeed,
whether it be a question of the violation of human
rights, of legitimacy, or of the violation of the most
sacred rules of the international community, the
South African regime is by far the worst offender.

4. The first speaker is the representative of Upper
Volta. 1 invite him to come to the Council table
and to make his statement,

Il. We should like to point out, indeed, that there
has been no improvement in that ldgime since the
United Nations first drew its attention to the continuing
violation of the most fundamental human rights. The
institution ofopwthid
is a system designed and set up
to make sure, by scientific means, that the non-whites
continue to serve the white racist minority. Indeed,
these non-whites-the blacks and the Coloureds-are
virtually slaves, since they are constantly at the
disposal of their masters, Over the years, ccpcrrthrid
has become wors,e. Increasingly evil laws are passed,
the sole purpose of which is to strip the blacks and
the Coloureds of their fundamental freedoms of speech,
association and movement. In South Africa we have
lost count of the number of arbitrary arrests, hangings
and imprisonments, The rape of young girls has become
a current amusement of Vorster’s soldiers, while the
opponents of uprpcrrtheid, primarily the black leaders,
are hunttid dcwn, if indeed they are not already
mouldering in some insalubrious gaol.

5, Mr. YACUIBOU (Upper Volta) (interprelaliort
J>o~t Fresh):
Mr. President, before dealing with the
grave problem before us, a matter of concern to the
whole of mankind, I should like first to associate
myself with the previous speakers here in congratulating you, a worthy son of Africa, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, at a time
when it is discussing a problem so crucial for our
continent, The United Republic of Cameroon, which
you represent here, has always pursued an admirable
African policy. Therefore, your presidency here today
is no more than a deserved tribute to your own
wisdom, and a symbol and a sign of the times-a
sign that the peoples of the third world will increasingly
make their voices heard in the discuss@ of matters
that concern them.
6. It was on 27 September last that the Credentials
Committee, in a historic vote, decided to reject the
credentials of the representatives of the racist rkgime
of South Africa,

12. At the time of the electoral masquerade of
24 April 1974, the National Party strengthened its
representation in the South African Assembly, thus
making its grip on the country complete. The bantustan
policy has been accelerated, with the result that more
than a million people have been forcibly transferred.
South Africa has embarked upon an unbridled arms
race. Supplementary appropriations amounting to
702 million rand, or about $912 million, have been
voted for national defence purposes in the budget for
the financial year t974/75. This all goes to show how
increasingly ,dangerous the situation is becoming in
this region, and the threat that it poses to
international security.

7. On 30 September, the General Assembly furthermore adopted by 125 votes to l-the 1 being the
vote of South Africa-resolution
3207 (XXIX) calling
on the Security Council “to review the relationship
between the United Nations and South Africa in the
light of the constant violation by South Africa of the
principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration
of buman Rights”,
8, Those .two decisions are merely the logical
outcome of the process, which began in 1970, of
denying the representatives of Pretoria any right to
represent the South African people. Decisions taken
in previous years to reject the credentials of those
representatives had been interpreted as severe
condemnations of the policy of rrpwflwid
and final
warnings to the South African Government to desist
from its racial practices,

13. As to the illegitimacy of that rBgime, no one can
any longer have any doubt about it. One may indeed
well wonder what credibility can attach to a
Government-that
is to say, the whites of that
country-which
has reduced 90 per cent of its
population to slavery. Furthermore, there is :I11
increasing tendency for some people among the whites
themselves to begin asking questions about lhc future
of a rCgimc that ib retreating more and more inlo
isolalionism. We understand that in this chamber ninny
States. and by no means the least important, hx\vc

9. Those uppeats appear to have t’allen on deaf ears:
there is none su deaf as hc who will not hear. The
inlernational community is now beginning lo become
aware of a m;dignant and evil phenomenon which
Africans have long since been denouncing. The
2

.

more and
,lem that
ons which
where the

beenunconditionalchamoionsofdemocracv. that is to
say, of governmentby n&ority rule. If this.principle
is really dear to them, it is they who shouldbe the
staunchestopponents of the minority r8gime of
South Africa.

tierely in
jgime, but
ri effective
3:. Indeed,
6f human
‘-the most
unity, the
Tender.

-14. And what about the continued violation of the
most sacredprinciplesof the Charter of the United
Nations,andof the resolutionsof the Security Council
and3heGeneralAssembly’?

that there
since the
:ontinuing
ights. The
and set up
.On-whites
6 Indeed,
weds-are
I-y at the
uptrtvhcitl

teepassed,
blacksand
of speech,
L we have
i hangings
is become
iwhile the
b. leaders,
it already
jerade of
:hened its
ably, thus
bantustan
that more
ansferred,
died arms
tinting to
&we been
Budget for
.$how how
Boming in
poses to
10one can
Iay indeed
tch

to

II WI'

tll;llly

ant,

havc

u

3 of that
nt of its
:re is an
the whites
the future
1110i.einto

-

the following: first, doesSouth Africa flout the most
fundamentalhumanrights or not; secondly, is South
Africa violatingthe decisionstakenby theinternational
community or not; and, thirdly, is South Africa
persistentlyviolatingthe Charterof the United Nations
or not’? Unless membersof the Council wish to
contradict their own conclusions,they have no choice
but to repiy affirmatively.

1% If that is their reply, they must draw the
necessary conclusions. They must no longer
15. Non-discriminationis a fundamentalprinciple procrastinateand try to admonisha regimewhich
of the Charter. It is to be found in the Preamble, scoffsat the Council’sdecisio!lsand which is causing
which reaffirmsthe faith of the peoplesin fundamental so muchuncertainty in the wo:ld about the prospect
humanrights, in the dignity and worth of the human for peace. The Charter must te applied, becauseit
personand in the equal rights of men and women. saysverbatim in Article 6:
Rut what do we see?South Africa is continuing to
“A Member of the United Nations .+Zc.h has
disregardtheseprincipleswith impunity,
persistentlyviolated the principlescontainedin the
present Charter may be expelled from the
16, It is within this context that the Gene’ral
Assemblyand the Security Council, each in its own
Organization by the General Assembly upon the
field of competence,have adoptedresolutionscalling
recommendirtion~of~the
Security Council.‘!
~~~;~ ~~~
upon the South African Government to change its
policy andto establisha morehumanand democratic 20. Some peoplesay that certain membersof the
Idgime, with due regard for the non-white mi\jority Security Council. becauseof their aowerful interests
of its population, These appealswere not heeded, in Souih Africa, ‘will veto a draft &olution to expel
and if the membersof the Council want to be that country. We are aware of this. However, we
completelyenlightenedall they have to do is refer to shouldlike to draw the attention of those States to
the excellent report of the Special Committeeon the double responsibility--l would even say comAprwtheid on the “violations of the Charter of the plicity-which they wouldbeassumingif they adopted
united Nations and resolutions of the General that attitude.
Assembly and the Security Council by the South
African regime”,I
21. Firstly, the consequenceof their attitude-and
an unfortunateconsequence-wouldbe that of making
17. There is no further need, 1 am sure, to attempt a laughing-stockof the Charterandthus considerablv
to describe~~pdwid.
Since the beginningof the weakining it and underminingthk- prestige of the
presentdebate, personsbetter qualified than I have Organization. It would also lead us to questionthe
already done so. The only thing that can be said is true role of the Security Council, since, for the
that no society canany longertoleratea policy of this developingcountries, the Security Council would in
kind andno peoplecanany longerput up with it. That fact be rather a Council of insecurity to the extent
iswhy wemustall mobilize-and aboveall the Security that-the prerogativesthat it enjoys would not have
Council-to fight this scourgewhich our socitty has been used for the benefit of peaceand security in
already describedas a crime againsthumanity. This thoseareas.Furthermore,thesecountriesmustrealize
policy doesindeedconstitutea crimeto the extent that that millions of Africans and milliom. of other
in its very essenceit deniesmenequality with other people throughout the world are--following these
men and also elevates
racism to
very closely. Are they goingto disappoint
___~~_~~
--.-the status
~~ of a proceedings
doctrin_
them? In that case, they would be responsiblefor
a dangeroussituation of tension prevailing in the
18. I say to the membersof the -Council: this regioninasmuchas the blacksof South Africa would
historic decision taken to entrust to you the have no other alternative but to conquer or die.
considerationof the relationshipbetweenthe United Obviously, they would decideto conquer,in spiteof
Nations and South Africa shouldbe interpreted by
the innumerablesacrificesthat that would require of
you in the light of the global context in which the them. We are firmly convinced, however, that
Assemblywishedto place it. By voting by a very
wisdomwill prevail in this Council and that it will
largemiority to bring the problemof South Africa
tread the path of justice at the expense-of shortbefore the Council, the nations of the world
term economicinterests.
demonstratedtheir faith in the honesty with which
its memberswould take the decision.The questions 22. As for the statementswe heard here a few
which those nations wished to pose IO them are days agofrom the representativeof the racist regime
of SouthAfrica. they have offered us no newelement
which could detainUsfor any length of time, unless
it is the fact that they constitute a new insult and

It the most
y. is South
ternational

uth Africa
ed Nations

il wish to
)~no~choice

:drgw the
10 longer
ime which
-is causing
e prospect
because it

irs of the

J interests
ij to expel
@ever, we
=§tates to
say comry adopted

LIude-and
of making
nsiderably
@e of the
Qstion the
; for the
-would in
be extent

-not have.
gcurity in
Ust real&
?of other

hg

these

@sappoint

dsible for
%g in the
ka would
r or die.
n spite of
“cquire of
wer, that
Iat it will
of short-

t-6: a fiw
s t regime
w element
e, unless
,1sult and

27. The PRESIDENT (itrtPri~rettrtiot1
jiut,l
Fretwi~):
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea, and
I invite her to take a place at the Council table
arid to make her statement.

challenge to the Organization, In fact the representative
of the South African rigime came here and stated
that its resolutions and those of the General Assembly
were based upon false information and prejudice. It
would seem that this assertion is offensive to the
good faith of those who have been dealing with the
South African problem, but we roalize, of course,
that the role of Mr, Botha is to defend his r8gime.
Anyone who.is well informed is well aware of what
is happening in South Africa, whore permanent
-insecurity for 90 per cent of the population is the
rule, and the leaders of the African movements are
hunted down, if indeed they are not already
languishing in some sordid dungeon, like Nelson and
Winnie Mandela. In any case, it would be difficult
for the representative of South Africa to prove that
the many laws promulgated by his regime are not in
contravention of human rights and particularly the
rights of the blacks. It would also be difficult for
-hi% to prove that the occupation of Namibia is
something which is not in defiance of the decisions
of the international community. It is true that later
in his statement Mr, Botha claimed that the concept
of separate development, that is to say, crpcrrtkdd,
was not based on any racist ideology. In the final
analysis, it is difficult to say whether this is not
more ridiculous.than it is tragic,

28, Mrs. Jeanne Martin ClSSi? (Guinea) (itrterpwtufhu
Frcwch):
Mr, President, before 1 take up
the hem before the Security Council I should like,
on behalf of my delegation, to convoy to you, and
through you to the members of the Council, my
thanks for havh., L :n given the opportunity of
participating, without the right to vote, in this debate.

tiot,

29. It is a source of pride for my delegation to see
a distinguished son of Africa, a national of a country
with traditions of justice and peace, presiding over
this eminent bodv of the United Nations at a time
when it is consideiing one of the most burning prdblems
of our time, one which has a direct impact on the
security of our continent, Africa, Your qualities as
an experienced diplomat lead us to hope that under
your presidency the Security Council will be able to
bring to the oppressed people of Azania the justice
they have been awaiting for more than a quarter of
a century.
30. On 30 September 1974, by its resolution 3207
(XXIX), adopted by an overwhelming mdority, the
General Assembly, for the first time, called upon the
Security Council to review the relationship between
the United Nations and South Africa in the light of the
constant violations by the latter of the priciplos of
the Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human.
Rights,

23. What we want, finally, is for crpurtlteid,
the
system of separate development, the racist ideology
and the colonialist ideology to disappear from Soulh
Africa. What we want to see in South Africa is
a democratic State, headed by freely elected leaders,
elected by the mdority of the population, and not a
regime which comes from God knows whore and which
has reduced 90 per cent of the population of the country
to~slavery,
s
24. No one can be deluded by the current policy
of the South African rkgime, and the statements made
by Mr. Botha do not encourage us to optimism. That
is why it is imperative for the Council to take a firm
decision,

31. At last, after 28 years in which the United
Nations has repeatedly adopted resolutions ranging
from appeals to warnings and recommendations of
sanctions against the white minority regime of Pretoria,
after 28 years of patience and in face of the universal
rejection and repudiation of ~tpdwicl,
the Security
Council is mooting to consider the consequences of
the arrogance of the Government of South Africa,
which continues to defy the international community,
undermining its moral authority year after year.

25. The racist regime of South Afi-ica is feeling the
wind of change, It is throwing a little ballast overboard
and is trying to have us believe that it is becoming
more democratic, but its only purpose is to try to
obtain some respite from the international community.
Fundamentally, apartheid
remains the doctrine of
this r6gime.
26. Before concluding, Mr, President, I should like to
thank you for giving me the opportunity to participate
in your debate and to reaffirm once again that today
we are determined to fight rrpnrtlwiti
as yesterday
WC fought nazism and as tomorrow we shall fight imy
ideology which would enslave mankind or any part of
mankind. in anv case. thL black oeooles will fulfil theit
destiny in the course of histori, $th or without the
United Nations. It is for us and it is for the members
of the Council to see to it that it is accomplished
with the ilnited Nations.

32, Everything, or almost everything, that could
be said abdut the policy of the racist minority of
Pretoria has been said over the past 28 years but,
unfortunately, the dimensions and the repercussions
of the system are such that it is impossible to avoid
repetitions, restatements and reminders.
33. Ever since the United Nations was created,
after the horrors of Hitlerite nazism, the signatories of
the Charter have been fully aware that racism was a
serious threat to international harmony and peace.
Thus they adopted General Assembly resolution 103 (I), in which the General Assembly
declared that it was in the higher interests of
humanity to put an immediate end to religious and
4

Qttl

so-calledracial persecutionand discriminationand struggle for independence, have proved to be
called upon the Governments and responsible ineffective becauseof the impunity enjoyedby South
authoritiesto conform both to the letter and to the Africa to which I havejust referred,
spirit of the Charter,and to take the mostpromptand
-energetic steps to that end, In responseto that
38, There is absolutelyno doubt that the policy of
resolution, the Government of South Africa, going ~rpttrfht~idis steadily spreadingand becomingmore
-back on its commitmentsunderthe Charter, adopted and more severe and oppressive, T/w C/dstim
a seriesof discriminatoryand humiliatingmeasures Scinlce Mot&w
stated in one of its issuesof 1970
againstthe non-whitepopulationof that country. The that betweenmid-1968and mid-1969there had been
-right to be representedin Parliament’was
.refusedto
88,000personsin South African prisonsevery day,
-the peopleof Indian and Pakistaniorigins
95 per cent of whom were Africans, and that over
the sameperiod 84 personshad been executed in
34. Placedon the agendaof the GeneralAssembly, South Africa-half of all the death sentences
~thequestion of racial conflict provoked by South imposedthroughoutthe world. On the basisof those
Africa’s policy of ~q.w/hcid has ever since been a horrifying statistics,which go back five years now,
constantsourceof seriousconcernto the international it is easyto appreciatethe seriousness
of the situation
~community,The situation regarding the policy of
obtainingin that country today.
trprw//wic/ was to be marked by one of its most
disturbingdevelopmentsin the l96Os,when for the 39. The peoplesof Africa, supportedby all peoples
first time the Security Council was seized of the of the world who love peaceandjustice, have never
questionby 29 African and Asian StatesMembeisof
ceaseddrawing the attention of the international
the Organization,It wasaskedto considerthe situation community to the inhumanpolicy of qmrtheid of
resulting from the massacreat Sharpeville of
South Africa. Two particularly important recent
unarmedand peacefuldemonstratorsagainstracial international conferencesin Africa land the third
discriminationand segregation
in South Africa, In the world-the Conferenceof Headsof StateandGovernresolutionadoptedat the conclusion.of its consider- ment of the Organization of African -Unity held
ation of the item the Councilstatedthat the situation, at Mogadiscioand the Fourth Summit Conference
if continued,might endangerinternationalpeaceand of the Non-Aligned Countries at Algiers-have
security, and called upon the Governmentof South publishedwarningson this point, have denounced
Africa to abandonits policy of ~/~trr//~citland racial trpartl~~id and once again have asked that urgent
discrimination[wsolrrlio~~ 134 t/Y&J)].
and effective measures
shpuldbe adoptedto fight it.

f+CWCh):

Guinea, and
lpuncil table
) (iutivprrt~~-

:e I take up
Hhould like,
to you, and
Zouncil, my
portunity of
this debate.

;ation to see
of a country
isiding ovel
IS at a time
ing problems
@pacton the
qualities as
S that under

11 be able to

i; the justice
a quarter of
ilution 3207
idority, the
ed upon the
hip between
e light of the
Fpriciplzs of
@of Human

35. Despitethis apprehension,welljustified because
it was strictly in line with reality, the growing
awarenessof this evil did not, unfortunately, induce
the internationalcommunity to take energeticaction
.againstccptrrtlteitl.

the United
ens ranging
mdations of
gof Pretoria,
131~
universal
:he Security
squencesof
tith Africa,
gommunity,
c year.

36. Today, evenmorethan’inthe past,a combination
of considerations of strategy and international
economic interests in the continent of Africa
explainsmore clearly the abdicationof responsibility
of one and all in the face of this unmitigatedevil
and of the distrust, disdain and hostility expressed
by the supportersof ~~pwtlwid and their refusal to
act in accordancewith the many resolutionsadopted
heretofore condemningthis scourge. As we have
already said, this attitude of the imperialists,which
is one of unrelievedguilt, hasin the courseof time
induced Pretoria each year to ‘adopt furthel
discriminatoryandhumiliatingmeasures,
accentuating
and worseningrepressionto the point where “the
right to live” is nothing but ;I phraseand where
the non-whites no longer have any possibility of
protesting, even peacefully. or any legal meansot
obtainingredressfor the wrongsthey suffer.

that could
ininority of
;- years but,
percussions
LJICto avoid

41. In placing the question of the racial policy of
South Africa on the agendaof the United Nations
for the first time in 1946, India, a country of the
third world, aimedto introducedemocracyandJustice
into the legislationof the racist minority Government.
Today the representativesof the countries,of the
third world and of all countriesthat love peaceand
justice, are working for the eliminationof opwthid;
they are working to ensurethat the deepest-rooted
aspirationsof mankind, for a life of dignity and
justice, becomea reality for the non-whitemajority
of South Africa.

42. The membersof the Security Council have all
in the courseof the foregoingdebatesreaffirmedtheil
deepaversionto trptw~hcid. We shouldlike to remind
them what a speakersaid in the plenary meeting
of the Assemblya few weeksagothat all our political
efforts are in the last analysisjudged accordingto a
single criterion: the ability to translate our human
37. It wouldbe wellto recognizethat all themeasures concernsinto deeds.
so far recommendedby the Organization ~~~IIIQ
South Africa‘s policy of trpurdwid, whether we are 43. Since all are opposedto the policy of rrptrrrhid
speakingof arms embargos,economicsanctions01
of South Africa. our choice can be no different and
assistancelo the peoplesof South Africa in theii ir can only br unanimous.Concertedaction against

as created,
gnatoriesof
zism wasa
and peace.
,lY resoluAssembly
nterests of
:ligious and

--

40 The international community itself has never
ceasedto denouncecipctrtheid. It has never ceased
to strive to find a solution to this execrablepolicy,
The time for taking an energeticdecisionhascome.

I. -

development plan such as the one advocated by

a practice condemnedas a crime against
humanity and as a threat to internationalpeaceand
security, is a certaingaugeof the valueof international
co-operation. In this international forum we have
heara a representative state that in international
affairs there could be no compromisewith justice.
Accordingly, Africa and its friendswill know how to
translatevotes into facts.

upnrtheid,

~~p~u-1I~eid.

47. In objectiveterms,whatinterestwouldthe United
Nations have in defendingthe rights of a Member
which hus regularly flouted not just one decision
but all the decisionsadopted by it’! Hew can one
explain that in this chamberthere shouldbe voices
that eternally support the causeof a State whose
~44. After 28 yearsof delay, the twenty-ninth session only merit is that it has invariably repudiatedthe
-of the GeneralAssemblyseemsto be the appropriate principlesof the Charter? It is just as if a Christian
moment for extending to the Organization rhe eere to be made an archbishopbecausehe had
ostracismmetedout to SouthAfrica in the speciahzed spaton the Bible. The excommunicationof the sinner
agencies.Indeed,why shouldwe continueto proclaim shouldbeparalleledpurelyandsimplyby the exclusion
the equality of all human beingsand at the same of SsutbAfrica from the United Nations.
time accept as a fully-fledged Member with all its
rights the Republicof South Africa, whosenational 48. Aptrrtlreid in Africa constitutes, by its very
policy is basedon the persistent violation of this nature, a serioussourceof concern and there is no
doubt but that it involves for all of us our security
principle?
and our liberaticn on the basisof our devotion to
45. The tone setat the outsetof the statementmade unity and universal peace. Therefore, any decision
by the spokesmanfor trpcrrtlteid in the Council on which the Council may take against South Africa
24October [fBLX?rh
meeting] reflecteda certainfeeling and on the basisof a compromise,other than the
of repentance. We were expecting more concrete exclusion without appeal sf that S!ate, would
~proposalsfor the immediate proclamation of the jeopardizethe Charter.
independenceof Namibia, the withdrawal of South
African interventionistforcesfrom SouthernRhodesiaI 49. The FRESIDENT (interpretcriion ,f?ortt Frard~):
landaboveall the promiseof a reversalof the backward L’henext speakeris the representativeof the People’s
policy of crpartheid. But alas, most unfortunately, Republicof the Congo. I invite him to take a place
the representativeof Pretoria, just as in the past, at the Counciltabie and to makea statement.
hasdashedout IQX 5. Thus, far from envisagingthat
rl,;versal of policy wlrich had been hoped for so 50. Mr. MONDJO (Congo) firltclr’/~rc’ttrtioir ,fkom
long, 1’rc.r
Isom reviewing its policy of intervention F~cvIc~~):I should like right away to dischargea
in Southern Rhodesk.,the Governmentof the white twofold duty which my delegation believes to be
~minority in South Africa, through !(le voice of its essential:first, the Congo delegationwould like to
spokesman,tells us that Namibia will accede to thank the membersof the Council and you yourself,
in thisdebate.
nationalsovereigntyin lessthan 10years,in order not Sir, for havingpermittedusto participate
,,,i,,
-J-..L.
“^^..,I
h,r th;.
,~,w;r;,,n
to tell us that the independenceof that TerrLory l-h.3 Pm,n,.il
the solemnundertakingat Teheran on I December
is-not to-be expectedtomorrow.
:
1943by the foundersof the United Nations to seek
46. The representativeof the Pretoria regimetook by all possiblemeansthe active co-operation and
pleasurein concludinghis s!atementthe other day participation of all nations, great and small. whose
by the following allegory:
peoplespre in their heartsand mindsready to devote
their efforts to the suppressionof tyranny and
“An African bishop,a wiseman,oncecompared enslavement,oppressionand intolerance.The Congo
the blacksand whites in South Africa to a zebra. is,a peace-lovingcountry which has always striven
_:~If the zebra were shot it would not matter whether to struggle against all anti-democratic, colonialist,
?the bullet penetrated a white stripe or a black imperialistandracistforces.
=-stripe: the whole animal would die.” [18001/t
51. Furthermore,I take great pleasurein expressing
Imeeti~ng, pcrra. 141.]
the great pride and complete satisfaction of my
~Thisillustration is true in the mind of the bishop, delegationat the absolutelyremarkableway in which
abutit is oprosed to the concept of apartheid. This you,’ Sir, have been presiding over the Council.
is all the more true since the representativeof the Many previous speakers have had occasion 10
racistrCgimetried, in that samestatement,to describe commendyour outst;lndingstatcsmanlikequalitiesand
crpclr//reid, not as a concept Goflagrant racism, but your diplomaticskills. Your provetl competenceand
asa plan for the separatedevelopmentof two racirl devotion to the causeof peaceare also well known.
communitiesthat they claim are integra!edlike the I have no wish to prolong this dehatc by adding
white and black stripes on t’le coat of a zebra. congralulations, which, nevertheless. you fully
Elementarycommonsenseislourdhave dictated that deserve.Just permit the representativec :+count.,
the ideal multiracialsociety expressedin the African close to the United Republic of Cameroon by
bishop’s allegory wotrld admit of no separate geography,by history and by sentiment.to recognize
6

I

ed
bet
on
ne
!FS
me
he
an
ad
feel
on

h):
e’s
we

yen
Ust,

in you, Sir, one of the tireless architects of the unity
of your great nation, a patriot who has earned the
confidence of the Cameroonian people and its guide,
President Ahidjo, a great African leader whose
dynamic contribution to the cause of the liberation
and unity, in friendship and peace, of our continent
we salute,

only to demonstratethe tremendousambiguitiesof
this whole problemof upcwheid, a crime in which
the many accomplicesproduce an atmosphereof
resignationand defeatism,To persistin reservinga
seat in the Organization for the South African
racistsis an examplewhoseperniciousinfluenceon
the credibility of the United Nationsneedsno further
proof. The duty of us all is to take the punitive
action required by the intransigentattitude of this
rebel State, which refusesto bow to the rules of
commondiscipline.andthusto expressunequivocally
our complete condemnationof the advocates of

52. Many sincere and talented speakers have taken
part in this debate and paid a tribute to the
,determination and wisdom of the General Assembly,
most of whose members are aware of the record of
-failure to take effective joint action to eradicate
apurtlteid which, through arbitrary arrests and the
-cruellest tortures, perpetuates the exploitation of the
people of Azania, a people whose history continues
to be written in blood and tears,

upfrrtAeido

56. Accordingly, it is time to break the vicious circle
of ineffective manoeuvres,of inaction, and invoke
Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter so as to give the
Council’sdecisionsteethandshowthe Pretoriaracists
53. The new element in the case history of upwtheid
that the law mustprevail. However, I shouldnot like
is the commondeterminationof the Membersof the to give any impressionthat I have come here to tell
Organizationto put an end to it, their awarenessof
the need to break the vicious circle of racism in the Council what to do; the Council is very well
southernAfrica once and for all, Resolution3207 aware of what measuresare required to provide a
(XXIX) adopted on 30 Septemberby the General just and urgentsolutionto this deadlockedsituation,
could npt be more humiliating to the
~Assemblyis the outcomeof long years of patience, which
Organization.
-~
of caution, of inflexibility and conservativereactions
when the Organizationdid everything it could to try
-alas, in vain-to persuadethe racist of Pretoria 57. In spite of our disgustat the empty monologue
to see the error of their ways. Far from doing so, delivered by the emissaryof the Pretoria racists,
.they just took advantageof our procrastinationin and our swelling indignationat the rhetorical outorder to perfect their torture machine,engagingeach burstswith which he attemptedto becloudthe debate,
day in further violations of the humanrights and the we would like LOsparethe Council any polemics,
which will of coursedo nothing to changethe fact
fundamentalfreedomsof the peopleof Namibia,to
that upctrthid constitutesthe supremeexampleof the
extend their fossilizedideology to the Territory of
known.
Namibia,which they occupy with impunity in spite mostoutrageous~racism~ever
of the repeatedappealsand condemnationsof the
United Nations.
58. Without doubt there are many ways of
approachinghistory, butto showeruswith information
54. ‘capeakingasI do at this late stageof the debate, in which lying and dissemblingare elevatedto mi\ior
my delegationwould likesto stressthat it endorses art forms is certainly not the most distinguished.
unreservedlythe pertinent legalargumentsadvanced Following the exampleof all thosefor whom Africa
by mostspeakerswho have appearedhereto support is a problem, a problemin any casecreated by the
the historic decisiontaken on 30 Septemberby the standardbrutality of colonialismand racism, and
GeneralAssemblyrequestingthe Council to review the intensity of the bloody repressionof which the
the relationshipbetween the Organization and the African peopleshave beena victim, the envoy of the
racist rigime of South Africa, in the face of the racist regimeof South Africa did not understandthat
obstinate refusal of the Pretoria administrationto
one of the best roads to an understandingof the
respectthe principleslaid down in the Charter and history of a peopleis that of objectivity in an impartial
in the UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights. We analysisof the facts recordedin history. A careful
shouldparticularly like to stressthat in this casethe decipheringof the history of the peoplesof southern
Council in its ‘wisdomcan very well apply Article 6 Africa, whosefierce resistancebeganwith the very
of the Charter relatingto the expulsionof a Member first contactswith the Boer settlers,is somethingthat
state.
has been recorded by distinguishedhistoriansand
researcherswho have brought us evidence of
55. The Pretoriaadministration,which is persistently undeniable
featsof armsandof the fiercedeterminaiion
infringing the principles laid down in the Charter, of the peoplesof southern Africa to defend theil
isa veritablec$ailCrl
gnawingawayat theOryanization. liberty. From this fine tradition of resistanceby the
The South African racists have offered sufficiellt
oppressed
peoplesmanyoutstandingfiguresemerged.
evidence that they have no intention of complying We would include in that list the name of the
with the fundamentalobligationstif a Member State. Zulu chief Dingan, half-brother of Shaka, a mili!ary
Therefore, to persist in keeping a seatfor them in genius,who hadestablishedanempireover a territory
the Organization-which they so often scorn-serves larger than Europe, of that Zula nation which was
7

,-

9 of
tiich
3 of
lg a
lean
3 on
ther
tive
Shis
s of
:ally
: of
rcle
tike
Ihe
ists

like
tell

Nell
ea
.Gn,
the
$ue
sts,
iuttie,

its,
hct
the

-of
itin
br
sd.
.Y
g:
.-jd
he
:he
Bat
fa7
till
:Ttl
*Y
Rat
fid
of
011

eir
he
xi.
he
.1-y
mry
a:;

rightly consideredthe best army in Africa south of
the Sahara.

becauseit is trampling the Charter and resolutions
of the United Nations underfoot, becauseof its
constant policy of defying and humiliating the
59. “We have no need to go into detail about the Organization,becauseof its criminal complicity with
facts of the case, of which the Council is fully the illegal rt!gime of Ian Smith, becauseof its
cognizant, The false pleadingof the emissaryof the obstinaterefusalto respectdecisionswhich establish
racistregimeof Pretoria, full of falsehoods,delivered the sacredright of the Namibinnpeople to indepenin his normaltone of arroganceand of contemptfol dence in unity and in territorial integrity, the racist
the Organization, left us with a bitter taste in our and Fascist r&me of South Africa has voluntarily
mouths, however. And even if we do not jump to put itself beyond the pale of humanity. Aptrrthaid
any hasty conclusions,we can at leastconcludethat is a subject of concern to the whole world, What
it isdifficult for the SouthAfrican raciststo appreciate the victims of that doctrine want is help to rid
the headywind of changewhich today is causingthe themselves of this scourge. What the General
collapseof the mostsolidbuttressesof the oppression Assembly, in its mi\iority, expects from the Council
and exploitation of peoples.The time of colonialist is not vetoes-which in any case, are no longet
rampagesis past, as indeed upartheid itself must awe-inspiringand will only serve to makethe deadpass,the emblemof a doctrine and a policy which lock even worse-but specific acts, becausewe want
every day arousesuniversaldisapproval.
to look togetherto the future with our eyes openin a
world whereproblemswill no longerbeposedin terms
60. The free flowering of racism in South Africa, of power relationsbut in termsof justice, peace,and
and its extensionto the Territory of Namibiastem freedomfor al! the peoplesof this planet.
-from the fixed ideasof Vorster’s gang, .vhich wants
to carry everything it doesto extremesinvolving an 63. The PRESIDENT (infer~~rettrliott Jiwttr Fretwh):
endlessseriesof the most barbarouscrimes.Ali the The next speakeris the representativeof the Libyan
Membersare sufficientlv well aware of the horrors Arab Republic. I invite him to take a seat at the
ofFupurtheid,
rightly considered a crime against Counciltable and to makehis statement,
humanity,upurtheid, a word with increasinglysinister
overtones. For Vorster and his gang of Calvinist
fanatics the objective is to create a white South 64. Mr, MAhHUR (Libyan Arab Republic):Allow
Africa where the blackswill have only the statusof me, Mr. President,to congratulateyou, on behalf
foreign labourers. The notirious laws which the of my delegationand on my own behealf, on your
followers of upartheid use for the most savage assumingthe presidencyof the Security Councilfor
oppression
of the opponentsof that diabolicaldoctrine this month.The goodrelationsbetweenour countries
are well known to all. Hence we must expressour will not fail to provide a good basisfor co-operation
you and my delegation.
astonishment
at lack of enthusiasmof certain Powers bet_w_een
for eradicating this cancer from humanity. Should
we not therefore believe Aim& Cesaire when he 65. I wish to thank you and the membersof the
Council for giving me the opportunity to address
writes:
myself to the item on the agenda.I do so in behalf
L.6 what the most distinguished,the most human- of the Arab Member States. It is onlv natural for
,~Itarian, the most Christian bourgeoisieof the my delegation,whetherrepresentingthe-Libyan Arab
m-twentieth century .,, cannot forgive Hitler is not Republicor speakingas the Chairmanfor this month
the crime itself, the crime againstman, it is not of the Arab delegationsto the United Nations, to
‘--the humiliation of man in itself; it is the crime participate in the discussionof an African issue,
?.committedagainstthe whiteman,it isthehumiliation for we Arabs are an integralpart of Africa.
,:of the white man, and his having brought into
*Europe colonialistpracticeswhich hithertohadbeen 66. Now is not the time to discussthe suffering
i&ii&d
only on the Arabs, the cooliesof India and that Africa hasbeen,and still is, subjectedto at the
i---the.Negroesof Africa”.
handsof the colonialistsasa whole. That would take
morethanbneSecurityCouncilmeetingandmorethan
61. ‘In spiteof the frenzied attemptsto dehumanize one statement.One look at the recordsof the General
the non-whitesof Azania andNamibia,whereworkers Assembly, the Council and the various commitare consideredas cattle, where the passlaws and tees will attest to that. The ineffectivenessthat
the “odor of the black” precedesany judgementon characterizescertain resolutionsof the organsof the
the black and where the mqiority of the people of Organization is disappointingindeed. For while out
SouthAfrica areherdedinto reservesin indescribable whole continent believesin the rightnessof bringing
conditions of overcrowding, millions of men and its grievancesbeforethe Organization,the colonialists
womenof Azania and Namibia now know that the and the vestigesof colonialismgo too far in tlouting
defeatof npurtheid is inevitable.
this processand this Organization by persistently
aiding racist Idgirnes and colonial enclaves and
62. Because it is daily violating human rights, protecting them, even within the Organization.
reducing man to the status of a talking beast, Speakersprecedingme haveenumeratedthe offences
8

ens
its
-the
with
its
‘dish
ren,dst
wily
rdcl
(hat

Irid
$ral
ficil
iset
sadvant
in a
rms
Bnd
dl):
Yan
ithe
low
half
‘our
=for
ries
Cion
:the
?SS
half
ifor
t&al3
Snth
i to
sue,
Ping
[the
:ake
.&an
&al
mitthat
the
our
ging
lists
thg

ntly
iind
i0n .
1c:C-S

spirit underlying other resolutionscondemningthe
racist rknimein South Africa. all of which are based
on the reports of special committeesand proven
facts, make it necessarythat the Council adopt a
resolution severing the relationshipof that regime
with the Organization. Indeed, any faltering on the
part of the Security Council. any obstructionof the
bill of the General-Assembly!
by-any of its members,
constitutesa flagrant violation of the Charter and a
defiance of the dictates of the human conscience
67. The issue before the Council is specific and as reflected in the General Assembly’smost recent
crystal-clearand is in no needof lengthy discussion. resoJtio0 gs well as in-i& previousresolu!ions,
A direct question has been put to the Council by
the GeneralAssembly,the organmostrepresentative 70. The substantive aspect does not need any
of the oeooles of the United Nations: will the elaboratediscussion.The statusof the racist rkgime
Organiza’tioi maintainits relationshipv&h a regime in South Africa has been consideredhundredsof
that has,for over a quarter of a century, deliberately times. Its persistentviolation of the Charter and the
violated the Charter and the Universal Declaration UniversalDeclarationof HumanRightsanditstravesty
of Human Rights? In other words, the General of the most sacredand noble idealsof man have
Assemblyhasraisedthe following question:will the been proved beyond any doubt. What we say about
Council, in defiance of the overwhelmingmaioritv thoseoffencesis basedneitheron fabricatedincidents
of the Members, maintain an illegitihate- anb nor on the misinterpretationsin the newsmedia. It
repugnantrelationshipwith a r6gimethat is foundedon is specifiedin the laws which are enforced by the
violations of the Charter and on breachesof its
racist rt?gimein South Africa and are the declared
policy of this minority clique.Suchpolicieshavebeen
reQ!utions~and~~d~clarations?
condemnedand deploredby all: by clergymen, by
68. The issuehastwo aspects,in our view. One is politiciansand by otherjust men.
purely legal,andthe other substantive,bearingon the
very existenceand structure of the United Nations. 71. Even those States maintainingrelations with
The Charterentitlesthe Security Councilto consider that racist r&me have been unableto justify such
a recommendation
with regard to the terminationof behaviourto their peoples.Therefore, there are only
the membershipof any Member State violating the two alternatives before us: either to sacrifice the
Rights
Charter, provided that the GeneralAssemblyadopts Charter, the UniversalDeclarationof HUmn
a resolutionin pursuanceof that recommendation. and the international court of ethics, or to isolate
Needlessto say, the Council does not have the this racist rhgimefrom the family of man in order
freedomto make a recommendationwithout taking to protect humandignity and to upholdthe principles
into considerationthe views of the other organof :he of the Charter. As the Secretary-Generalsaid:
UnitedNations.As the mainbody of the Organization,
“The secondquestionrelatesto the positionand
the Councilshouldersthe responsibility,in accordance
-credibility of the United Nations itself and the
with the Charter. of reflecting the views of the
majority of the Membersand of-acting in accordance ‘~~respect
of its Members for the decisionsof its
main organs, especially the Security Council.”
with those views. None of the provisions of the
[17931-d meting, parer. 20.1
Charter entitles the Council to act in contradiction
with, or in defianceof, the views of the majority.
Thereforefor a minority of Memberswith power in 72. We wonder now what the future and the value
the Council to take decisionson, or to obstruct the of the United Nationswill be if the Security Council
adoptionof, resolutionsthat have a bearingon the itselfdoesnot respectthe GeneralAssemblyresolution
essenceof the relationshipbetweenthe Organization adoptedby 125votes to 1. What will happenif the
as a whole and those who violate the Charter-is Council does not take a decision regarding the
relationshipbetweena rt!gimethat persistentlydefies
somethingthatcannot be accepted. .
basichumanvaluesandthe United Nations?Weleave
69, In the light of the foregoing, we believe that it to you to give the answer.Your decisionwill be
whentheGeneralAssemblyexpresses
a view regarding subject to the judgement of the peoplesof the
an issue before it and requeststhat the Security United Nations.
Council make a recommendationon that issue,the
latter’srecommendation
shouldbe consistentwith the 73. The PRESIDENT fbr~~~p~c~ttrtio/I jiw~ Ftvtrch):
views of the Assembly.When the Council refusee+o Membersof the Council will recall that the Council
act in accordancewith the GeneralAssembly’sviews, today decided,under tule 39 of the provisionalrules
or takesa decisioninconsistentwith thoseviews, such of procedure to invite Mr. T. George Silundika,
behaviourplacesthe Council’saction outsidethe legal Secretary for Publicity and Information for ZAPU,
framework of the Charter. Accordingly, we believe as requestedby the representativesof Kenya and
that GeneralAssemblyresolution3207(XXIX), andthe Mauritania. Mr. Silundika has madeit known that

committedby the colonialists,and 1 am sure some
of thosefollowing me will do likewise.The records
of this Council in particular are full of caseswhere
the veto was exercised for the protection of the
racist r8gimes.The records and documentsof the
‘committeesabound with instancesof violations by
certain permanent members of the Council of
resolutionsadoptedagainstSouthAfrica andthe racist
regimein Zimbabwe.

II
I

Y

the

rsed

IVen
jt a
:ime
-the
-the
ps,

irl a
‘rice
!ent
my

,ime
il

he is ready to address the Council at its present
meeting. Therefore, with the consent of the Council,
1 invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
74, Mr. SlLUNDlKA:
We thank you, Mr. President,
and the Council for graciously allowing us to address
the Council on issues raised before this organ by the
representative of the racist trptrrfheid rbgime of South
Africa in regard to our country, Zimbabwe, and out
organization, ZAPU, Before proceeding to the subjectmatter, may I congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of office and say how much we as
a struggling people are inspired by that fact, since to
us you represent a beacon in the successful liberation
~,~
struggle of your country.

lY6l Constitution was rejected totally by the Zimbabwe
masses, as well as by the United Nations. As I have
said, in our view this was the only and last attempt
at coming to terms over the Rhodesian question.

*‘There was no Zimbabwe leader outside at the time,
78, We are aware that subsequently there were such
proposals as the F~&css,
the Tiger, the 1971
Doiglas-Home
and Ian Smith proposals, and the
latest British-inspired
conversations between Bishop
Muzorewa and Ian Smith, all of which have been
called attempts at corni&
to terms or so-culled
settlements. Quite frankly, all those were, and are,
conspiratorial
attetnpts by British Governments to
avoid the issue and impose a constitutional device,
leaving decisive power in the hands of the minority
racists
of Rhodesiaterms, of course, favourable
to the Vorster r8gime. By what stretch of logic can
proposals emanating from a colonial r8gime and its
governing agent for imposition be called “attempts at

Of

the
ssty
we
pout
tits
,i It
the

75. We would not have sought to expend any more
of the time of the Council on an issue on which, for the
sake of international peace, there is need for urgent
decision and action, had the conduct of our liberation
struggle not been dragged in for distortion of facts
regarding the situation in southern Africa. We feel
we should put the record straight, as it may not be
long before the Security Council finds itself seized of
a far graver situation as a consequence of the arrogant,
racist and militaristic policies of the South African
and Rhodesian r&imes,

&h

76. Addressing the Council on 24 October, the
representative of the racist rkgime of South Africa
quoted his Prime Minister as follows:

ri-ed
Neen
rby

wh
OlY
the
tits

ate
der
bles

a solution”i

79, Once again, thanks to the vigilant and resolute
Zimbabwe
masses, all these conspiracies against
unqualified
miiority
rule and independence
for
Zimbabwe were and are being firmly rebuffed and
rejected. The resounding rejection of the DouglasHome-Smith ‘settlement proposals by the people of
Zimbabwe in 1972 is a loud record of the voice of
the people-a
record printed by the blood of
unarmed
masses sacrificing
themselves for the
restoration of their country, freedom, majority rule
and independence.

“there are ZANU and ZAPU leaders outside
Rhodesia who are suspected ,.. of exerting
influence on black Rhodesians not to come to
terms,” ~/cloUflt rtterling, pctni. IJO.]

from~ coming to terms.

80. The leaders of these masses-our leaders, Joshua
Nkomo and others-have
been in prisons and concentration camps for over IO years for being of
the Same iron determination
with the masses in
rejecting minority rule and insisting unswervingly on
miljority rule and independence. In this settlement,
who is to come to terms, and with whom? Smith
and members of his regime arc irretrievable racists,
and therefore have neither the status, the capability
nor the capacity to reconcile themselves to the reality
of the only correct solution required in Rhodesia.
The’ mentality of Whitehall is incapable of getting
out of the colonialist groove.

77. These hollow tactics must be exposed. It should
be noted that the last attempt to remove the Rhodesian
minority
racist regime through the idea of a
constitutional settlement was made in 1961, with rather
bitter results. The United Kingdotn Government of the
day us&d the Constitutional Conference as a magic
container
from which it pulled out the 1961
Constitution-a
fraudulent piece of paper designed
pet mancntly to entrench white supremacy and white
rninor~ily racist rule by some transparent camouflage
ol‘ IS seats for Africans. Thanks to the steadfastness
ol‘ the people of Zimbabwe and the international
community through the United Nations, the fraudulent

81. ZAPU is the people in Zimbabwe; it is in
Zimbabwe: its leaders are in Zimbabwe in Rhodesian
g&s; its fighters are in Zimbabwe, fighting the racists
on Zit~lbabwe soil: and, therefore, the eloquent al, ’
decisive voice of the oeoole is in Zimbabwe. acting
on no influence tram ‘o&ide.
The objective’ of ouy
lihcration struggle is not to come to terms with
racism hut to remove it from our soil. The task ol’ the
few of us outside is to inform the international
community of the factu;ll situation in Rhodesia, and
to effect the liaison between external support and
the development of the wned
reVi~lllti0tli1ry
struggle
in Zimbabwe.

That was apparently
Mr. Vorster’s
attempt to
extricate himself from what he himself, in the sam_e
passage, confessed in the following words:

.Lue
WI
ion
the
the
b

We
be
the
41):

lcil
des
ka,

‘IJ ,
Uld

hat

-

~-

“I must also say that I know it is being said
in some quarters, on the one side, that South
Africa is holding the Rhodesian Government
back” [ihid.]
.~ -~ ~~ ~~~
-presumably,

IO

mbabwe
9

I have

&tempt
Gesrion.
!Atime,
such
1971

31x

ce

and the
Bishop
3e been
0-Ciillt?d
tild are,
kents to
Xievice,
ninority
!eurable
Bgic can
-and its
rnpts at
‘esolute
;tlgainst
!‘ce for
‘ed and
Guglasop1e of
oice of
;od of
or the

ity rule
Joshua
d con,fng of
#ses in
@ty on
ement,
%mith
%cists,
ability
reality

zdesia.
getting
;

: is in
desian
racists
nt ill, *
iicting
of
i

out
with

of the
It ion al
d.

aml

‘I

and

rugglc

82. Seeking to justify the seizure of areas of the
Transvaal and ot’ the Orange Free State-that
is,
in South Africa-for
exclusive claim by the Boers,
the representative of the South African rrpco’//wit/
ldgime made the following interpretation of history:

colonial policies and derive their racist attitudes from
the nature of British policies towards other races.
The concept of separate racial settlements and theh
administration,
the pass system, were of British
colonial origin, The South African Boers, pursuing
these policies to the logical extreme, as well as the
British colonialists in Rhodesia, have reached the
present abominable racist stages of ccpcrtvlwitl and the
so-called provincialization
respectively. The Natives
Land Act of 1913 in South Africa, laying down the
basis of bantustanism, was emulated by the British
settlers in Rhodesia in 1930 when they enacted the
Land Apportionment
Act, laying down the basis fol
the present Tribal Trust Land system, The Bantu
Development
Corporation
to exploit the Africans
economically in South Africa was passed on as the
Tribal
Trust Land Development
Corporation
in
Rhodesia for the same purpose. In short, the
Rhodesian regime has made a carbon copy of nearly
every racial law enacted in South Africa to impose
discrimination
between blacks and whites in every
avenue of life. To crown it all, Ian Smith takes
counsel from Vorster at every turn of events under
the transparent and hackneyed diplomatic cover of
going to watch rugby matches in South Africa,

“Mzilikazi,
i\ lieutenant of the Zulu king, Shaka,
who had fled from his former master, subsequently
completed this devastation and annihilated
the
African tribes living there,” [Ibid,, pa. 72.1
Mzilikazi was one of the valiant kings, among others,
constituting the background to the present Zimbabwe
nation. It is true that wurs were fought in the same
manner that wars were fought among tribes in Europe,
but Mzilikazi did not wipe out any tribes anywhere.
In fact, he fought the Boers at Mosega, trying to
halt their attempt to seize land in the area. Mzilikazi
is no excuse for the seizure of other people’s lands.
History proves the contrary of the South African
racist claims that they never had colonialist
or
expansionist claims, Having imposed themselves in
the areas of the present Transvaal, they entered the
race of fraudulent treaties through their dispatch of
a Mr. Grobler to conclude such treaties with King
Lobenguta in Zi@ab.?e
in competition with- the
British,~

85. I may once again ask the question: Who then
influences whom in Rhodesia? We cannot be accused
of influencing a people of which we are a part.
The people’s decisions are our decisions. Vorster
is not part of the Zimbabwe population. His role is
that of interference, blocking the advance of the
liberation struggle and defending racialism.

83. Now 1 should like to turn to the question of
the presence of the South African racist regime in
Rhodesia ;IS part of that rCgime’s machinations to
interfere with the affairs of Zimbabwe. Economically,
South Africa is waging a two pronged assault on out
country, First, firms of South African origin, as
well as South African farming interests, have
systematically expanded in our country and dug in
their roots of exploitation. In advance of this and to
assist this expansion was the welt-known Broederbond
financial lending house,. called SANLAM.
whose
monuments stand out in Salisbury. A substantial
percentage of the farming settler community
in
Rhodesia is South African, well known to be the
backbone of the racist policies of the Rhodesia
Pront-the
party of the ruling rkgime in Rhodesia.
Secondly, South Africa under its racist regime is the
staging post into Rhodesia for most of the big
international
financial,
commercial
and industrial
monopolies.
Pick any enterprise
of economic
significance in Rhodesia-General
Motors, ranches,
tea estates, .Anglo-American,
O.K. commercialsthey are routed through and managed largely from
South Africa. Most transportation and trade is handled
through South Africa. All this is not just a matter of
economic convcnicnce; it is an economic stranglehold
on Zimbabwe. ‘I’his explains why the South African
rtigime is a sallctions-brcakcr
where Rhodesia is conccrncd.

86. The Broederbond is the underground intellectual,
racist and criminal machinery of the Afrikaner group
in South Africa, It hatches the schemes to suppress
the blacks and to preserve the so-called white m&n’s
civitization in southern Africa. It is a hush-hush
organization.
It has now emerged concretely in its
spread in Zimbabwe right into the cabinet of the
Rhodesian rdgime, holding the most decisive posts to
prevent a correct settlement of the Rhodesian problem.
It is present in the persons of a Mr. Van.der Byl,
a Mr. Cronje, a Mr. De Kock and a Mr. Blomberg,
selected on the admission
of the Rhodesians
themselves through their press to ensure South
Africa of a continued racist relationship. These four
are of South African origin and are supporters of
the Broederbond. Bel:ween them they hold the posts of
Defence. External Relations, Information,
Labour,
and Special Security matters.
87. The presence of South African military pcrsonncl
in Zimbabwe is not a thing of yestcrlay or today. It
is as old as the historical relationship of the two
racist r&imes. It has been brought into prominence
with the increase in numbers by the escalation of the
confrontation
with the Zimbabwe liberation forces.
The first signifiGln1 indication of the pi~eseuce
of
South African military and security personnel ~61s in
1960. from July to November, when the Zimbabwe

X4. Politically. the Soul Ii African trptrrtlwitl r&ime
and the Rhodesion settler F;lscists share a common
ideologv, that oi‘ racism. It is, of course, no surprise.
IXXilUSC
the two rCgimes are creations of British
II

es from
t races.
id theit

British
ursuing
“as the
ied the
and the
Natives
bwn the
British
ted the
asis fol
Bantu
ifricans
-as the
don in
rt, the
’ nearly
impose
r every
i_ takes
s under
3ver of
@ then
&used
9 part,
Vorster
{role is
-of the
lectual,
r group
appress
k man’s
th-hush
E in its
;$ot”the
msts to
ublem.
gr ByI,
mberg,
Pesians
j South
Se foul
bters of
5ostsof
labour,
rsonnel
Xlay. It
he two
linence
I of tt1e
forces.
!IlCC

of

wgs in
lljabwe

massestook to the streets in their hundreds in as exemplified by division and strife in lreland,
demonstrations
and demandsfor their freedom.The Cyprus, Bangladeshand Pakistan,eventuaHyleading
SouthAfrican military personnelparticipatedalready to multitribalism,And we know indeedthat this same
then in the slaughterof our people. Since then they policy of separateracialadministrationshasled to the
have done soon an increased scale. They are ’ presentctpar/lwid, which is an internationalproblem
deployed openly in units all along the borders of
beforethe Council,
.Rhodesia with neighbouringindependent African
States and in certain key installationsall over the 91, We reject completely-l mustrepeat-we reject
country. Our forcesareengagedinfrequentencounters completely and unreservedly these policies of
with themIn variousliberationbattlesin the country. multinationalism
and multiracialism.Wecannotallow
I do not have to list namesfor evidence sincethis constitutional sanctioningand cementing of racial
‘is now a public fact. The condnuous supply of
prejudices.This is what our PresidentNkomo said
weapons,personnel,aircraft, bombersand armoured in 1961:
-cars by South Africa to the racist regime is an
escalatingprocess.I may as well quote the South
“We do not accept multiracialismand these
African regimeitself on this matter. Questionedon
people of other races who want to remain here
the sendingof South African troops to Rhodesia,
must identify themselveswith the African people.
Vorster, the racist Prime Minister there, on 29 May
We do not want to swim with them in the pools,
1974in the presenceof Ian Smith, hadthis to-say:
we want to swimwith them in Parliament.”
“Our positionis unchanged.We sent our police 92. Therefore,the freedomwe seek is not only the
-to Rhodesiato pull our own chestnutsout of the restorationof our countriesbut the establishment
of
ffire and that is exactly where the positionrests~at a Government popularly elected by its citizens,
naturaland naturatized. We are not out to establish
multigovernmentsfor multiuliedracialismin a sinele
-88, While the representativeof the South African
country. Sovereigntyof governmentfor-+-Stateis-&-i
racist rigime wasspeakingbefore the Council of his and indivisible.
%5gime’s
policy of non-interferencein othercountries’
-affairs-that wason Thursday-his Minister of Police, 93. We are tired of beingtold of how muchis being
Mr. Kruger, wasalmostsimultaneouslyannouncingin done for us by these racist regimesin education,
the South African Parliamentthat the confrontation free healthservices,goodhouses andall the nauseating
in Zimbabwe with the liberation forces was now statisticsalongthat line. We could well be treated to
reachingthe level of conventionalwarfare and that, the statisticsof stock breedingand the free veterinary
therefore, his Government was now organizing serviceswhere the bill would perhapsprove to be
mercenaryguardsto meet the situation. We can all higher.Wearenot objectsof sympathyandhelp.That
see through this. It is a belated admissionof the is not the issuein southernAfrica. The issueis the
dismantlingof the system of white racismand the
presenceof troops. The British Junior Minister for
of State powerbasedon the democr@ic
CommonwealthAffairs, Miss Joan Lestor, said this establishment
will-.of all citizens asequals,manto man.
in a report published by the Zatnbiu Daily Muil
on 31 May 1974: “We know it is true that South
Africa hastroops in Rhodesiaand we have no doubt 94. The ultimatesettlementof all power problemsis
throughpoweritself. This is what our armedliberation
about this”.
strugglehas set out to achieve in the interest of
peacein southernAfrica. We cannot flinch from the
89. We do not have to labour the issue.I can only
horrors of rivers of blood if it meanscrossingthem
say that as we have flushed out the South African
troops in the bushes of Zimbabwe in guerrilla to achieveour freedom.The racistsin southernAfrica,
confrontations,our armedliberationstruggleis going supported by the NATO [N&r Atlrtttic 7ketr?\
to continue vigorously and relentlessly. whatever Otgctnizcctiortl Powers, are demandingthis developtroops or armamentsihey bring, until %mbabweis ment.We haveno illusions.Freedomwe mustachieve
regardless:
lihr@ed.totally from colonialismand racisn:
9s‘, The PRESIDENT fitltcI’I)I.ptNtiott,fj’ol?l!+c~u~/I):
90. I indicatedearlierthat the RhodesianandSouth, Memberswill recall that at the 1796thmeetingthe
African rdgimessharea commonracialist ideology. Council had decidedto invite Mr. David Sibeko to
An .impressionis beingcreated in this chamberthat
addressthe Council.Mr. Sibekohasalreadyaddressed
the white man in southernAfrica is beingdriven OI the .Council, but I have just been informed that he
swept to the seasby the liberation struggle:hence would like to makean additionalstatement.With the
the insistenceon policiesof racialismand separate consentof the membersof the Council, I shallinvite
development; in short, the policies of multina- Mr. Sibeko to take a place at the Council table and
tionalism as enunciated by South Africa and to makehis statement.
multiracialism as enunciated by the British fol
Rhodesia-what they call power-sharing.We know Y6. Mr. SIBEKO: Mr. President, 1 thank you
what the British meanby constitutionalmultiracialism, for allowing me once more to appear before the
12

-

n Ireland,
ally leading
t this same
s led to the
al problem
-we reject
Blicies of
nnot allow
of racial
(omo said
and these
main here
in people.
the
pools,
t_.”
t only the
shment of
citizens,
& establish
n a single
&ate is one
h is being
:ducation,
causeating
Ereated to
#eterinary
%ve to be
Ielp. That
we is the
I and the
gmocratic
Oblems is
liberation
I’terest of
-from the
iing them
t!n Africa,
e

Tw,r?\

rdevelopij achieve
Ftwrc~h):
eting the
iibeko to
.ddressed

1 that he
With

the

all invite
able and
illk

you

for-e

the

i

council. 1 would not have sought to crave your
indulgencehad it not beenfor the fact that, because
of the mendacious
statementmadebeforethe Council
by Mr. Vorster’s representative,we felt that certain
pointshadto be broughtfurthey to light.

that the world was flat, although the universities
that we had in Ghana, in Mali and in Egypt had
alreadyachievedsuccess
in detectingthe phenomenon
of our planet and conceiving it to be round. This
evidenceis abundant,especiallyhere in the United
Statesof America, where black peoplehave gone to
97. Having so requestedyou, Mr. President,alone greatlengthsto find out their background,and before
-as1 am in representingmy organizationand having I go on I should like to refer the representative
to attend to other committeeswithin the United of Mr. Vorster’s r6gimeto a record I listenedto only
Nations, I have coniinuouslvfollowed with as much yesterday called The Black Rhnpsody. It .is full of
attention as I could summonthe inierventionsmade informationabout this early civilization. Having said
by other delegations.Flowing from that, I am aware that, I shouldlike to add that they went on to say
that the tissueof untruths which was broughtbefore that, after the neonlethat they hadfound there. whom
you here has been to some extent appropriately they derogativelycalled Bu&men or Hottentois, they
repudiated, but we feel it incumbent upon us to thencameinto contactwith the so-calledmoremilitant
bring to the attention of the Council part of the more aggressive-asthey said-Xhosa people.This
arrangementwhich goesinto the make-upof today’s again is turning the facts upsidedown: the owners
racistSouth Africa.
of the land are the aggressors,and the expansionist
is the victim of aggression.Having so said, we add
98. I am, I believe, without being too subjec’tive, that the one thing we always found peculiarly
a classicalvictim of what crp(~4teiclis in SouthAfrica
outstandingin this history was that the white settle1
for our people.Therefore, I have a minimumamount always recovered-the-cattle stolen~fromhim by the
-of formal preparationin academics,but I have striven Xhosas.
throughout my life to make myself as articulate as
I possiblycould. Your patiencewith my inadequacies, 100. In our statementimmediatelyafter Mr. Botha
Sir, is I believe a reflection of the deep concern had spoken, we said that the South African racist
which certain Members-the miori’ty of Members, rkgime was using new words but maintainingthe
I dare say-have with our cause, a sympathy and old systemof white supren‘acy.After trying to fool
in many casesa solidarity. But during that limited the entire black school population of Azania, the
preparation that I enjoyed when I went to school South African Government is now attempting to
we usedto be presentedwith what was called the fool the internationalcommunityby standingthe facts
white side of the history of South Africa. I will not on their heads.The historv that Mr, Botha related
pretendto know how that title, which is no misnomer, here is the history which ihey ordinarily~ieave--the
wasconceived.Having beenconceived,the textbook black manto follow, becauseI happento know that
usedto go somethinglike this. The white mancame they havedonesufficienthistoricalresearchto compel
to South Africa to seek a half-way station on the them to prevent in Azania today archaeological
sea‘route to India from Europe. Upon coming to
exploration into placessuch as the one which they
South Africa, he met ,somkprimitive peoplein what found to be Tabazimbeand which is still Tabazimbe
is today Cape Town and neighbouring areas, today. Now, Tabazimbe-and I am sureour Chinese
whereuponthese primitive people offered him the colleagueswith their vast experienceand civilization
comfort of shelter, fresh vegetables and other will vindicate us-had a very prosperingiron and
fundamentalsthat go with sustaininglife. Theseare steel industry in the Middle Aees and thereafter.
the primitive people that so provided for the white It was called Tabazimbe; which is a very Bantu
man, and the white man felt that he had a duty to
expression;it cuts acrossboth Suto and Zulu, which
bringcivilization into this ared. Amongtne first things are thep~hlcipallanguages
in SouthAfrica. They have
he did was to move out these piimitive people decidedin South Africa that that history will not be
from the immediatelyfertile landin which helandedso dug into, but that we shallbe subjectedto the kind of
that he could .maintaina civilized station there for
mendacitywhich Mr, Botha attemptedto confront us
passingships. Now, as you know; Mr. President, with here. But let us deal with that clearly from the
you yourselfbeingan African, ws are not in the habit statementsthat have been madeby my colleagues,
of fencing in any territory, but the white man, who Mr. Elias and others, who, becauseof their interest
camethere andfound 110 fences,beganto put fences in Azania, have acquireda’far moreintimate andfal
around what land he regardedas his own. Without more accurate knowledge of what is happening
enteringinto any contractual agreementwith any of
there.
the indigenouspeople,and having decidedso to set
himselfup, he proceededto “civilize” South Africa.
101. Therewasalsoanattempthereby Mr. Vorster’s
representativeto make conciliatory statements;but
99. We must bear in mind that the primitive state even a brief glimpseat what is happeningill Azania
of navigalion of that time did not even allow the today, as we see it here, amply demonstratesthat
white man to bring with him any stock from Mr. Botha’s statementwas nothing more than an
Europe-what with faulty compasses
and uncertain Alit i/l ~o~~tlc&r/~c/
tale; that his protestationsof the
distances.And. remember,at that timehestill believed reform of policiesof racial arrogancewere just one
13

-

niversities
&ypt had
:nomenon
und. This
?e United
e gone to
nd before
gsentative
td to only
Is full of
wing said
tin to say
re, whom
tots, they
se militant
IpIe. This
g owners
pansionist
i we add
leculiarly
ite settle1
@ by the

Er. Botha
iin racist
ining the
g to fool
Gnia, the
rpting to
-the facts
i related
gave the
now that
it compel
eological
t%h they
hazimbe
F%!hinese
tilization
son and
.ereafter.
U Bantu
0, which
p;y;
6 kind of

(front us
born the
[leagues,
interest
: and far
ippening
‘orster‘s
nts; but
Azania
.tes that
than an
1x of the
irlst one

long swan song; and that his feigned remorse
nothing more than crocodile tears of self pity,

was

105. I do not wunt to spcek of the great October
Revolution in the Soviet Union. I do not wunt to
‘speak about the. protructed people’s war waged by
the Chinese people. I just want to speak about the
far more concealed similar activities, not of theh
results but of the uctivities, undertaken by people in
order to right u wrong, Whut we are doing is
righting a wrong,

102, The fact of the matter is tha!, as we were sitting
here considering
this matter, the South African
Minister of Justice was announcing that the South
African racist rkgime, because of the situation inside
Azania-where,
as you know,
Mr. President,
militunt strikes have been going on, protests have been
mounted by students, and so on-was pulling back its
troops from Zimbabwe, But it was pulling buck those
troops in order to replace them, not to pull them out
completely in response to resolutions of the United
Nations. The South African racist r6gime has now
become even more brazen. It is raising a mercenary
force, under the euphemism of “a voluntary force”,
to go there und man the posts hitherto manned by
itii aggressive troops-even
as we were talking,
even as Mr, Botha was making his lament before
the Council. We have assurances from his own
statement. I must really thank the delegations of
those countries that know themselves, that persuaded
Mr. Botha to engage in an exercise which he usually
avoids, which his country has avoided, of entering
into a diulogue with civilized people about conditions
in South Africa, persuading him to come here and
explain the policies of his Government, because he
succeeded in exposing the fact that there is no intention
on the part of the racist rBgitne in South Africa of
giving up- its racist and oppressive policies,

106. In this day and age, when we come to take
certain decisions-, it amazes us when the successors
of Georae Washinnton. of Voltuire. even of Winston
Churchin, who ft% ii was -right’ to fight against
nuzism. deliberately choose, at this point in time, to
he duped by Admiral Hugo Birmann of the South
Africun Defence Forces, who claims that Communist
p:-netration into the southern hemisphere and the
thl;.uts that this portends have caused the southern
hemisphere, and particularly the Indian Ocean, to
emerge dramatically
from a position of retutive
obscurity and to assume u conspicuous position in
the East-West power struggle, We have been lectured
continuously, and we are told by the muss media of
the West, thut there exists u dbtente, an etttetltc
cOorclitrie, between the Powers of the West and the
Powers of thk East. Whv should little Azania be the
obstacle, unless this is u &ere cover-up for other, much
more sinister, designs? We are now being held to
ransom in what we have been told is an antiquated
ideological conflict between East and West. There is
a behaviour that leads us to think that perhaps the
buccaneers and pirates who menaced the high seas in
the last century and earlier have not been completely
wiped out, and that by some twisted logic the navies
of the socialist countries have become the marauding
ships of the pirates of yesteryear, for we heal
nowhere in the world of a people’s freedom being
undermined because certain pirates are threatening
the normal trade that goes on between East and
West-except,
that is, around Azania.

103. Too many speakers have already specified,
giving chapter and verse, the violations of the Charter
and of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
for me to need to belabour the Council with any
further details. I have already cited one example
of South Africa’s refusal to reform and I have no
doubt in my own mind that whatever has been installed
through reuctionary violence will never be removed
through
peaceful persuasion
but only through
revolutionary violence. That is why the Pan Africanist
Congress is committed
to nothing less than a
revolutionary struggle in Azania for the overthrow of
crp_ro7lf(~ilid~tyranny.

107. 1 say this because you, Mr. President, like
myself and members of the Council, are being
inundated with a deluge of leaks, inspired and
otherwise, in the locul press. This is not invention
of the so-culled “subversive”
United Nations, us was
implicit in Mr. Botha’s statement. These inspired
teaks inform us that joint naval exercises will be
taking place between the South African navy and the
navy ,of a Western Power, such as are taking place
now, and that on I5 October yet another flotilla
of warships left a Western European port to go to
South Africa to engage in similal~ exercises.

104. That is not a choice which has been arrived
at lightly; it is a choice that has been arrived at
painfully, after streams of victims have been found.
It is a choice similar to that made by the people of
what is today the United States of America when they
decided to’ revolt against the colonial empire of
Westminster. il similar decision to that ~nadc in
17X9--if my date is correct-by
the people of France
when they chose to revolt against the tyranny of
King !.ouis. a similar decision to that taken by the
United Kingdom to stamp out Hitlerite nazism in
Eu!opc--if
it had not taken that decision there
wound have been no point in its and other countries’
dropping people behind the lines in support of the
Maqclis forces in France. We are doing nothing
unusual. We are on the same course.

108. Added to that, we have received information
that there are 12 leading officials from ;I member of
the Security Council currently visiting South Africa
on ;I salts mission for arms to South Africa, that h 01
Ihcse I2 are high-ranking officers and they arc led by
a senior general. We have cbeckcd with Ihe embassy
of the country in question; rather than deny it, they
have offered no comment. We illso know that
14

eat Octobei
tot want to
P waged by
k about the
1~ot of theh
fy people in
l e doing is
;tne io take
f successors
-of Winston
ight against
t in time, to
P the South
Communist
we and the
tie southern
Ocean, to
:of relative
1position in
een lectured
Ss media of
an rrrtewla
&t and the
&nia be the
other, much
‘ing held to
I’ antiquated
!$t. There is
perhaps the
high seas in
!completely
j the navies
5 marauding
@ we hear
edom being
Zthreatening
f East and
@dent, like
_ are being
*pired and
5 invention
Ions, as was
:se inspired
Ses will be
avy and the
aking place
thcr flotilla
,I? to go to
s.
information
rllenltx!r

of

outh Africa
XI,
f

tt1:11 h 01‘
arc

led by

he embassy

zriy it, they
I:now that

Mr. JamesJohnson,the current commanderof the
South African navy, hasbeen invited to yet another
Westerncountry for a one-weekstay by a deputy to
that Westerncountry for later this weekin November.
We have checkedand this has beenconfirmed, We
know alsothat SouthAfrica is conductinga campaign
to recruit mercenaries
in Europeancountriesto serve
in its naval forces. And this -is no invention of the
PanAfricanist Conaressor the United Nations.I have
this document. But I have been counsellednot to
antagonize the membersof the Security Council
with the veto. Hence my restraint, for I have no
instructionsfrom my headquartersto proceedfurther.
You see, I am not a diplomat; I cannot conceal
the truth,
109. But the truth that 1 am trying to place before
you is that it does seemthat the stories we have
heard, the speculationswe have listened to bf an
impendinginvolvement of Indo-Chinaproportionsin
our part of the world, are not wild. Becausethe
h’e,v Stcctes/ncr/t-aBritish publicationof tremendous
prestige-says that the Vice-Admiral commanding
the forces that are engagedin joint exerciseswith
South Africa says-unlike the Foreign Office-that
theseare not a routine call; the Vice-Admiral haslet
it out that this week’s exercisesare to improve the
fighting efficiency of both forces.
110. To the best of our knowledge there is no
country in the world that is threatening South
Africa with any aggression.
The only peoplewe know
to be threateningSouth Africa with a tight are the
national liberationmovements.So that thesepeople
are really being prepared by responsiblemembers
of the internaiionalcommunityto tight againstus,

of the veto will be exercised. And South Africa
will retain its stampsof respectability by retaining
membershipof this augustbody, whilst the mdority
in that country, whoseleadersare the true custodians
of all the princip!es enshrined in the Universal
Declarationof Human Rights and the Charter, are
kept under house arrest, are imprisonedor have
been executed. That will not undermineour own
resolveto do what is~necessary,
113. MangalisoSobukwelong a.gopointedout that
the whole world can sympathizebut they can never
liberate us. The task of liberating Azania is a
task that mustbe played out by the Azanian people
themselves.We believe, with the dramatic turn of
events that has taken place in the southern
hemisphereas it affects the African rep’on of that
hemisphere,that we too-much aswe may not be on
the eve of our just liberation and our just freedomare well on the way to our own freedom, because
we believe that every revolutionary country, every
progreec,ivecountry that has attained its freedom
through bearingarms, through engagingin militant
struggle,and throughridding Africa of the scourgeof
colonialism,has taken heedof what Amilcar Cahral
oncesaid:“Every independentAfrican country should
regard itself as a liberation movement in power.”
And if that is true, no amount of flotillas, of wilt
planes, of submarines,can ever quell the flames
of strugglethat will break out in that part of Azania.
And those who today standwith our enemy should
not really expect us to embrace them when the
inevitable comes to pass-the inevitable being out
ascension to full statehood, independenceand
freedom.

114. I shouldlike to end, Sir.,with your permission,
with an old African savingwhich I was remindedof
I1 1. May I go back briefly to the NP~I~
S~~r/esnl~n yesterday,becausewe co&ern ourselveswith matters
whereit says:
of our freedomeven at weekends;this is no pastinte
with us, it is a total commitment.We do not leave out
“To engagein manoeuvreswith a Power that parents, our mothersand our fathers, and commit
wages war against its own population, harasses ourselvesto exile purely for the glory of appearing
_~the borders of other countries and maintainsan -with due respect- before your augustbodies.It is
illegal occupation of Namibia is not ensuring a painful exercise such as was defined by one
againstaggression.
It is condoningit.”
eminentblackAmericanscholar,becausewearetrying
to deliver into our part of the world a new dawn.
It is not a figment of the imagirtationof the Pan He savs “Everv new birth must needsbe n;rinl\d.”
Africanist Congress.
But t6e Azaniah saying1 wanted to invoke’herc.-in
the face of this evidenceof intensifiedcollaboration
112. We all know what goes on in the corridors. with South Africa, says: “There is no bird lhat tlics
We all know what the spcculat;onis. WCall expect alone. One that does so is lost.” Evidcnlly, South
that shouldAfrica’s just case,shouldthe iust caseof
Africa is not lost.
the Azanianpeoplebe receivedwith majorityapproval
before the Security Council, the almighty instrument

kjuth Africa
by retaining
the m;\jority
e custodians
e Universal
Charter, are
ied or have
qe our own
Ited
OUI IhUl
!5/ can ilevel
kania
is a
&nian people
Mic turn of
II2 southern
p’on of that
ay not he on
iI freedompn, because
Intry, every
Its freedom
: in militant
e scourge of
&xr
Cabral
entry should
in power.”
1.las, of wai
the flames
Bi of Azania.
krny should
T when the
e being OUI
ldence
and

Egermission,
Ferninded of
$vith matters
,- no pastime
lot leave out
tind commit
pf uppedring
bodies. It is
led by one
five are trying
-new dawn.
be painful. ”
Bite here. in
oll;d~oralion
xxi thal flies
:ntly, South

BOW

TO OBTAIN

UNlTED

NATXONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nationa publlcatlone may he obtained from booketores and distributors
throughout the world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Gales
Sactlon, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT
SE PROCURER LER PUBLICATTONS
DES NATIONS UNIES
Lee publications den Nations I!niee sent en vente dans lea librairiea et les agencea
d&osItaires du mondo antler. Informez-voi
aup& de votre llbraire ou adreaeez.vous
B : NatIona Uniee, Section des ventee, New York ou GenBve.
KAR IlOJXYUHTb

COMO

ll3AAHH8

OPl'AHH3A9HH

CONSEGUIRPUBLICACPONESDELASNAClONES

OB'bEAHHffiHHblX

HAUHT1:

UNIDAS

Las publicacionea de la8 Neciones Unidaa eat&n on venta en librerlaa y cama distrjbuidoraa en todns pnrtea de1 mundo. ConHulte a .%I librero o dirljasc a: Naciones
Unides, Secci6n de Ventas, Nucva York o Ginebre.

Litho in United Nalions, New York

uo400

74.82001-June

1983-2,200
