United Nations

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6360th meeting
Friday, 16 July 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Kyrle
Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Figueirôa
Mr. Hu Bo
Ms. Tétreau
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Ms. Shiotsu
Mr. Jaber
Mr. López Tovar
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Müftüoğlu
Mr. Mugerwa
Mr. Green
Mrs. Kotheimer

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools: Prospects and challenges in
Africa
Letter dated 9 July 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/371)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-45510 (E)

*1045510*

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the European Union delegation
to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for inviting the European Union to
participate in this important debate. The candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia
align themselves with this statement.
In the interest of brevity and heeding the
President’s call, I shall summarize the key messages set
out in more detail in the printed version of this
statement.
The African Union Assembly proclaimed 2010 as
the Year of Peace and Security in Africa. Today’s
debate gives us the opportunity to share lessons from
concrete situations, brief one another on the tools that
are available and examine the increased cooperation
with regional organizations in conflict.
We see this discussion as a continuation of the
Council’s focus on protection issues, including last
week’s highly relevant debate on protection of civilians
(see S/PV.6354).
Conflict prevention is one of the main objectives
of the European Union’s external policy. To that end,
the European Union has strengthened its crisismanagement capabilities in recent years and pursues a
wide range of policies and actions from development
cooperation and external assistance to efforts aimed at
strengthening human rights, the rule of law and
accountability,
along
with
cooperation
with
international
partners
and
non-governmental
organizations.
The Joint Africa-European Union Strategy, in
particular the Partnership on Peace and Security,
embraces a wide set of objectives and activities
addressing short- and long-term security challenges.
We hold regular joint consultations on crises or

2

emerging threats, and our close cooperation is
facilitated by a designated Special Adviser on African
capabilities. The European Union provides funding for
African-led peace support operations, and we are often
invited to assist in many crisis situations in Africa
through other tools at our disposal, such as EU special
representatives and European Union crisis management
operations.
We commend the growing role of the African
Union and African regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention and mediation
efforts in Africa. International contact groups are also
useful tools for coordinating efforts to tackle crisis
situations. Some of these bring together the African
Union regional organizations, the United Nations, the
European Union and other relevant partners. We could
do more to strengthen relations among these
organizations by developing a common methodology
for identifying and addressing emerging conflicts and
the capacities needed.
In implementing the African Union-European
Union Action Plan on the Peace and Security
Partnership, we put particular emphasis on cooperation
in the field of mediation as a tool of first response to
emerging or ongoing crises. The United Nations is
certainly the most important and experienced actor in
the area of mediation. At the same time, regional and
subregional actors are increasingly the first to respond,
given their knowledge of local and regional dynamics
and their credibility in the regional context.
Our cooperation therefore aims at developing a
common understanding and broad guidelines, through
regular African Union-European Union-United Nations
exchanges.
As other speakers before me have stressed,
justice contributes to the consolidation of peace and to
conflict prevention. The experience in Africa shows
how accountability for the most serious crimes must be
part of any lasting solution, not least for its deterrent
effect on ongoing conflicts. Accountability for past
violations of human rights, as well as the overall
reform of the justice sector, should thus be integrated
in security sector reform and other institution-building
efforts.
The Peacebuilding Commission also plays an
important preventive role regarding the countries on its
agenda. In our view, the Peacebuilding Support Office
should deepen its interaction with other actors within

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

the United Nations system, such as the United Nations
Development Programme and the Department of
Political Affairs, in particular the Mediation Support
Unit, in order to exchange experiences and build on
best practices. The United Nations Inter-agency
Framework Team plays a helpful role in that regard.
Looking ahead to the coming months, in
particular the tenth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) in the autumn, we should never
underestimate the key role that women can play in
conflict prevention. Women are often powerful and
capable actors in their communities, and the
information provided by women’s groups can be
valuable in the early detection of tensions. Women
should be encouraged and enabled to participate
equally and actively in formal and informal mediation
processes and peace negotiations. Africa has led the
way in operationalizing resolution 1325 (2000). In this
anniversary year, much more remains to be done to
fully implement that landmark document. The
European Union will strongly support such efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset, Madam President, to
congratulate you on the very elegant way in which you
have been guiding the work of the Security Council
this month. My delegation is pleased to be able to
participate in today’s debate on this most important
theme, which is of interest to us all in so many ways,
as reflected in the Security Council’s ever-denser
agenda, more than 60 per cent of which is devoted to
the African continent.
In spite of the praiseworthy and sustained efforts
of Africa’s States, the continent sadly continues to
suffer the torments of conflict. The nature of these
conflicts has changed from inter-State conflicts to
intra-State disputes, which are more complex and
deadly. Whether these are the result of ethnic, religious
causes or of a struggle for control of natural resources,
Africa continues — despite innate optimism and trust
in a better common future — to be the silent victim of
the use of increasingly sophisticated, destructive and
evil weapons.
According to the annual report of the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, worldwide
expenditures on weapons in 2009 rose to a record
$1.531 trillion: an increase of 49 per cent compared to

10-45510

2000 and 9 per cent compared to 2008 — in spite of
the world financial crisis on which so much attention is
being focused. By comparison, the annual
peacekeeping budget amounts to less than 0.5 per cent
of the worldwide arms budget. That shows that
peacekeeping is an effective and inexpensive tool for
the international community in conflict resolution. We
ought to support and strengthen the United Nations in
this field.
The increased expenditures on weapons are
related to increased income in States from the sale of
natural resources and, sometimes, relates to the
hegemonic temptations of a past era. These
developments in the sphere of conflict oblige us to
reassess our overall concept of security. Threats from
beyond the national territory have been replaced by
internal, global and more diffuse threats that take the
form of military rebellions, transnational organized
crime or terrorism, which strike more randomly and in
an indiscriminate way.
The success of our Organization lies in its
universality. No other player can claim to possess the
legitimacy and experience in the maintenance of
international peace and security that the United Nations
has gradually accumulated since its establishment.
New global security concepts must take into
account the new parameters of conflict and must
incorporate elements such as crisis management and
the settlement and transformation of conflicts. It is thus
necessary to consider the spectrum of crises as a
continuum, during which the international community
can intervene, making use of a variety of tools such as
preventive
diplomacy,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding. We cannot manage crises without using
tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as
provided for in Article 33 of the Charter, negotiation
being the most important among them.
In settling, stabilizing or transforming conflicts,
those tools for dispute settlement have demonstrated
their relevance and effectiveness with the political will
of the parties and the positive and constructive
commitment of neighbouring States, whose role is the
undeniable key to successful conflict settlement.
But despite the relevance and importance of these
methods of peaceful settlement of disputes, nothing
can replace a policy of anticipating and preventing
conflict. That approach is among the least used by the
international community. The preventive deployment

3

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

of Blue Helmets in Macedonia, in 1999, exemplifies
the successful use of timely prevention. But such
diplomacy is not sufficient in itself; it must be
complemented by structural preventive action aimed at
strengthening the foundations of viable States by
building institutions and implementing sustainable
development policies. In this framework, the
Peacebuilding Commission plays a very precious role
which deserves to be backed by the international
community and especially by the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
It is fundamental to instil a culture of prevention
at the heart of our Organization. To do this, it is
necessary to qualitatively strengthen the Mediation
Support Unit of the Department of Political Affairs. In
this regard, we welcome the efforts undertaken by
Mr. Lynn Pascoe and his ambitious programme to
transform the Department.
We also believe it pertinent to establish a highlevel group within the Secretariat responsible for the
prevention of conflicts that would include, in addition
to the Cabinet of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, among others. Efforts should
also be undertaken in the training of United Nations
staff from those departments so that they can fully
understand the realities of the conflicts they are
expected to manage and concerning which they must
present reports to the Security Council on behalf of the
Secretary-General.
Africa has made significant progress towards
stability. However, such regions of the continent as the
Horn of Africa, the Great Lakes and the Sahelo-Sahara
continue to be targeted for destabilization. The recent
Small Arms Survey study by the Graduate Institute of
International and Developmental Studies in Geneva
noted no less than 11 non-State movements
representing threats to the security of the SaheloSaharan region as a result of their high degree of
militarization. The absence of cross-border cooperation
and security coordination and collusion among various
trafficking operations have turned the Sahelo-Saharan
region into an arc of crisis and a grey area in which
these non-State actors operate in collusion with each
other. Indeed, the Security Council devoted a meeting
to that theme during the presidency of Burkina Faso
last year.

4

The Kingdom of Morocco, an Arab-African
country solidly anchored on the continent by its
historical heritage and a civilizational heritage, has
since its independence made the choice of afropositivism by backing the liberation movements of the
continent that made the independence of many African
countries possible. Aware of the many security
challenges affecting these States, Morocco has spared
no effort to back them in peacebuilding and has
participated in some 20 peacekeeping operations
throughout Africa. Far from limiting itself to
peacekeeping, and as a result of its status as a discreet
mediator, Morocco has led a number of mediation
efforts between brotherly African countries, especially
within the framework of the Mano River Union.
The prevention of conflicts unfortunately remains
the poor cousin among the crisis management
instruments available to the United Nations. Whether
through its good offices, mediation or the appointment
of special representatives, the institution of the
Secretary-General must be equipped to enable better
action by the United Nations. In this respect, Morocco
expresses its hope that the United Nations will develop,
through its presence in the field, an early warning
mechanism that would enable it to detect crisisinducing factors and to contain them before they
degenerate.
A Buddhist teaching holds that the water pot is
filled drop by drop. Javier Pérez de Cuéllar and
Boutros Boutros-Ghali started this work; Kofi Annan,
Bernard Millet and Jean-Marie Guéhenno continued it
by strengthening United Nations peacekeeping. It now
behoves us to work together on this heritage to enable
the United Nations to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war and to establish a global
culture of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Gambia.
Mrs. Waffa-Ogoo (Gambia): My delegation
would like to commend the Nigerian presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this thematic debate
under the item “Maintenance of international peace and
security: Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy
tools: Prospects and challenges in Africa”. This debate
is not only on a critical and very visible part of the
mandate of the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, but it is also one that resonates with those of
us in Africa. The Charter of the United Nations,

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

especially in its Chapters VI and VIII, envisages
situations in which parties to disputes that are likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security could resort to the range of preventive
diplomacy tools identified under Article 33 or to
regional agencies or arrangements.
My delegation wishes to acknowledge the
commendable work carried out by the Council in
supporting the pacific settlement of disputes in Africa,
but we would like to see a more active involvement of
the Council in making use of the tools under
Chapter VI. The Council’s systematic engagement in
the early stages of a dispute would go a long way
towards reinforcing the good offices missions of the
Secretary-General and such regional and subregional
organizations as the African Union (AU) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).
We recognize that the increasing interaction and
consultation taking place between the institutions of
the Security Council and the African Union, such as
the AU Peace and Security Council and the AU
Commission, have created one of the best platforms for
preventive diplomacy in Africa. Increasingly, we are
also witnessing the active engagement of the United
Nations Office for West Africa with ECOWAS and
other United Nations entities by deploying preventive
diplomacy tools in volatile situations. The early
engagement of all of these institutions in potential
conflict situations in West Africa has yielded dividends
by reinforcing political stability across the region.
The synergies that these interactions and
consultations create between Member States, the
United Nations and African regional arrangements
must therefore be reinforced by all stakeholders. Our
institutions must enhance their mediation or preventive
diplomacy capabilities by generating a cadre of
practitioners and support teams using knowledge-based
approaches or early warning and early awareness
mechanisms for settling disputes before they erupt into
deadly conflicts.
I should like to highlight a few challenges or
concerns that would need the consistent engagement of
the Council and the international community. Election
processes in many parts of Africa are periods of
heightened tension and dispute, with some resulting in
tragic loss of human life and property, as well as the
onset of ethnic conflicts and political instability.

10-45510

Across West Africa, we have seen numerous success
stories, as in recent developments in Guinea and the
Niger, indicating that early intervention, mediation and
preventive diplomacy work. The lesson here is that
when the United Nations and regional and subregional
stakeholders act in concert in supporting Member
States, disputes among local actors and civil society get
settled and contained. The Council can reinforce such
engagement by endorsing the work of the various
United Nations and regional institutions dealing with
the situation. Peaceful and credible elections engender
security and stability.
West Africa has had a lot of civil conflicts that
have been settled through the active engagement of the
Council, but we still have lingering issues that continue
to threaten the relative security and stability of the
region. The end of conflicts in West Africa has
highlighted the need for security sector reform. The
increasing use of the subregion as a transit hub for
cocaine trafficking is also threatening to derail the
stability of the region. The international community
needs to urgently support ECOWAS efforts in tackling
these twin menaces.
The increasing engagement of the SecretaryGeneral, the Security Council, the United Nations
system and a network of special envoys and
representatives with the AU Peace and Security
Council, the AU Commission’s Panel of the Wise and
subregional bodies such as
ECOWAS, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community, to name
but a few, must lead to a coherent strategy that makes
effective use of Africa’s regional and subregional
arrangements, their established mechanisms and tools
and dedicated personnel or experts on preventive
diplomacy. Greater attention could be paid to the role
of preventive diplomacy in the United Nations-African
Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme. My
delegation believes that such an approach has the
potential of saving the larger international community
from embarking on costly interventions.
It is clear that there are many centres and actors
in the area of preventive diplomacy, and in any one
potential conflict situation there are bound to be many
actors who run the risk of falling over each other in
their quest for solutions. The United Nations could,
within its Mediation Support Unit, establish a capacity
or facility to coordinate the activities of all actors with
a view to achieving the best possible outcome in

5

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

conflict resolution. To my mind, an inspiring example
can be found in the United Nations leadership in
coordinating humanitarian action in disaster situations.
The capacities generated for conflict prevention remain
relevant even when conflicts or disputes are settled.
Preventive diplomacy works. It prevents disputes
from becoming deadly and saves costs associated with
full-blown peacekeeping missions. What we need from
here is a willingness to make good use of the array of
tools available under Chapters VI and VIII of the
Charter — a strategy for action that would embrace all
the relevant institutions and actors on the continent. We
must also enhance our support to the existing early
warning mechanisms and build the requisite capacities
and skills at the local, national and regional levels. A
comprehensive strategy of preventive diplomacy
should benefit from lessons learned, concrete examples
and the numerous success stories that are being
replicated across the continent.
The delegation of the Gambia is looking forward
to the continued engagement of all concerned in taking
this debate forward. My delegation is also convinced
that the time for a consistent and coherent United
Nations strategy for preventive diplomacy is long
overdue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes this debate on preventive diplomacy with a
focus on Africa. It seems particularly appropriate,
Madam President, that you have gathered us here today
in a week in which we gathered, just two floors above,
to commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the
Srebrenica genocide, which was an historic and
conspicuous failure of preventive diplomacy.
There is always the risk that, with the daily work
of this Council necessarily focused on reacting to
unfolding events and conflicts and on mandating
peacekeeping missions to respond to such conflicts, we
may lose sight of the key founding principle of this
Organization, namely, to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.
Today’s debate is a useful reminder of the
importance of preventive action. It is perhaps a little
clichéd, but prevention is better than cure, and we
should do all the more collectively to take measures to
prevent conflict, rather than wait for the need to

6

mobilize a collective response to a conflict. The
Council has an important role to play in this endeavour.
The Council has wide powers of investigation
and recommendation in regard to the pacific settlement
of disputes at its direct disposal under Chapter VI,
including the ability to engage itself in the process of
dispute resolution and to investigate situations and
make appropriate recommendations. Arguably, these
tools are not used often enough.
The Council has an important role to play in
providing political support to the good offices role of
the Secretary-General. The Council’s statements are
not just words, but rather a powerful signal of the will
of the international community.
We have been pleased to be able to support the
efforts to strengthen the Secretariat’s ability to service
the Secretary-General’s good offices role through the
provision of financial support to the Department of
Political Affairs (DPA). We have also been pleased to
support the crisis prevention work of the United
Nations Development Programme, recognizing that the
challenge of conflict prevention requires a collective
effort of multiple agencies. It remains a concern,
however, that this work falls to be funded under
voluntary contributions, when it is central to the
mandate of the United Nations. We should redouble
our efforts to ensure that the DPA’s strength and ability
to respond rapidly in conflict prevention situations is
adequate.
The Council has a further role to play in
supporting the preventive diplomacy efforts of regional
organizations, as outlined by the representative of the
Gambia just a few moments ago. Regional
organizations have an important role in the prevention
of conflicts, just as much as in responding to them.
Systems for early conflict resolution and better early
warning mechanisms on emerging crises can often be
more alert and more robust at the regional level. A
strong organic relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations, at both the regional level
and here in New York, must be an essential part of our
regional and global approach to conflict prevention.
The African Union (AU) is to be commended for
its tireless efforts to establish its own peace and
security framework, with preventive diplomacy at its
core. Subregional organizations in Africa have similar,
mutually supportive structures. Australia supports, in
its own modest way, the ongoing efforts of the United

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

Nations and the AU to develop the AU conflict
prevention and peacekeeping capacity at both the
strategic and operational levels, and we welcome the
recent decision to create a United Nations Office to the
AU in Addis Ababa. We have been pleased to
contribute to United Nations initiatives aimed at
strengthening the relationship between the AU and the
United Nations and at developing more effective
conflict-prevention mechanisms in Africa at both the
regional and the subregional levels. The establishment
of the United Nations Office in Addis Ababa should
create greater synergies and efficiencies in the United
Nations-AU relationship, including in relation to
conflict prevention activities.
We witnessed the effective interplay of the
subregional, regional and global systems in response to
the events that unfolded in Guinea last September. The
Economic Community of West African States, the AU,
the Council and the United Nations more broadly
responded in unison to the unfolding events in Guinea
in a manner that effectively diffused tensions and
restored that country back to the path of democracy.
This was a telling illustration of how the system can
work to effectively prevent the escalation of tensions.
Central to an effective system of conflict
prevention is awareness of the situation, the ability to
analyse that information and the political will to take
action when needed. DPA plays an important role in
collating and analysing the necessary information. In
extreme situations, the proposed joint office of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and for
the Responsibility to Protect, the creation of which we
support, should serve to alert the United Nations
system to emerging mass atrocity situations. It then
becomes a question of political will.
The Council needs to open itself up more to
receiving briefings from DPA and other parts of the
Secretariat on unfolding situations, and the broader
membership needs to support such Council
engagement. Despite some improvements and the use
of some innovative meeting formats, too often the
Council still appears deaf to calls to be briefed on
unfolding situations. If the Council is overly
conservative in its approach to what is or is not a threat
to international peace and security, it will inevitably
relegate itself to the role of responding to conflict,
rather than seeking to prevent it. This will mean that
the Council will have failed the test set for it and for all

10-45510

of us in the opening paragraph of the United Nations
Charter.
The President: I
representative of Algeria.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on behalf of the Algerian delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July and to express to you our
appreciation for the effective manner in which you
have been guiding our work. I would also like to
commend you for having selected the theme
“Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools:
Prospects and challenges in Africa” and to thank you
for developing the terms of reference for this debate. I
would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Ambassador Claude Heller, Permanent Representative
of Mexico, and his delegation for their presidency in
the month of June.
As we have heard in today’s debate on the
subject, preventive diplomacy is not only accepted in
its general terms but is also recognized as a potentially
effective instrument for action, one requiring patience,
discretion and coordination. One of the essential and
accepted tenets of preventive diplomacy is respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
the political independence of States. Given its nature
and its purpose, preventive diplomacy is thus founded
neither on interference nor on coercion. It is also
acknowledged that preventive measures can enable the
international community to save precious resources
that could then be invested in development.
Algeria notes with satisfaction that in the overall
resources used by the United Nations to handle
existing conflicts, the portion devoted to preventive
diplomacy has increased considerably, even though it is
peacekeeping operations that remain the most visible
aspect of the activities of the Organization.
Given that the success of this undertaking hinges
on a dynamic synthesis of efforts at the global, regional
and subregional levels, we have witnessed the gradual
development of multidimensional partnerships based
on a perspective of consolidating gains and creating
synergies. The United Nations and regional
organizations serve as our points of reference in this
context, to the extent that their actions are
complementary and mutually reinforcing.

7

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

In the African context, preventive actions have
been intensified and expanded, first because of Africa’s
collective commitment to peace — which has resulted
in the multiplication of mediation efforts led by
eminent African leaders — as well as through the
implementation of a peace and security architecture, at
the heart of which lies the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union.
This recasting of the African collective security
system responds to awareness that peace and security
govern the progress of our societies. It is based on an
approach that includes addressing the root causes of
conflict in order to ensure that conditions are in place
for lasting peace and security. The Panel of the Wise,
the Early Warning System and the African Standby
Force are further innovations that allow the Peace and
Security Council to fully carry out its responsibilities.
By creating these new instruments and the means for
their functioning, Africa has thus clearly shown its
resolve to fully play its role in maintaining,
consolidating and strengthening peace and security on
the continent.
To achieve that goal, Africa counts on the
constant and resolute support of the United Nations
and the international community. The interest and the
attention that the main organs of the Organization pay
to affairs on the African continent are, in this respect, a
source of decided encouragement for the efforts of the
African leaders.
Despite the significant headway achieved, Algeria
is of the view that this preventive diplomacy
arrangement has not yet reached its full potential. First,
the risk of crises will remain significant in countries
experiencing all types of insecurity. To remedy that
situation, we must not only more effectively tackle the
structural causes of conflict, but also implement a
comprehensive and integrated approach while ensuring
sufficient coordination of actions. Moreover, the
actions of preventive diplomacy will remain ineffective
as long as the parties themselves refuse to resort to
dialogue and negotiation, or to enter into mediation and
contribute to appeasing tensions. There will be no true
progress in this field without the will of its main actors.
With regard to preventive diplomacy instruments
and their use, I wish to make the following comments.
I will begin with the Early Warning System,
which is a tool crucial to the success of preventive
action, to the extent that it helps to detect the warning

8

signs of dangerous situations. For its optimal use, we
believe that internal links should be established
between the political and economic sectors of the
United Nations Secretariat. On the external level,
channels should be created for the exchange of
information and communication with regional
mechanisms. We must also move from the phase of
observing situations that may be precursors to crises to
the progressive-response phase; otherwise the Early
Warning System will lose its relevance.
A further observation concerns the pre-conflict
peacebuilding dimension and the support measures that
should be taken to help countries that are in difficulty
before conflicts break out. In this regard, preventive
development is considered a necessary complement to
preventive diplomacy. It consists in focusing efforts on
building States’ capacities to resolve their problems
themselves by targeting specific sectors.
The implementation of preventive development,
however, raises the issue of financing, which is quite
clearly the most critical element and the main
constraint. One of the clear challenges lies in
persuading the international community that the cost of
pre-conflict peacebuilding represents only a small
fraction of the expenses that could be committed to
peacekeeping operations and, at the end of the day, for
peacebuilding operations following conflicts.
Finally, it is essential to optimize the
coordination of efforts by the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. To that end,
Algeria believes that efforts must be made to derive
greater benefit from the complementarity and
reinforcing roles of the entire array of actors, taking
into account their various constraints, in particular
their lack of resources and expertise.
In recent years, the African Union and some
subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community, have made a
commitment to do more to resolve conflicts and have
established new institutional mechanisms to encourage
conciliation and negotiation. Those initiatives
supplement efforts made at the global level in the field
of prevention and auger well for future cooperation
between those organizations and the rest of the
international community. As a result, they have the
right to expect increased support from the United
Nations and the international community, all the more

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

so because their actions to support peace on the
continent are part of greater worldwide efforts to
maintain and strengthen peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to the Nigerian presidency for its leadership in
convening this open debate to discuss the important
issue of preventive diplomacy. Preventive diplomacy is
indeed a broad agenda item encompassing political,
socio-economic, humanitarian and governance-related
areas. Thus I echo the call of the other Members that
we need a more coordinated, comprehensive and
holistic approach to effectively take up this issue.
Over the years, the merits of preventive
diplomacy have been widely recognized among
Member States. However, the actions of the United
Nations remain weighted towards the more visible,
forceful and reactive measures rather than the invisible,
quiet and proactive initiatives required to prevent
conflicts.
The problems concerning preventive diplomacy
stem from the fact that it is very difficult to determine
what worked and why, and far easier to point to what
failed. Moreover, there is the so-called invisibility
problem of successful conflict prevention, since it is
neither seen nor heard. However, such shortcomings
should not be the cause of inaction, as preventive
diplomacy is driven by overriding political,
humanitarian and moral imperatives and is much more
cost-effective than dealing with conflicts after their
outbreak and escalation.
Against that backdrop, we note with satisfaction
the various efforts made by the regional and
subregional organizations in Africa towards conflict
prevention. In particular, the Early Warning System
established by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) is a step in the right
direction that sheds new light on the initiatives that
need to be taken up more actively at the international
level.
Through the incorporation of an effective early
warning system, we would be in a better position to
detect the signs of conflict at the preliminary stages.
Once we can ascertain that the tensions for a potential

10-45510

conflict are on the rise, we can then employ the
relevant tools of preventive diplomacy.
I should like to take this opportunity to
emphasize the importance of mediation among the
various tools for preventing conflicts. During the open
debate on 21 April 2009 on this topic (see S/PV.6108),
I stressed that mediation services must be provided by
the most qualified mediators at the earliest stages of
conflict. To that end, thorough databases of dedicated
mediators need to be created so that when the need
arises, less time and energy will be devoted to locating
mediators with the right attributes for the situation.
I applaud the efforts undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat in this field since then, as
United Nations engagement in preventive diplomacy
and in support of peace processes have been quite
extensive. One example is the work of the Mediation
Support Unit, which now employs a standby team of
mediation experts. Another achievement worthy of
mention is the mediation work of the Department for
Political Affairs on the reconciliation talks in Somalia
that led to the Djibouti Agreement and on the national
political dialogue in the Central African Republic. In
all, the Organization has provided mediation support to
over 20 peace processes.
In addition to mediation, we should also seek to
more actively utilize other preventive diplomacy tools
as well, including establishing good offices, dispatching
special envoys and increasing consultations, among
others.
If our efforts on preventive diplomacy are to
succeed, effective resource allocation will be key. In
this vein, we could look into the plausibility of
allocating a portion of the peacekeeping budget
towards preventive diplomacy efforts. We should strive
not only to identify the most effective strategy and
tools, but also to obtain the resources needed to carry
out the various tasks comprising preventive diplomacy.
I sincerely hope that the United Nations and
Member States will henceforth work closely together
with regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union and ECOWAS, and also with
relevant non-governmental organizations so that we
can turn the various ideas we have proposed today on
preventive diplomacy into concrete action. For its part,
the Government of the Republic of the Korea will exert
its utmost efforts to this end.

9

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly congratulate the sister
delegation of Nigeria for having organized this open
debate of the Security Council on the theme
“Maintenance of international peace and security:
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools:
Prospects and challenges in Africa”.
This debate is all the more relevant as, quite
clearly, numerous atrocities could have been avoided
and thousands of human lives spared had preventive
diplomacy tools been deployed in a number of conflict
situations around the world. This conviction is
supported by the positive experiences achieved around
the world under the auspices of the United Nations
through the good offices, mediators and special envoys
of the Secretary-General, which have defused several
crises and which prove, if there was any further need
for such proof, that the effectiveness and benefits of
preventive diplomacy are well established.

complementary instruments in United Nations
actions — are necessary to strengthening the momentum
of preventive action.
In this vein, we should welcome the fact that the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations, which is based on Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and stretches back to the very
creation of the Organization of African Unity, is one of
the most dynamic partnerships in the area of
peacekeeping and early detection of warning signs of
potential crisis situations. The presence of United
Nations offices in various regions throughout Africa is
therefore of great importance.
Indeed, my delegation is of the view that the
African Union, with the support of the United Nations,
must acquire the means to be more aware of the
precursor signs of tension and to take the necessary
steps in close cooperation with the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular.

The resounding successes achieved in different
areas through the interventions of regional and
subregional organizations and civil society, or simply
through good will, are also grounds for satisfaction,
from which we should take encouragement and seek to
optimize such strategies in all of our efforts towards
peace.

Having taken this fully into account, the African
Union established a system for the management of
peace, which spans the spectrum of activities from
preventive
diplomacy
to
peacebuilding
via
peacekeeping. The Panel of the Wise was established in
the context of this initiative, as Africa has understood
and recognized that conflicts, be they latent or open,
can be resolved only through political means — that is
to say, through negotiation.

Thus, the United Nations, which was created,
among other reasons, to save current and succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, should place
preventive diplomacy at the very heart of its action to
ensure that, even if it is not the main tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it will
serve as an essential one in neutralizing certain
conflict-prone situations from the earliest signs.

My delegation therefore launches an appeal for
the African Union Panel of the Wise to enjoy the
greatest possible support, which would enable it to
offer informed advice to the Presidents of the African
Union and the African Union Commission, which
could, on the basis of that advice, carry out intensive
preventive diplomacy. Is it not said that it is better to
prevent than to cure?

To achieve effective preventive diplomacy, we
must meet the challenge of devoting the necessary
financial resources and proven and highly qualified
human resources to it. Another challenge that will have
to be met is that of strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations to consolidate their conflict-prevention
and settlement mechanisms. Indeed, synergy and close
interaction between the United Nations, which bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and its partners —
especially regional organizations, which serve as

However, to prevent effectively, there is a need to
bear in mind, as recalled by the Secretary-General in
his report contained in document S/2008/18 of
14 January 2008, that prevention is a multidimensional
task involving political decisions, humanitarian
activities and development activities that require
organizations to work in close cooperation with the
United Nations, and especially with the Security
Council, the Human Rights Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the specialized agencies.

10

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

In so doing, we could focus on strategies aimed at
peacebuilding and reconciliation. In that regard, the
African Union has already taken the first steps by
adopting, at its seventh session of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government, in July 2006, the
strategic Framework for Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development.
Relying on the aforementioned principles and
beliefs, and supported by the structures established by
the African Union, the President of the Republic of
Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Wade, has
personally involved himself in a number of regions of
Africa and the world to advise and reconcile the parties
in conflict. The ongoing commitment of President
Wade has promoted the resumption of political
dialogue, better governance and the holding of free and
democratic elections in many countries, thus avoiding
confrontations which would have undoubtedly claimed
hundreds if not thousands of lives.
Senegal remains convinced that the combined
actions of all to find ways and means to prevent
conflict will finally mitigate the financial and human
costs of peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
The President: I give
representative of Burkina Faso.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all I welcome the presence in the Council this
morning of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria
and the other individuals convoked to this meeting.
Equally, I would like to commend you, Madam, on
your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July and to praise
the initiative of convening this open debate on the
important theme of conflict prevention.
Is it necessary to reaffirm the importance of
preventive diplomacy in conflict resolution, especially
in Africa, where crises and their extent seriously
threaten international peace and security? We can point
to the lively deliberations and the numerous relevant
recommendations on the subject, in particular in the
Secretary-General’s report, “An Agenda for Peace”
(S/24111), the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) and
reports of the Secretary-General on conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa, mediation and dispute
resolution.
All that underscores the importance and priority
that the United Nations, in particular the Security

10-45510

Council, should attach, in coordination with regional
and subregional organizations, to activities for the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes. The
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations are compelled to pursue and strengthen
their prevention efforts, as they serve not only to
restrict the magnitude of crises, but above all
contribute to avoiding staggering expenditures in
peacekeeping operations, whose outcome remains
uncertain.
In this regard, we welcome the positive actions
by regional and subregional African organizations such
as the African Union (AU), the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Community in implementing their
internal conflict prevention mechanisms. But we must
find the best possible channel to establish a strategic
relationship among the United Nations and the such
organizations in order to ensure the success of conflict
prevention and resolution actions, all while drawing on
local capacities.
We believe that the best way to meet that goal
lies in strengthening the mediation and conflict
prevention capacities of regional and subregional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Establishing relations that are more
strategic and share a common vision fits in the
framework not only of conflict prevention and
resolution but with peacekeeping and long-term
reconstruction activities. We believe that is crucial. In
this regard, the establishment of the African UnionUnited Nations Joint Mediation Support Team is
encouraging.
I would like to take this opportunity to recall that
in its presidential statement of September 2008
(S/PRST/2008/36), issued following the high-level
meeting on mediation and settlement of disputes, the
Security Council underlined the importance of engaging
the potential and the existing capacities and capabilities
of regional and subregional organizations in mediation
efforts and welcomed the promotion of regional
approaches to the pacific settlement of disputes.
In particular, we encourage the United Nations to
continue to support the African Union’s 10-year
capacity-building programme, in particular in the field
of mediation and conflict resolution, as well as in
electoral affairs. In the same vein, we welcome and
encourage the support provided by the Peacebuilding

11

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

Commission for prevention actions, which have
undoubtedly contributed to peacebuilding and to
preventing a resurgence of violence in post-conflict
countries or the emergence of new conflicts.
In the framework of optimizing diplomatic and
preventive channels, I wish touch on a few points that
we believe are of prime importance. They include
raising the awareness of and involving national actors,
in particular civil society, in the design and launching
of prevention activities, and using existing capacities
and resources at regional and subregional levels for
preventive actions, including with regard to negotiation,
mediation and good offices. Strategic relations need to
be strengthened and a common strategic vision
developed between the United Nations and the African
Union, chiefly between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in order to better coordinate their actions in
the field of conflict prevention and resolution.
Partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union, must be pursued and strengthened
in order to provide necessary support to the initiatives
and measures taken by regional and subregional
organizations in the field of conflict prevention and
resolution. That was recommended by the Security
Council’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa following the
interactive seminar held in 2007 on the topic of “An
effective global conflict prevention strategy in Africa:
the role of the Security Council”.
There is a need to sustain and coordinate the
beneficial actions of United Nations entities — such as
UNESCO, the Peacebuilding Commission, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research
(UNITAR) — that play an active role in preventive
diplomacy. We must draw on the lessons learned from
strategic partnerships and the arrangements that the
United Nations has developed with certain institutions,
in particular the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund in the context of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to promote activities for conflict
prevention and resolution.
For its part, Burkina Faso will continue to
contribute, in particular in the context of ECOWAS and
the African Union, to the prevention and resolution of

12

conflicts, as we are convinced that peace and stability
are the bedrock for true sustainable development.
As I indicated earlier, activities for prevention
and peaceful settlement of disputes are a collective
responsibility and represent one of the pillars of the
collective security system. Thus the full range of those
involved, including national actors, subregional and
regional organizations and the United Nations, must
combine their efforts to optimize diplomatic and
preventive channels and, above all, to transition from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention of crisis.
Given the increased complexity of conflicts and
the growth of needs, a great deal is to be gained by
prioritizing prevention activities with peacekeeping
activities. Therefore we express the hope that the
United Nations, working together with subregional and
regional organizations, will maintain and strengthen
the diplomatic and preventive channels to preserve
peace and stability worldwide and particularly in
Africa.
The President: I give
representative of Pakistan.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): For how long have we
sat in these halls and heard the despair of Africa. For
how long have we viewed horrible genocide and so
much waste for so beautiful a land? For how long have
we further despaired that the world has not taken
cognizance of some of the most brutal acts that have
taken place in the history of the world?
Today I am proud to represent a Member of this
Organization, where, Madam, you as an African are the
President of the Security Council, where an African is
the President of the General Assembly and where many
very august members sitting around this table are of
that continent.
While North and Central Africa are ably
represented at the highest offices in this Council, South
Africa needs to be congratulated on holding a
tournament of international brotherhood never before
held in so significantly peaceful an atmosphere. I feel
that these reflections and the recent speech from this
very chair by my brother the Permanent Representative
of Senegal, who stated his case so eloquently, clearly
show that if anyone today believes the world has a
chance it is because here in this Security Council and
at this institution so much has been made possible by
your compatriots, Madam President. We have seen

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

important strides towards addressing the challenges of
peace, security and nation-building. I think the holding
of today’s debate attests to the close attention that
you — and, through you, some very able leadership in
Africa — are paying to security.
In the early twentieth century, the independence
movements in India and Pakistan and the subcontinent
and the freedom struggle against colonialism in Africa
were mutually inspiring. Today, Africa’s collective
endeavour towards peace and security helps us believe
and reinforces our own quest for sustainable peace in
our region and beyond. We have been a friend and
perhaps even a partner with Africa in search of peace
and stability in our own neighbourhood, and today one
is proud to say that Africa is leading the way with so
many practical examples that we indeed can learn from
it. We have seen in the recent past so many conflicts,
so many wars that were thought a decade ago to be
ones that would destroy that continent. And today we
find that wise, able leadership — including, I must add
here, that of two very able Secretaries-Generals
preceding the current one, together with our own
current Secretary-General himself — has played an
essential role in creating the preventive doctrine.
Bodies such as the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and the Panel of the Wise have imparted
to Africa strengths never envisaged before. Africa has
sagaciously resorted to the vast spectrum of modalities
envisaged in Chapter VI and other relevant provisions
of the United Nations Charter. These have prevented
disputes from arising and have ably laid to rest some
ongoing ones.
The United Nations has had some success in
employing the tools of preventive diplomacy in these
conflicts. However, we are not here to sit back, and
indeed we need to strengthen and make full use of
comparative advantages of Africa’s regional, national
and local capacities for mediation, conflict prevention,
reconciliation and dialogue. And on the subject of
reconciliation, one cannot continue without mentioning
former President Mandela and Archbishop Tutu. They
have been much larger than life, bright illuminations in
a firmament of stars, where they have outshone all
those around the world; today they are icons of peace,
security and stability.
The Secretary-General’s report of April 2009
(S/2009/189) on enhancing mediation and its support
activities laid emphasis on early engagement and on
processes addressing the root causes of conflict. This is

10-45510

an important lesson we must learn from the past. As the
principal organ with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council also needs to make a wider and more
effective use of the procedures and means for pacific
settlement of disputes, particularly Articles 33 and 38
of the Charter.
There has been an injudicious use of Chapter VII
in certain conflict situations, and these merit due
consideration. These injudicious uses, in our view,
have damaged the efforts for pacific settlement under
Chapter VI and have created an impression that
non-Chapter VII resolutions are somehow not equally
binding. This does not augur well for international
peace. A proactive regional organization with its hands
on the local pulse can counter such a trend.
The African Union has provided strategic
coherence, leadership and on-the-ground management
in nearly all conflicts on the continent. Through close
partnership in recent years, it has added value to the
work of the United Nations, particularly that of the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The African Union is also ideally placed to improve the
structure of global governance and make it more
egalitarian and just. The record of its recent review
meeting in Addis Ababa makes positive reading for the
future of Africa.
The African Union, with other regional and
subregional actors including local civil society, has
effectively worked for the cause of peace, in sectors as
diverse as the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the anti-piracy campaign off
the coast of Somalia, and in facilitating the political
processes following the recently held elections in
Burundi and in many other African States where
elections were not considered possible some years ago.
The Secretary-General’s report of 21 June 2010
(S/2010/324) also notes the active role of the
Economic Community of West African States in
promoting peace and stability of West Africa.
Many speakers today have very elaborately
outlined the future challenges of peace and security in
Africa. These challenges are not confined to Africa
alone. In our view, demographic trends with high
proportion of youth population, lack of employment,
poverty, income inequalities, food and water crises and
deficits in education and health lie at the root of these
conflicts.

13

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

I would particularly like to state that the example
set by Africa in Copenhagen was indeed something that
can be emulated by many others. And, not to be
outdone, with regard to the very reform of this Council,
Africa has set, by its steadfastness and its own beliefs,
a trend which many thought could not last — and they
have been baffled by what has been achieved.
We have to move beyond security paradigms and
the traditional tools of preventive diplomacy to include
areas such as fair trade practices, food and
environmental security and investment in governance
institutions. Accordingly, the tools of preventive
diplomacy could be better optimized if used in
conjunction with rectifying measures in such areas.
Today’s debate will refresh our collective
understanding of the issue of peace and security. Let
me thank you, Madam President, for this valuable
initiative of opening a debate that will prove to the
world how very important your leadership is today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): I believe this is an
opportune moment to extend our sincere congratulations
to His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Nigeria on
his appointment and to warmly welcome him to New
York. I also want to place on record our appreciation to
the delegation of Nigeria for organizing this open
debate on this all-important subject of “Optimizing the
use of preventive diplomacy tools: Prospects and
challenges in Africa”. And we are grateful too for the
concept note on the subject matter, circulated on
12 July (S/2010/371, annex), highlighting the need for
more use of preventive diplomacy and the Council’s
role under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations.
Allow me also to welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, and the representatives
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the World Bank and to thank them for
their participation in this debate. This meeting is more
than timely as we approach the stock-taking high-level
event on the tenth year of the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration.
It cannot be gainsaid that the present predicament
reflecting Africa’s sluggish progress in meeting the
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), is

14

significantly related to the incessant spate of conflict
that the continent has had to grapple with over the last
half century. These conflicts have erupted, festered and
spread easily beyond national frontiers as a result of
sheer complacency, leading to the failure to adopt
timely preventive measures and early action.
Preventing violent conflicts involves, for the
most part, the institution at the international, regional
and local levels of structural mechanisms imbued with
effective capability to apply measures designed to
monitor early warning indicators and predict
potentially violent situations. That would be conducive
to the timeous adoption of effective measures and
initiatives in order to prevent impending conflicts as
well as to address the root causes of previous conflict
situations or disputes.
It is evident that many of the conflicts that have
erupted in Africa in recent decades were deeply rooted
in the failure of States to meet their obligations to their
citizens, particularly in providing much-needed
protection in order, inter alia, to safeguard human
rights, in the improvement of the quality of life of
citizens and in the taking of appropriate measures to
avoid political and economic exclusion and
marginalization. The key indispensable tools of
preventive diplomacy include development, education
and the wider recognition and promotion of human and
political rights. At least the lessons we in Sierra Leone
have learned and continue to learn from the results of
our Truth and Reconciliation Commission have put us
in a vantage position to appreciate this.
Preventing conflicts requires the application of
varying normative mechanisms, different sets of tools
and skills as well as the involvement of diverse
stakeholders at the local, national, regional and
international levels. And key among the players at the
heart of the maintenance of international peace and
security is, undoubtedly, the Security Council. Given,
however, the complexity of the task and the dynamics
involved, cooperation between the United Nations and
the regional and subregional organizations is imperative
if the Council is to carry out its mandate effectively
and efficiently.
Although we all seem to believe that the best way
to end wars is not to start them, the fact, however, is
that the international community has over decades been
more inclined to engage in what one could describe as
“firefighting diplomacy” than to use preventive

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

diplomacy in maintaining international peace and
security. Clearly, and in comparative terms, we all are
aware of the colossal nature of the human and material
costs involved in the former as opposed to the costsaving investment of resources in preventive measures.
Experience has shown that the use of preventive
measures or early action in addressing looming crisis
situations has often received little attention or at best
come as an afterthought. The need for a paradigm shift
cannot now be more overemphasized.
Developments that have taken place on the
African continent in the past decade with the adoption
of the Constitutive Act establishing the African Union
have significantly changed the conflict transformation
landscape on the continent. Thus, there appears to be a
fair quantum of normative mechanisms or measures to
prevent conflict, ranging from Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s
1992 Agenda for Peace (S/24111) to the 1998
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318), along with the
numerous initiatives undertaken thereafter, including
the recent establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
It is safe to say that what the international
community needs to do is to muster the necessary
political will to fully implement these mechanisms by
providing the much-needed resources and human capital
for global peace and security. Until the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission, engagement with
societies emerging from conflict had often been fraught
with constraints ranging from weaknesses in
disarmament and demobilization programmes, justice
and security sector reform processes and resource
mobilization to human and institutional capacitybuilding in order to create a more secure environment
for peace to take root and for the promotion of
economic growth and sustainable development.
Regional and subregional organizations like the
African Union, ECOWAS, the Southern Africa
Development Community and even the Mano River
Union have developed, within their respective
architectures, viable mechanisms for the prevention of
conflicts, yet are handicapped in their capacity to
implement these mandates in terms of matching
resources and capacity-building constraints.

10-45510

In addition to the perennial problems of the illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons and the lack
of surveillance and patrol mechanisms for long and
porous borders and territorial waters, the continent is
also experiencing new and/or emerging threats
involving narcotic drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, piracy and terrorist activities, such as
the recent cowardly act of terrorism committed against
the innocent citizens of Kampala.
In conclusion, I deem it imperative to stress the
need for the Council to intensify cooperation with
regional and subregional actors in concrete ways in
order to promote preventive diplomacy by way of
measures to support and facilitate the coordination of
international assistance in resource mobilization, in
enhancing national capacities to monitor frontiers and
territorial waters, in the positive use of mediation
options and in putting in place robust security sector
reform.
At the national level, it also important to provide
support for and collaborate with civil society and
women’s organizations to develop and implement
programmes aimed at preventing conflicts and to help
in fostering the requisite political will in doing so.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the Government of Benin, I would like at the outset
to congratulate you, Madam President, and, through
you, your country on your accession to the presidency
of the Security Council. We wish you every possible
success during your term at the head of this institution.
I also convey my gratitude to the Ambassador of
Mexico, who presided so outstandingly over the
Council’s work during the month of June 2010. The
presence in New York for this debate of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of your country, Madam, clearly
demonstrates Nigeria’s commitment to peace and
international security, especially on the African
continent. Your country has paid a very heavy price for
peace in Africa, which is a priority of its foreign
policy.
While sovereign responsibilities place the
primary responsibility for the prevention of conflicts
on United Nations Member States, it is equally true
that the eruption of conflict in any country whatsoever
illustrates the failure not only of its political class, but
also of the international community. The thematic

15

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

outline that was provided by your delegation to guide
our consideration of this topic appropriately frames
this issue in all its aspects. It raises critical questions
that require responses commensurate with the
challenges facing the African continent.
That outline reintroduces on our agenda the issue
of the establishment of a cohesive conflict prevention
strategy for the entire United Nations. This question
was highlighted by resolution 1625 (2005), which was
presented and negotiated by the African States that
were then members of the Council, on the basis of the
work of the Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution
of Nigeria.
Such a strategy should be based on the following
main points: State capacity-building aimed at enabling
countries to settle their internal disputes peacefully,
without resort to armed violence; the establishment of
staggered early warning and rapid response mechanisms
that could include the preventive deployment of United
Nations forces; the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter — the African
Union provides optimal conditions for such cooperation
in the spirit of partnership for peace; the mobilization
of adequate financial resources for the implementation
of structural and operational preventive measures; and
the strengthening of systemic measures to reduce the
level of violence in the international system.
In terms of internal capacity-building, Benin’s
journey on the road to democracy over the past 20 years
has passed through social and economic reforms in
various sectors and the establishment of support
programmes negotiated and implemented in cooperation
with development partners. We should not underestimate
the role played by opposition and mediation institutions,
which have energized our national and local dialogues
and thus contributed to ensuring political and social
stability in the country over the years.
More recently created institutions include the
offices of the Mediator of the Republic and the High
Commissioner for Concerted Governance, which seek
to improve and strengthen national governance, not to
mention the independent reflection commissions.
With respect to the establishment of early
warning and rapid response mechanisms, preventive
diplomacy should be aimed at recognizing crisis and
conflict warning signs, contribute to re-launching
dialogue between stakeholders when dialogue has

16

broken down or become bogged down, and promote
conciliation or reconciliation in order to strengthen the
national consensus that is so crucial to preserving
lasting peace and stability.
I must here underscore the importance of the
regular reports that are submitted to the Security
Council on the challenges facing some regions of our
continent. The extraordinary monitoring work carried
out by the United Nations Office for West Africa, in
liaison with the Economic Community of West African
States, enables us to keep an eye on critical situations
at the level of individual countries and in the subregion
as a whole. Fortunately, the effectiveness of the United
Nations peacebuilding mechanism very successfully
bridges the institutional gaps in this field. The
usefulness of the catalyst subsidies provided to the
Peacebuilding Fund has been clearly demonstrated.
The international community should increase the
resources available to the Fund by maintaining these
two rapid response channels.
My delegation advocates an increase in the
number of visits by the Secretary-General to countries
in precarious situations, as he represents the collective
conscience of the international community. The
exchange of bilateral visits between countries in
difficult situations and the heads of State or ministers
for foreign affairs of countries sitting on the Security
Council can also promote intensive political dialogue
with their leaders and help to identify the constraints
they are facing, the path to follow and the resources
that can be brought to bear to contribute to an
improvement in their situation.
Given the recent eruption of post-electoral
violence, special attention must be paid in preventive
diplomacy efforts to guaranteeing the transparency of
elections, remedying the lack of trust in conventional
bodies for settling electoral disputes, increasing the
credibility of the electoral process as a whole as a way
to transfer power, and consolidating the legitimacy of
elected officials in order to avoid situations in which
their democratic process could be blocked and
undermined.
The extremely high costs of popular elections
prevent low-income countries from taking appropriate
precautionary measures. This situation is fraught with a
great many risks for peace and stability in the countries
concerned. The international community should offer

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

countries in that situation appropriate assistance to
organize credible and peaceful elections.

durable solutions to conflict situations around the
world.

Manual voter registries, compiled anew for every
election, make the conduct of elections very costly for
low-income countries. The creation of a permanent
electronic voter registry, impervious to partisan
manipulation but easily updated and reusable, could
guarantee transparency. Furthermore, such a permanent
electronic registry, once established, could also provide
a mine of statistical data to promote economic and
social development and balanced land-use planning in
all countries, including in the context of the
Millennium Development Goals, in order to guarantee
to all citizens the benefits of common minimum social
services as a means of combating the various forms of
social exclusion.

My delegation upholds the principle that States
should act so as to prevent, in their international
relations, the emergence or aggravation of disputes or
conflict situations, in particular by fulfilling their
obligations under international law. We also believe
that it is the duty and responsibility of all States, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, to use peaceful means to settle any
dispute that is likely to endanger international peace
and security. We are encouraged to note that the culture
of prevention is indeed gaining ground, as is the
understanding to strengthen and give support to the
tools used in response to situations that could
potentially lead to the outbreak of violence.

Development assistance should be implemented
in such a way as to contribute to the prevention of
conflicts by fully incorporating measures aimed at
tackling their underlying causes. Large-scale youth
unemployment is one such cause, and in this regard
decent work for youth is equal to peace.

As noted in the concept paper contained in
document S/2010/371, we acknowledge that early
warning, preventive diplomacy, preventive deployment,
practical disarmament measures and post-conflict
peacebuilding are interdependent and complementary
components of a comprehensive conflict prevention
strategy. In this regard, we believe that the sooner we
act to prevent conflict, the greater are the chances of
success.

Finally, resolution 1625 (2005) calls for a
strategic assessment of the risks of conflicts in
countries showing signs of fragility. In this respect, the
United Nations should fully utilize the synergies
offered through support to regional mechanisms for
conflict prevention. The support of the international
community
for
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations arising from the African Peer Review
Mechanism in the framework of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development should lead to good results.
The President: I give
representative of Botswana.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Madam President,
allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of this Council. My delegation also
joins in thanking the Nigerian presidency for its
initiative of convening this open debate.
Under the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
effective implementation of this noble mandate hinges
on the trust and support of all States Members of the
United Nations, the coordination and cooperation of
regional and subregional organizations, and the
persistent efforts of the Organization itself to explore

10-45510

Consistent with its democratic tradition,
Botswana is fully committed to the implementation of
existing international instruments, as well as of
respective principles and rules governing the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. We support the
declarations and resolutions of the General Assembly
that call for the strengthening of the capacity of the
United Nations to respond effectively and efficiently in
matters relating to dispute or conflict prevention.
As an embodiment of the collective will of
African countries to achieve unity, peace and security,
the African Union has the legitimacy and the political
and moral authority to handle conflict prevention and
resolution of conflict situations throughout Africa. It is
important to recognize that the African Union has
declared the year 2010 as the Year of Peace. We
believe that the Year of Peace will provide impetus to
peace and security efforts on the continent and give
better visibility to ongoing and past efforts of the
African Union on the ground to speed up the
implementation of commitments made by African
countries in various treaties. In this regard, we
acknowledge that, in recent years, the African Union

17

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

has played an increasingly important role in addressing
conflicts on the African continent and has made
invaluable contributions to maintaining world peace
and security.
To this end, it is gratifying to note that progress
has indeed been made on a number fronts. This
includes the creation of the Peace and Security
Council, the African Standby Force and a Panel of the
Wise responsible for mediation and preventive
diplomacy. However, securing reliable sources of
funding and building preventive diplomacy capacity
and expertise at the national and regional levels remain
among Africa’s most serious challenges.
We recognize the importance of enhancing
coordination amongst the relevant bilateral and
multilateral donors to ensure predictable, coherent and
timely financial support to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools, including mediation,
throughout the conflict cycle. In this regard, the Group
of Eight (G-8) Africa Action Plan of 2002, which
makes specific commitments to supporting peace and
security in Africa, needs to be pursued vigorously. This
includes support for African efforts to resolve armed
conflicts on the continent. The G-8 countries had also
committed to assist with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. It is important that these countries
deliver on the pledges they have made in this regard.
We believe that the Security Council should
continue to strengthen its cooperation with the African
Union, and particularly with its Peace and Security
Council, in order to fully utilize its regional early
warning mechanisms and peacekeeping capacity.
In conclusion, we reiterate our conviction that the
United Nations has the potential to fulfil, in a practical
manner, an effective function through collective and
preventive diplomacy.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation joins those who have spoken before me in
congratulating you, Madam, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. We are very pleased to see Nigeria presiding over
the debate on this very special and important subject
for the United Nations and the African continent. We
are confident that you will steer this meeting to a
fruitful conclusion, given your vast political experience

18

and diplomatic skills, coupled with Nigeria’s
commitment to peace for Africa and the world. This
commitment has been well illustrated by, among other
things, your country’s effective participation in many
United Nations and African peacekeeping missions,
your various endeavours in the settlement of disputes,
and deliberations on international peace and security
here at the United Nations.
We welcome the statement of the Deputy
Secretary-General, Asha-Rose Migiro, and the briefing
by the Special Representative and Director for the
World Development Report on Conflict, Security and
Development of the World Bank, Ms. Sarah Cliffe.
Nigeria has also done a commendable job in
coordinating disarmament issues for the African Group
under each of the agenda items of the First Committee.
We also commend the Bureau that you lead in carrying
out the work of the Security Council.
The United Republic of Tanzania is committed
not only to the keeping of peace in Africa and the
world but also to making it happen. In that regard, we
belong to the clan of peacemakers. In recent times,
Tanzania has, for example, successfully mediated
various conflicts and disputes in Africa, in particular in
countries of the Great Lakes region, including Burundi,
Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
most recently, neighbouring Kenya, to mention but a
few.
Preventive diplomacy works well but, despite the
significant and commendable efforts African countries
have made in that regard, some of the factors that cause
or perpetuate conflicts, especially poverty and
unemployment, persist in our societies. The World
Bank representative, Ms. Sarah Cliffe, elucidated this
issue in very clear terms.
Armed conflicts not only cause instability and
insecurity, but also retard human development for very
many years. As I have just mentioned, poverty and
unemployment are persistent phenomena in conflict
and post-conflict societies. The people affected,
especially unemployed youth, become very easy targets
for recruitment into terrorism, with all its tragic
consequences, as well as other vices including
transborder crimes such as arms and drug trafficking.
Many of the representatives who spoke before me,
including members of the Security Council, did not
miss the opportunity to stress this reality. No civilized
society or people should claim honour or take pride in

10-45510

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

wealth or power acquired by orchestrating conflict
entrepreneurship, nor should we allow that to happen.
The way forward for the United Nations, the
international community as a whole and, of course,
Africa is to join hands and address in a holistic but
efficient and effective way the circumstances that serve
to perpetuate conflicts, instability and terrorism. It is
cheaper to invest in development, employment and the
elimination of poverty than to wage war or pay for
peacekeeping activities. The United Nations must show
leadership in these processes, much as African Member
States have been asked or instructed to own them. We
must all give the United Nations adequate support, as
speakers have demonstrated here, in exercising its
multilateral authority and we must demand that it does
so with impartiality and effectively. Donor nations and
the entire donor community stand to benefit in the long
run as lives and resources will eventually be saved
when peace reigns and more nations become better
partners in global markets and trade instead of
preoccupying themselves with conflict issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Muita (Kenya): I thank you for giving me
the opportunity to address the Council on a matter that
Kenya considers to be crucial to peace and security in
Africa. My country commends the Federal Republic of
Nigeria not only for having highlighted an important
subject, but also for its robust role in enhancing
preventive diplomacy on the African continent.
In their efforts to promote peace and security,
African leaders have been mindful of the need for the
support of the international community. Consequently,
the African Union Peace and Security Council protocol
mandates that Council to cooperate with the United
Nations Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the relevant United Nations
agencies and international organizations.
In this regard, Africa has taken the lead in
addressing conflicts in the continent and beyond by
deploying peacekeeping and mediation missions in
order both to maintain peace and security and to protect
civilian populations. Africa is ready and willing to
assume greater responsibility in that respect. However,
there are many challenges that face the continent in
implementing preventive diplomacy. In that context, we
are encouraged to note that the Secretary-General has

10-45510

underscored the necessity for a close strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union and has given direction on mechanisms and
processes to be put in place so as to enhance this
critical endeavour. The United Nations Office for West
Africa is a good example of this partnership.
In the same spirit, we welcome the recent
establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union in Addis Ababa. The new integrated
Office will go a long way in coordinating peace and
security issues between the two organizations. We
commend the critical role played by the Department of
Political Affairs in strengthening this strategic
partnership.
Africa has long remained a continent prone to
strife. Endemic warfare has impacted negatively on the
continent’s socio-economic development agenda,
laying fertile ground for further conflicts. In addition, a
vicious cycle has been created that serves to banish the
continent to perpetual underdevelopment. Promoting
economic development is therefore a vital tool for
enhancing preventive diplomacy.
The causes of conflict in Africa are numerous.
However, at the heart of many of these is the
competition for resources that are scarce because of
underdevelopment. If one throws in the effects of
climate change on the continent’s socio-economic
environment, one finds a recipe for turmoil that is all
too common.
Other challenges to peace and security include
inequality, ethnic tensions and governance shortcomings.
The strengthening of governance institutions is
particularly cardinal in efforts to enhance preventive
diplomacy, especially as the conduct of credible
elections is concerned.
The role of regional and subregional organizations
in preventing conflict has proved invaluable in Africa.
Regional bodies such as the East African Community,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern Africa Development Community and the
Economic Community of West African States have on
various occasions intervened in a timely manner and
averted what could potentially have been catastrophic
disasters. The place of regional organizations is unique
in this regard and should be recognized and supported.
We should nurture and encourage them to continue in
this role.

19

S/PV.6360 (Resumption 1)

Indeed, Africa has its own unique mechanisms for
the settlement and prevention of disputes, and these
local solutions are best placed to deal with conflicts
across the whole continent. What ails these regional
institutions is the lack of capacity, including resources.
The international community can contribute to the
prevention of conflicts on the continent by helping
existing regional mechanisms to better deal with the
situations that arise. In that way, local ownership of
these processes will be enhanced.
Leadership on the continent has evolved over the
years to embrace the values of democracy and good
governance. The realization of these core values, as
well as respect for human rights and the end to
impunity, are all prerequisites for sustainable peace and
development that have helped the continent move
forward. These values should continue to be promoted
and be thoroughly embedded in social and political life
on the continent in order to ensure lasting peace and
pre-empt the outbreak of conflict.

20

In conclusion, it is a fact that the African Union
and regional organizations have made considerable
sacrifices in responding to urgent demands for
peacekeeping and mediation. This has been done
despite such challenges as the lack of sufficient
resources. It is imperative that the question of
predicable and sustained resource availability be
addressed to bolster conflict prevention mechanisms.
I would strongly urge, therefore, that the United
Nations and the international community invest more
in conflict prevention mechanisms in order to save the
huge amount of resources, both capital and human, that
is expended in addressing fully fledged conflicts.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

10-45510
