III.

61

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ular the work of its Ad Hoe Working Group on that
question;
2. Expresses its regret that an agreement on the
complete and effective prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
on their destruction has not yet heen elaborated;
3. Urges the Committee on Disarmament to continue, as from the beginning of its session to be held in
1981, negotiations on such a multilateral convention as
a matter of high priority, taking into account all existing
proposals and future initiatives:
4. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to
report on the results of its negotiations to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

94th plenary meeting
12 December I 980
('

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use
in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and
of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, which was
signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925 and entered into force
on 8 February 1928, 10
Noting that the States parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction"' have reaffirmed
their adherence to the principles and objectives of that
Protocol and called upon all States to comply strictly
with them,
Noting that the Protocol does not provide for the establishment of any machinery for investigating reports
about activities prohibited under the Protocol,
Believing that the continued authority of the Protocol
and relevant .rules of customary international law require that full and proper attention be given to all
reports regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons
and to their harmful effects, both immediate and longterm, to humans and to the environment of the victim
countries,
Noting reports alleging that chemical weapons have
been used in recent wars and certain military operations
in various regions of the world,
Noting recent reports from certain States concerning
the use of chemical weapons on their territories,
Noting also the statements of various international organizations, in particular of the International Committee of the Red Cross, concerning these reports,
Expressing profound regret that certain States directly
interested in the clarification of reports pertaining to the
actual or alleged use of chemical weapons and which
have submitted appropriate proposals or suggestions in
that matter had not been given the opportunity to present their views in the Committee on Disarmament during its session held in 1980,
Concerned over the fact that a convention on the complete and effective prohibition of chemical weapons and
on the destruction of their stockpiles which would fully
preclude the danger of their use has not yet been concluded,
Gravely concerned about the continued research and
development programmes in the field of chemical weapons, especially the development of binary and multicomponent weapons whose field deployment could

compromise the ongoing effort to prohibit the development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons
and trigger a chemical arms race,
Urging all States to refrain from the development,
production and deployment of new types of chemical
munitions, in particular binary and multicomponent
munitions,
Believing it necessary for all States, in particular
militarily significant States, to refrain from any action
which could impede multilateral negotiations on banning chemical weapons,
Convinced of the need to ascertain the facts pertaining
to these reports and, in particular, to determine the
harmful effects of the use of chemical weapons to
human beings and the environment of the victim countries,
I. Calls upon all States parties to the 1925 Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare to reaffirm their determination
strictly to observe all their obligations under the
Protocol:
2. Calls upon all States which have not yet done so to
accede to the Protocol:
3. Appeals to all States to comply with the principles
and objectives of the Protocol:
4. Decides to carry out an impartial investigation to
ascertain the facts pertaining to the reports regarding
the alleged use of chemical weapons and to assess the extent of the damage caused by the use of such weapons:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to carry out such
investigation, inter a/ia, taking into account proposals
advanced by the States on whose territories the use of
chemical weapons has been reported, with the assistance
of qualified medical and technical experts 1 ! who shall:
(a) Seek relevant information from all concerned
Governments, international organizations and other
sources necessary:
(b) Collect and examine evidence, including on-site
with the consent of the countries concerned, to the extent relevant to the purposes of the investigation;
6. Invites the Governments of States where chemical
weapons were used to provide the Secretary-General
with all relevant information they may have in their possession:
7. Calls upon all States to co-operate in this investigation and to provide any relevant information they
may have in their possession regarding such reports:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
0n t_his matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session.
94th plenary meeting
12 December 1980
35/ 145.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
34/73
A
CESSATION Oli ALL TEST 1:XPLOSIONS
OF 1'-lJCLEAR WEAPONS

The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that the complete cessation of
nuclear-weapon tests. which has been examined for
"Subsequently referred lo as the Group of Experts to Investigate
Reports on the Alleged I 1se of Chemical Weapons.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

62

more than twenty-five years and on which the General
Assembly has adopted more than forty resolutions, is a
basic objective of the United Nations in the sphere of
disarmament, to whose attainment it has repeatedly assigned the highest priority,
Stressing that on seven different occasions it has condemned such tests in the strongest terms and that, since
1974, it has stated its conviction that the continuance of
nuclear-weapon testing will intensify the arms race, thus
increasing the danger of nuclear war,
Reiterating the assertion made in several previous resolutions that whatever may be the differences on the
question of verification, there is no valid reason for
delaying the conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive test ban,
Recalling that since 1972 the Secretary-General has
declared that all the technical and scientific aspects of
the problem have been so fully explored that only a
political decision is now necessary in order to achieve
final agreement, that when the existing means of verification are taken into account, it is difficult to understand further delay in achieving agreement on an
underground test ban, and that the potential risks of continuing underground nuclear-weapon tests would far
outweigh any possible risks from ending such tests,
Recalling also that the Secretary-General, in his
foreword to the report entitled "Comprehensive nucleartest ban",2 1 has reiterated with special emphasis the
opinion he expressed eight years ago and, after specifically referring to it, has added: "I still hold that belief.
The problem can and should be solved now",

Noting that in the same report, which was prepared in
compliance with General Assembly decision 34/422 of
11 December 1979, the experts have emphasized that
non-nuclear-weapon States in general have come to regard the achievement of a comprehensive test ban as a
litmus test of the determination of the nuclear-weapon
States to halt the arms race, adding that verification of
compliance no longer seems to be an obstacle to
reaching agreement,
Taking into account that the three nuclear-weapon
States which act as depositaries of the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water 24 undertook in that Treaty,
almost twenty years ago, to seek the achievement of the
·discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and that such an undertaking was
explicitly reiterated in 1968 in the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons/'

I. Reiterates once again its grave concern that
nuclear-weapon testing continues unabated against the
wishes of the overwhelming majority of Member States:
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve the
prohibition of all nuclear-test explosions by all States
for all time is a matter of the highest priority and constitutes a vital element for the success of efforts to prevent both vertical and horizontal proliferation of
nuclear weapons and a contribution to nuclear disarmament;
3. Urges all States that have not yet done so to
adhere without further delay to the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water and, meanwhile, to refrain from
testing in the environments covered by that Treaty;
23

A/35/257.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.
" Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

4. Urges likewise all States members of the Committee on Disarmament:
(a) To support the creation by the Committee, upon
initiation of its session to be held in 1981, of an ad hoe
working group which should begin the multilateral negotiation of a treaty for the prohibition of all nuclearweapon tests:
(h) To use their best endeavours in order that the
Committee may transmit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session the multilaterally negotiated text of
such a treaty:
5. Calls upon the States depositaries of the Treaty
Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in
Outer Space and under Water and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, by virtue of
their special responsibilities under those two treaties and
as a provisional measure until the new comprehensive
test-ban treaty enters into force, to bring to a halt
without delay all nuclear test explosions, either through
a trilaterally agreed moratorium or through three unilateral moratoria:
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Cessation of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons".

94th plenary meeting
12 December I 980
B
PROHIBITION OF ALL NUCLEAR-TEST EXPLOSIONS BY
ALL STATES FOR ALL TIME

The General Assembly.
Reaffirming its conviction that it is in the interests of
all people that nuclear-weapon testing by all States in all
environments should cease, as this would be a major
step towards ending the qualitative improvement,
development and proliferation of nuclear weapons, a
means of relieving the deep apprehension concerning the
harmful consequences of radioactive contamination for
the health of present and future generations and a measure of the utmost importance in bringing the nucleararms race to an end,
Recalling that the parties to the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water 24 and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons 25 have already expressed in those treaties their determination to continue
negotiations to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject, in
particular resolution 32/78 of 12 December 1977,
paragraph 51 of resolution S-10 /2 of 30 June 1978, resolution 33/60 of 14 December 1978, section IV of resolution 33 /71 H of 14 December 1978 and resolution
34 /73 of 11 December 1979,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on a comprehensive nuclear-test
ban, 21
Taking note of the progress report on the trilateral negotiations, submitted to the Committee on Disarmament by the three negotiating nuclear-weapon States, on
a treaty prohibiting nuclear-test explosions in all environments and its protocol covering nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, 20

24

,,. See CD/ 139/ Appendix II 1Vol.11, document CD/ 130

Ill.

63

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Expressing regret that those negotiations have not
moved as rapidly a·s had been expected,
Emphasizing the urgent need for all nuclear-weapon
States to cease the testing of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the indispensable role of the Committee
on Disarmament in the negotiation of a comprehensive
test-ban treaty capable of attracting the widest possible
international support and adherence,
Believing that the Committee on Disarmament should
establish an ad hoe working group on a nuclear-test-ban
treaty,
Recognizing the importance to a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing of the work being carried out under the
auspices of the Committee on Disarmament on the
development of a global seismic verification system,
Convinced that the conclusion of such a treaty would
create a favourable international climate for the second
special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982,
1. Reiterates its grave concern that nuclear-weapon
testing continues unabated against the express wishes of
the overwhelming majority of Member States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve
the prohibition of all nuclear-test explosions by all
States for all time is a matter of the greatest urgency and
priority;
3. Calls upon the three negotiating nuclear-weapon
States to exert their best efforts to bring their negotiations to a successful conclusion in time for consideration during the next session of the Committee on Disarmament;
4. Expresses the conviction that such a treaty is a
vital requirement to halt the nuclear-arms race and the
qualitative improvement of nuclear weapons and to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to additional countries;
5. Requests the Committee on Disarmament to take
the necessary steps, including the establishment of a
working group, to initiate substantive negotiations on a
comprehensive test-ban treaty as a matter of the highest
priority at the beginning of its session to be held in 1981;
6. Further requests the Committee on Disarmament
to determine, in the context of its negotiations on such a
treaty, the institutional and administrative steps
necessary for establishing, testing and operating an international seismic monitoring network and effective
verification system;
7. Urges all members of the Committee on Disarmament to co-operate with the Committee in fulfilling its
mandate and, to this end, to support the creation of a
working group on a comprehensive nuclear-test ban;
8. Calls upon the Committee on Disarmament to exert all efforts in order that a draft comprehensive
nuclear-test-ban treaty may be submitted to the General
Assembly no later than at its second special session
devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an item relating to the implementation of the present resolution.

94 th plenary meeting
I2 December 1980

35/146.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
NUCLEAR C,\PABILITY OF Sounl AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/76 B of 11 December 1979,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa 21 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from 17
to 21 July 1964,
Alarmed by South Africa's increased sophistication in
the nuclear field, including the advanced processing and
enrichment of uranium as nuclear-weapon fuel and its
advanced nuclear technology,
Alarmed also at the fact that South Africa's nuclear
capability has been enhanced by the co-operation of certain Western States and Israel with the racist regime,
Taking note of the report of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means
of making the mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa more effective, 2'
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 24 and to conclude adequate
and comprehensive safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials from peaceful
uses to the manufacture of nuclear weapons and other
nuclear explosive devices.
Recalling its decision taken at the tenth special session, devoted to disarmament, that the Security Council
should take appropriate effective steps to prevent the
frustration of the decision of the Organization of
African Unity for the denuclearization of Africa, 10
Bearing in mind the persistent concern with which the
international community regards South Africa's
capability and plans in the nuclear field,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on South Africa's plan and capability in the nuclear
field, including the reported explosion of a nuclear
device in the South Atlantic on 22 September 1979, 11
I. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on South Africa's plan and
capability in the nuclear field;
2. Expresses its deep alarm that the report has established South Africa's capability to manufacture nuclear
weapons;
3. Also expresses its deep concern that South Africa's
nuclear capability is being developed to preserve white
supremacy by intimidating neighbouring countries and
blackmailing the entire continent of Africa;
4. Reaffirms that the racist regime's nuclear plans
and capability constitute a very grave danger to inter~ational peace and security and, in particular, jeopardize the security of African States and increase the
danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons;
:, Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.
"Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year. Supplement for July, August and September /980, document S/14179.
" Resolution 2373 (XXI I), annex.
"' Resolution S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
"A/35/402 and Corr.I.
