UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/21
26 April 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3525th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 April 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
relating to Nagorny Karabakh", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the reports (S/1995/249 and
S/1995/321) of the Co-Chairmen of the OSCE Minsk Conference on Nagorny
Karabakh presented in accordance with paragraph 8 of its resolution
884 (1993). It expresses its satisfaction that the cease-fire in the
region agreed upon on 12 May 1994 through the mediation of the Russian
Federation in cooperation with the OSCE Minsk Group has been holding for
almost a year.
"At the same time, the Council reiterates the concern it has
previously expressed at the conflict in and around the Nagorny Karabakh
region of the Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between the Republic
of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic. In particular, it expresses its
concern at recent violent incidents and emphasizes the importance of using
the mechanism of direct contacts for the settlement of incidents as agreed
upon on 6 February 1995. It strongly urges the parties to the conflict to
take all necessary measures to prevent such incidents in future.
"The Council reaffirms all its relevant resolutions, inter alia, on
the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
the region. It also reaffirms the inviolability of international borders
and the inadmissibility of the use of force for the acquisition of
territory.
"The Council reiterates its full support for the efforts of the
Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Conference to assist in conducting speedy
negotiations for the conclusion of a political agreement on the cessation
of the armed conflict, the implementation of which will eliminate major
consequences of the conflict for all parties, inter alia, ensuring
withdrawal of forces, and permit the convening of the Minsk Conference.

95-12557 (E)

260495

/...

S/PRST/1995/21
English
Page 2

"The Council stresses that the parties to the conflict themselves bear
the main responsibility for reaching a peaceful settlement. It stresses
the urgency of concluding a political agreement on the cessation of the
armed conflict on the basis of the relevant principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and of the OSCE. It strongly urges those parties to
constructively conduct negotiations without preconditions or procedural
obstacles and to refrain from any actions that may undermine the peace
process. It emphasizes that the achievement of such an agreement is a
prerequisite for the deployment of a multinational OSCE peace-keeping
force.
"The Council welcomes the decision of the Budapest summit of the CSCE
of 6 December 1994 on the ’Intensification of CSCE action in relation to
the Nagorny-Karabakh conflict’ (S/1995/249, appendix). It confirms its
readiness to provide continuing political support, inter alia, through an
appropriate resolution regarding the possible deployment of a multinational
OSCE peace-keeping force following agreement among the parties for
cessation of the armed conflict. The United Nations also stands ready to
provide technical advice and expertise.
"The Council underlines the urgency of the implementation by the
parties of confidence-building measures, as agreed upon within the Minsk
Group on 15 April 1994, in particular in the humanitarian field, including
the release of all prisoners of war and civilian detainees by the first
anniversary of the cease-fire. It calls upon the parties to prevent
suffering of the civilian populations affected by the armed conflict.
"The Council reiterates its request that the Secretary-General, the
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE and the Co-Chairmen of the OSCE Minsk
Conference continue to report to the Council on the progress of the Minsk
process and on the situation on the ground, in particular, on the
implementation of its relevant resolutions and on present and future
cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations in this regard.
"The Council will keep the matter under consideration."

-----
