General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

164

specific studies contained in the programme for the first
phase that must be followed by concrete action not later
than during the second phase:
15. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Economic Commission for Africa with the financial
means and resources necessary to enable it effectively to
fulfil its role as the lead agency for the Transport and
Communications Decade in Africa and to submit to the
Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1981, a progress report on the implementation of
the programme for the Decade:
16. Requests the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa to continue to submit
progress reports on the implementation of the programme for the Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa and to participate actively in the proposed
World Communications Year, with a view to providing
special impetus to development in Africa.

114th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/109.

World Communications Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ 160 of 19 December 1977
on the Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa, in which it requested the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the International Telecommunication
Union and other specialized agencies concerned, to propose for consideration, as appropriate, one year during
the Decade as a World Communications Year, in view
of the importance of transport and communications to
other regions of the world,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/69 of 25 July 1980, in which the Council recommended 1983 as an appropriate year for the celebration
of World Communications Year, provided that the arrangements necessary for its financing had been made,
based on the principle of voluntary contributions,
I. Endorses the arrangements made by the Economic and Social Council concerning the programmes,
organization, co-ordination and mobilization of
resources to meet the requirements for a World Communications Year, as outlined in Council resolution 1980 /69:
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
make appropriate proposals to the General Assembly at
its thirty-sixth session, following its evaluation of the report on the state of preparations for the World Communications Year, in particular on the financial resources that will be available and on programmes that
may be of interest to the international comm unity, particularly the developing countries.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/110.

Permanent sovereignty over national resources
in the occupied Arab territories

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 34/ I 36 of 14 December
1979,

Bearing in mind the relevant principles of international law and the provisions of the international con-

ventions and regulations, in particular Convention IV of
The Hague of 1907/'' and the fourth Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949, ,.1 4 concerning the obligations
and responsibilities of the occupying Power,
Recalling its previous resolutions on permanent
sovereignty over natural resources, particularly their
provisions supporting resolutely the efforts of the developing countries and the peoples of territories under
colonial and racial domination and foreign occupation
in their struggle to regain effective control over their
natural and all other resources, wealth and economic activities,
Bearing in mind the pertinent provisions of its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, and 3281 ( XX IX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States,

Recalling further its resolutions 3175 (XXVIII) of
17 December I973, 3336 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
3516 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 3 l / 186 of 21 December 1976 and 32./ 161 of 19 December 1977 on permanent sovereignty over national resources in the occupied Arab territories,
Referring to the note by the Secretary-General'~" concerning the report on permanent sovereignty over
national resources in the occupied Arab territories requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
34 ! 136,
I. Emphasizes the right of the Arab States and peoples whose territories are under Israeli occupation to full
and effective permanent sovereignty and control over
their natural and all other resources, wealth and economic activities:
1

Reaffirms that all measures undertaken by Israel
to exploit the human, natural and all other resources,
wealth and economic activities in the occupied Arab territories are illegal and calls upon Israel to desist immediately from such measures;
3. Further reaffirms the right of the Arab States and
peoples subjected to Israeli aggression and occupation to
the restitution of. and full compensation for, the exploitation, depletion and loss of and damages to their
natural, human and all other resources, wealth and economic activities, and calls upon Israel to meet their just
claims:
4. Calls upon all States to support and assist the
Arab States and peoples in the exercise of their abovementioned rights;
5. Calls upon all States, international organizations,
specialized agencies, investment corporations and all
other institutions not to recognize, or co-operate with or
assist in any manner in, any measures undertaken by
Israel to exploit the resources of the occupied territories
or to effect any changes in the demographic composition, geographic character or institutional structure of
those territories:
6. Regrets the failure to prepare a report for submission to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session in accordance with Assembly resolution 34/ 136:
., Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. The Hague Conventions and Declarati,ms oj !H99 and /1)()7 (New York, Oxford University Press. 1915), p. 100.
'"• United l\ations /'reat_r Series, vol 75, No. 973, p. 2X7.
't\ ,5 51-+
