S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6061st meeting
Wednesday, 7 January 2009, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lacroix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Heller
Mr. Yakovenko
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Butagira
Ms. Pierce
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-20163 (E)

*0920163*

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 11.10 a.m.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representatives of Argentina,
Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, the Czech Republic,
Ecuador, Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to take part in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took seats at the side of the Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
7 January 2009 from His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji,
Permanent Representative of Senegal, in which he
requests to be invited, in his capacity as Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Paul
Badji.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to request all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Malaysia.
Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Israeli military aggression
into Gaza is entering its thirteenth day today. Over the
course of just less than two weeks, more than 600 lives

2

have been lost and more than 2,700 people injured, the
largest majority being Palestinian civilians, including
women and children.
Only yesterday, an Israeli attack killed at least 43
people and wounded about 100, who were taking
refuge inside a United Nations school. There is no need
to even mention the level and degree of destruction to
mosques, schools, homes and infrastructure that that
illegal Israeli action has brought upon the Palestinians
in Gaza, because any sensible person can imagine what
kind of destruction 13 days of Israeli bombardment
could bring about. Any right-minded sensible person
and Government would also deplore that Israeli action.
There is no justification for that disproportionate,
indiscriminate and excessive use of force in Gaza, not
even in the name of self-defence. The Israeli action is
against the rule of law and modern standards of human
decency. Its actions clearly demonstrate Israel’s
complete disregard for international law and its
violation of the United Nations Charter. Malaysia
considers that act as a war crime and a crime against
humanity.
How could the death of innocent civilians,
particularly women and children, be in the name of
self-defence? How could any other Member States of
this United Nations accept that argument and condone
that action? How could the Security Council, which is
entrusted with the maintenance of peace and security,
not react to a clear violation of international peace and
security? How many more deaths and casualties and
how much more destruction will it take before the
Security Council is resuscitated from its paralysis in
dealing with the Palestinian issue?
Is it that, after almost two weeks into the illegal
Israeli aggression towards the people of Gaza, the
Security Council is now struggling to stop those
atrocities? We do not believe so, at least not judging by
how fast it reacted in other situations. On many
occasions we have expressed our deep regret over this
matter, and we once again record our deepest regret at
this apparent inaction by the Security Council.
However, despite that, we remain confident that
this Security Council, which is mandated to ensure
international peace and security, will take the necessary
and appropriate action in dealing with the Israeli
aggression. In fact, the Council has no option but to do
just that — to stop the killing of innocent civilians and
women and children and the destruction of homes,

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

schools, mosques and other infrastructure. A durable
and sustainable cessation of hostility, including a
ceasefire, must be the immediate target, with the
deployment of an international monitoring or
peacekeeping force to de-escalate and stabilize the
situation. Israeli forces must leave the Gaza Strip.
Unless it does so immediately, there will be no let-up
in the death toll. One dead is far too many and the
blood of those who have perished and been injured by
that illegal Israeli action will also be on the hands of
the Security Council.
Malaysia urges all parties to exercise the utmost
restraint, in particular to avoid additional casualties
among innocent civilians and damage to civilian
property and infrastructure, and to refrain from acts
that could further exacerbate the situation.
We also urge this Council to ensure the
immediate lifting of the blockade on Gaza. The
destruction resulting from Israeli aggression has further
aggravated the humanitarian crisis of the beleaguered
people of Gaza, who urgently need food, fuel and
medicine. Israel, the occupying Power, must be made
to allow international assistance to reach the people of
Gaza. Despite repeated Israeli denials, what the people
of Gaza have faced prior to the recent Israeli assault is
nothing less than a man-made humanitarian crisis
caused by the Israeli siege of Gaza, which is a point of
significant importance, as it shows that the people of
Gaza are not suffering from a lack of resources.
The root cause of the current violence in the
Middle East is the occupation of Palestinian territories
by Israel. It began in 1947, when people living on the
periphery of the war in Europe found themselves
displaced and dispossessed to make way for another
group of people torn by that conflict, and went on to
the 1967 Israeli military aggression and continued
expansion of Israel’s occupation of Palestinian land.
Since that time, a new theatre of conflict has
emerged in the Middle East, which has impacted the
state of peace and security globally. Since then, too, the
Security Council, in its wisdom, has adopted several
resolutions, including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515
(2003) and, most recently, 1850 (2008), aimed at
addressing that occupation, which is the longest known
in modern history. But the occupation persists and,
even worse, despite efforts towards a durable and
lasting peace, including the Quartet Road Map and the
Arab initiative, a comprehensive solution continues to

09-20163

elude us, not for lack of effort but through the sheer
intransigent practices and policies of the Israeli regime.
As recently as a year ago, in clear contravention
of its obligations under the Annapolis understanding,
the machinery of the Israeli occupation regime plodded
on relentlessly. The separation wall continued to be
constructed. The illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories mushroomed. The network of
checkpoints and roadblocks continued to inextricably
hinder the movement and economic activities of
Palestinians.
How could one expect or even hope for a tangible
outcome from the peace process when one party, the
oppressed, is being asked continuously to make
concessions for peace when its homes are being
demolished, its lands and farms confiscated, its
families and communities separated and its children
uprooted schools and even killed in schools? The harsh
facts of life, especially for the children living under the
occupation, will bear negatively not only on them
when they enter adulthood but also on the prospects for
peace in the Middle East.
Indeed, the present situation is not conducive to
durable and lasting peace. The continuing loss of life,
the infliction of serious injury and the devastation of
property will only deepen hatred and divisions and will
not do any good to either party. Only negotiations
leading to a two-State solution will bring about a
durable and lasting peace for Israelis and Palestinians
and for the entire Middle East.
The path to peace is clear. Right now, we must
stop the violence and the killing. The Security Council
must act now. The Council must make every effort to
ensure that this Israeli military aggression cease
immediately. We reiterate that the Council must exert
every effort for an immediate ceasefire and the
deployment of an international force so as to de-escalate
the conflict and stabilize the situation, and establish
other confidence-building measures between the parties
with the objective of resuming the peace process. While
ensuring the implementation of the ceasefire, the
Security Council must also ensure the complete
observance of the Council’s previous resolutions,
including among others resolution 242 (1967) which
clearly specifies that Israeli forces must withdraw from
the occupied Palestinian territories.
At the same time, we also call on the leaders of
Hamas and Fatah and implore them to initiate talks

3

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

immediately
to
resolve
their
differences.
Reconciliation should be a priority if these leaders are
genuinely committed to pursuing the objective of
creating a sovereign and independent State of
Palestine. Unity among the Palestinians themselves is
the most critical element in attaining a solution to the
predicament faced by all Palestinians.
Last year, we failed to make 2008 the year of a
peace treaty between Israel and Palestine as envisioned
in the Annapolis understanding. Let us concentrate our
efforts again on achieving the goal we set last year —
the solution of two States living side by side in peace
and security, with the creation of a sovereign State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital. For now,
let us stop the bloodshed in Gaza before the situation
spirals further, leaving no chance and hope for peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Moreno (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour of participating in this debate on behalf of
the 118 members of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Movement has followed the events in Gaza
with the utmost concern. On 29 December, the
Coordinating Bureau of the Movement, which I have
the honour of chairing, issued a statement in response
to the military aggression launched by Israel in the
Gaza Strip. Subsequently, on Monday 5 January, only
48 hours ago, the Coordinating Bureau issued a new
statement on the escalation of military activities. The
Movement’s position with regard to the situation in
Gaza has been made duly clear to you, Sir, in your
capacity as President of the Security Council, as well
as to the President of the General Assembly and to the
Secretary-General.
The
Non-Aligned
Movement
vigorously
condemns the escalation of the military aggression
being carried out by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
Gaza Strip. The Movement is gravely concerned by and
condemns in particular the Israeli ground invasion into
Gaza, in flagrant defiance of the calls of the
international community for a cessation of military
activities and of the regional and international
diplomatic efforts under way to resolve the current
crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its deep
regret at the loss of innocent life as a result of the
Israeli military attacks against the Strip, including the

4

killing of hundreds of Palestinian civilians, among
them many children, the injuring of several thousand
persons, and the massive destruction of property and
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip.
The Movement reiterates that this unacceptable
Israeli military aggression against the Palestinian
civilian population in Gaza constitutes a grave
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law, and that it is
intensifying the cycle of violence and threatening
international peace and security, as well as the fragile
peace process between the two sides.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls for the
immediate cessation of all military activities and
violence and for the implementation of an immediate
general ceasefire. Israel should immediately end all its
military attacks and strictly abide by all of its
obligations as the occupying Power under international
law and relevant United Nations resolutions. In this
regard, the Movement urges Israel to unconditionally
comply with its obligations under international law,
including the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.
In view of the indiscriminate bombings affecting
the civilian population, including women and children,
as well as the severe humanitarian crisis prevailing in
Gaza, the Non-Aligned Movement also calls for the
immediate provision of protection for the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of international
humanitarian law.
The Movement expresses increasingly grave
concern with regard to the humanitarian crisis being
faced by the Palestinian population in Gaza as a result
of the ongoing military actions, the continued closure
of all border crossings and the obstruction of access to
humanitarian aid, including food and medicines, and
the reduction of fuel and electricity supplies to the
Gaza Strip by Israel. In this context, the Non-Aligned
Movement calls upon Israel to end the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people and to allow for
the immediate and sustained opening of the border
crossings into the Gaza Strip in order to ensure the free
access of humanitarian aid and other essential supplies
and goods, as well as to facilitate the passage of
persons to and from the Gaza Strip.

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

In light of the gravity of this crisis, the
Non-Aligned Movement expresses its profound
disappointment at the inability of the Security Council
to uphold its responsibilities to maintain international
peace and security. Despite more than a week of
sustained military attacks that have gravely affected the
civilian population and heightened instability and
tensions in the region, the Council has regrettably been
unable to take any concrete measures to end the
aggression. Once again, the Movement requests the
Security Council to act urgently to address this grave
situation.
NAM stresses that the international community
must intensify and coordinate its efforts to put an end to
this crisis and must take the required actions to support
and promote the peace process and ensure compliance
with international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law. That is the key to a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole, and is the only
way to guarantee a lasting peace in the region.
The Movement is convinced that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. In that context, NAM
reaffirms its commitment to a peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to the right of the
Palestinian people to exercise self-determination and
sovereignty in an independent State of Palestine based
on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil is deeply concerned
at the magnitude and gravity of developments in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in recent days. Through
press releases issued since the start of the Israeli
operation in Gaza, Brazil has made its views widely
known. We condemn the violence on all sides and
deplore Israel’s disproportionate military response to
unlawful rocket attacks against its territory, which also
must cease. The new cycle of violence is inflicting
extraordinary pain and anguish on civilians. We call for
an immediate ceasefire and for the opening of border
crossings to the Gaza Strip to allow for the access of
humanitarian aid and to alleviate the unsustainable
humanitarian situation there.
The ceasefire is ever more needed in the light of
the spiralling death toll and the desperate plight of the
residents of Gaza, where impartial and respected
observers, including the United Nations, agree that a

09-20163

humanitarian catastrophe is in the horizon. The loss of
innocent lives in Israel is also saddening and must be
stopped.
Furthermore, we add our voice to those of
Security Council members in their call for a negotiated
solution. Lasting peace can be achieved only through
the creation of an independent Palestinian State living
peacefully side by side with Israel within
internationally recognized borders and in full
compliance with Security Council resolutions.
Today, international public opinion expects
effective action from the United Nations and its
Member States. In such an endeavour, the Security
Council has a key — although not an exclusive — role
to play. We all share a collective interest in a respected
and active Council. Its legitimacy and effectiveness
would be diminished if it were to be perceived as
hesitant to fulfil its legal and political obligation to
maintain and restore international peace and security.
Recently, President Lula has reaffirmed our
willingness to cooperate more intensely with the
international community in order to defuse the current
crisis and truly advance the cause of peace. That would
be the main purpose of the expanded conference
recently proposed by President Lula himself. Such an
initiative could facilitate the work of the Council.
Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs Celso
Amorim will soon visit the region. He will discuss
possible ways to effectively address the current crisis
and to help Israelis and Palestinians achieve peace. We
are encouraged by the initiative of Presidents Mubarak
and Sarkozy, announced yesterday. We also welcome
the visit by the Secretary-General to the region. A
special session of the Human Rights Council, presently
under consideration, might also strengthen our
collective endeavours. In addition, improving
humanitarian assistance is imperative. At the request of
the Palestinian Authority, Brazil is sending 14 tons of
food and medicine to Gaza.
Such efforts, however do not exempt this organ
from carrying out its most urgently needed action,
which is to demand that all parties halt the violence
immediately. A ceasefire called for by the Security
Council must be fully implemented by all parties. After
so many decades, no one can have the slightest illusion
that there is a military solution to the conflict or that
lasting political gains can be achieved through the use
of force. Nor can violence be allowed to serve as a

5

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

political tool. An international mechanism to monitor a
sustained cessation of hostilities could be put in place.
Brazil would be willing to contribute to such a
mechanism if the parties found it useful.
Just as important, the Council must ensure that all
parties fully satisfy the humanitarian and economic
needs of the Gaza Strip. All sides — including, given
its relative strength, the State of Israel in particular —
must, in each and every case and at all times, fully
abide by international humanitarian law and respect
human rights.
We welcome yesterday’s announcement that
Israel will soon open humanitarian corridors in Gaza.
That is a first step that must be immediately
complemented by other measures. Meanwhile, we
reiterate that targeting civilian populations — through
rocket firings; military action likely to cause harm to
innocent civilians, especially women and children; or
any other means — is unacceptable. The deaths of
civilians caused by Israeli military action in the
vicinity of United Nations schools in Gaza in recent
days are a tragic illustration of the intolerable perils of
the current situation.
Halting violence is also key to allowing the peace
process to be resumed in earnest and as promptly as
possible. Negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian National Authority and the needed internal
reconciliation among Palestinians cannot make
progress while Gaza burns and its residents, as well as
those of southern Israel, fear for their lives. Likewise,
the negotiating process does not stand a true chance if
all parties are not clearly and forcefully reminded that
the international community considers a just and
comprehensive settlement to be the only realistic and
acceptable way forward. Only the Security Council can
credibly convey that message.
Once calm is restored, the Council must assist the
peace process more decisively, without prejudice to the
valuable role of individual Member States, groups of
Member States or other organizations. At each
juncture, the Council must determine the most
appropriate way to best contribute to a peaceful
solution to the conflict. Now is the time to act,
including through the implementation of resolution
1850 (2008), by which this organ commits the
international community to a number of goals. Among
them are the irreversibility of negotiations; the
fulfilment of obligations under the Quartet Road Map,

6

as stated in the Annapolis Joint Understanding;
refraining from any steps that could undermine
confidence or prejudice the outcome of negotiations;
and the intensification of efforts aimed at the mutual
recognition and peaceful coexistence of all States in
the region. All those objectives have been thwarted by
recent events and their tragic repercussions. As several
delegations stated in the meeting held on 16 December
(see S/PV.6045), resolution 1850 (2008) put the
Council to a difficult test. It must succeed.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate country Croatia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; and the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the
Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.
The European Union is deeply concerned over the
ongoing fighting, the plight of civilians in and around
Gaza and the suffering and anguish of the entire
civilian population in the region. We deplore the
ongoing hostilities, which have caused high numbers of
civilian casualties, and we wish to express our sincere
condolences to the families of the Palestinian and
Israeli victims. We are profoundly disturbed by the
losses of civilian lives at the United Nations school in
Jabaliya as a result of Israeli military action.
The European Union is determined to make every
effort to help stop the current violence and repeats its
call for an immediate cessation of military action on
both sides. There must be an unconditional halt to
rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli
military action.
The European Union urges the parties to fully
respect
their
obligations
under
international
humanitarian law. The European Union recalls that no
military solution can prevail in Gaza and calls for the
establishment of a lasting truce. The European Union
welcomes the initiative of Presidents Mubarak and
Sarkozy and follows with hope the latest developments
in that direction.

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

The European Union also calls on the parties, in
particular Israel, to grant immediate, unhindered and
secure passage for the delivery of humanitarian aid to
the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip. The European Union
welcomes the three-hour halt of Israeli military
operations and calls on Israel to open a humanitarian
corridor in Gaza to allow humanitarian organizations
free access to the territory. The European Union is also
ready to step up its already substantial assistance for
the improvement of the humanitarian situation of those
in need.
The European Union fully supports the
international efforts to find an immediate solution to the
current crisis and takes an active part in these efforts.
The foreign ministers of the States members of the
European Union met in Paris on 30 December 2008 and
put forward their proposals to resolve the crisis.
Subsequently, a European ministerial delegation led by
the European Union presidency, represented by Czech
Foreign Minister Karel Schwarzenberg, travelled to the
region to seek an end to the violence, to alleviate the
current distressing humanitarian situation and to discuss
the European Union proposals agreed upon in Paris.
First, the current situation on the ground makes
the need to reach an immediate and permanent
ceasefire absolutely urgent. There must be an
unconditional halt to rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel
and an end to Israeli military action. The cessation of
fighting should allow a lasting and normal opening of
all border crossings, as provided for in the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access. The European
Union is ready to re-dispatch the European Union
Border Assistance Mission to Rafah to enable its
reopening in cooperation with Egypt, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel. It is also willing to examine the
possibility of extending its assistance to other crossing
points, provided that the issues relating to security
have found a satisfactory response.
Secondly, immediate humanitarian action is
required. Food, urgent medical supplies and fuel must
be delivered to the Gaza Strip, the safe evacuation of
the injured must be allowed and immediate access for
humanitarian workers should be made possible through
the opening of crossing points. The European Union
dispatched a field mission to provide the most
appropriate response as quickly as possible, in
cooperation with the United Nations, the Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, and non-governmental
organizations.

09-20163

Lastly, the European Union reiterates the need to
step up the peace process. In this context, it welcomed
the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008). We are
convinced that there is no military solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in Gaza or elsewhere. The
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict must be
based on the process set out in Annapolis and in
accordance with the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, in particular land for peace, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Quartet’s Road
Map. It must lead towards the establishment of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State in
the West Bank and Gaza existing side by side with
Israel in peace and security.
In order to foster a lasting settlement, the
European Union, while neither intervening in the
negotiations nor prejudging their outcome, reiterates its
willingness to assist in the implementation of a final
peace agreement when the time comes. The European
Union calls upon the parties to desist from any actions
that threaten the viability of a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement, in conformity with international law.
The European Union is fully aware of the
responsibility of the international community,
especially the Quartet. The European Union also
reiterates the importance of the Arab partners’
sustained, broad and constructive commitment. In this
respect, it considers that the Arab Peace Initiative
offers a solid and appropriate basis for peace in the
Middle East to which all parties should give their
consideration.
The European Union also encourages interPalestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas, commends the mediation efforts of Egypt and
the Arab League in this respect, and is prepared to
support any Government which respects the Palestine
Liberation Organization’s commitments, resolutely
supports the peace negotiations with Israel and pursues
policies and measures that reflect the Quartet’s
principles.
Finally, let me stress once again that the
European Union is determined to assist alongside the
other members of the Quartet and the region’s States in
ending violence and re-launching the peace process.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.

7

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to express our gratitude for
this opportunity for States non-members of the
Security Council to express their views on the very
serious situation in the Gaza Strip.
The recent developments in the Gaza Strip are
alarming and once again show that the main victims of
violence and military operations are innocent civilians,
especially Palestinians. On the occasion of the
beginning of the Israeli military operations in Gaza on
3 January, the Argentine Government condemned such
operations and the disproportionate use of force by
Israel, as well as the continuous rocket attacks by
Palestinian groups against Israeli territory.
In spite of the reiterated calls on behalf of most
of the international community, hostilities have
intensified over the past few days, and yesterday saw
the death of more than 40 civilians as a result of Israeli
attacks against a school operated by the United Nations
in the Gaza Strip. My country most vigorously
condemns these attacks and believes that an
independent international investigation should be
established to determine responsibilities and to prevent
such acts from being repeated. I would like to convey
to the families of the victims of this conflict the sincere
condolences of the Argentine Government and people.
The Israeli response after 27 December has been
altogether excessive and disproportionate. Israel must
fully respect its obligations in the framework of
international humanitarian law and take all steps to
protect the Palestinian civilian population. United
Nations and other reports regarding the number of
Palestinian civilians who have died as a result of Israeli
bombing and land operations show that such steps have
not been taken.
That is why my country feels that the immediate
priority is to declare a ceasefire and to end violence
and all military operations. The Israeli troops must
withdraw from the Gaza Strip and attacks against
Israeli territories much cease. The Israeli proposition to
establish a ceasefire for a few hours is clearly an
unacceptable response, since it cannot contribute in
any way to resolving the grave and urgent
humanitarian needs of the Palestinian civil population.
What is needed at this hour is a permanent and
unconditional end to all hostilities.
Taking into consideration that the parties alone
are not capable of arriving to an agreement, the

8

Security Council must assume its responsibilities and
adopt a resolution in this regard. The Council avoids
this obligation only at the risk of gravely damaging the
credibility of the United Nations. My country supports
the various efforts being made to establish conditions
conducive to the adoption of a decision of this nature.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is
alarming. Under the current conditions, international
assistance cannot reach the affected population. If we
do not act urgently in the short run, it may escalate to a
major humanitarian crisis that could affect more than
1.5 million Palestinians.
Argentina is currently putting together a
significant package of humanitarian assistance for
Gaza. We are prepared to join our efforts with those of
the rest of the international community. However, those
efforts will be meaningless unless assistance
immediately reaches the thousands of Palestinian men,
women and children who are at this very moment
suffering as a result of the violence. It is therefore
urgent that a ceasefire be declared, so that
humanitarian agencies can deploy on the ground and
begin to work.
Finally, I would like to say that the IsraeliPalestinian conflict has been on the agenda of the
Security Council for more than 60 years. The current
crisis illustrates to us once again the urgency of
achieving a lasting peace in the region that will lead to
the establishment of a democratic, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with
Israel in peace and security, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
Argentina hopes that the Security Council will
this time shoulder its responsibilities and contribute to
immediately ending hostilities and to establishing the
conditions necessary to achieve peace, so as to benefit
all the peoples living in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): For nearly two
weeks now, the Israeli military onslaught against
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip has raged unabated. Just
yesterday we witnessed a new low, with news of Israeli
strikes against schools operated by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

Near East. Innocent civilians, including women and
children seeking refuge, have fallen victim. Once
again, Indonesia condemns, in the strongest manner
possible, Israeli military attacks against Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip, which are in contravention of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
It is a measure of the gravity of the situation that
the Security Council yesterday heard directly from the
principals concerned. We appreciate very much the
presence and statements of President Mahmoud Abbas,
Foreign Ministers of Security Council members,
Foreign Ministers of members of the League of Arab
States and the Secretary General of the Arab League
himself. Indeed, we are cognizant of, and encouraged
by, the various ongoing intensive diplomatic efforts to
bring the fighting to an end. Indonesia is particularly
mindful of the strong efforts being made by the
Secretary-General in concert with regional countries.
The role of countries in the region, individually or
collectively through the League of Arab States, in
promoting peace in the region has been particularly
pivotal.
Such intensive diplomatic efforts accentuate one
glaring fact: the continued lack of a formal and unified
Council position. Far from building on the common
position reached in the press statement by its President
on 28 December 2008, the Security Council has thus
far been unable to pursue stronger measures to end all
violence and military activities and to restore the
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip.
Of course, we are only too aware of the
painstaking process of diplomatic negotiations and the
need to formulate a finely crafted and balanced
resolution. However, when the situation on the ground
continues to deteriorate and innocent civilians continue
to fall victim, the price of delay is immeasurable.
Indonesia calls on the Council to issue without delay a
crystal-clear and simple message: end the fighting. The
cycle of violence must be reversed. The victims must
be assisted. And the peace process must be revived.
Indeed, beyond the death and destruction that the
Israeli military operations have wrought, the peace
process itself is also ultimately at risk. We believe that
a credible and permanent ceasefire, with the requisite
international mechanism, must be immediately
established.
Similarly urgent is the lifting of the closures of
the Gaza crossings and the provision of humanitarian

09-20163

access in a continuous and permanent manner. My
delegation calls for unhindered access to the Gaza Strip
by persons, including humanitarian workers, and
essential supplies. Palestine cannot go it alone in
responding to the humanitarian challenges in the Gaza
Strip. Hence, the continued provision of emergency
and humanitarian assistance by the international
community to the Palestinian people in Gaza remains
critical.
We cannot ignore the fact that Israel has not
responded to the Security Council’s call in its
statement of 28 December 2008. A situation of such
magnitude in the Middle East warrants a serious and
swift response from the Council. It is therefore our
fervent hope that Council will be able to assume its
responsibility by taking a firm and formal decision.
We believe that, should the Council remain
unable to act, alternative avenues for action within the
United Nations system should, with the support of the
parties directly affected, be sought, including the
General Assembly, by invoking the Uniting for Peace
resolution — General Assembly resolution 377 (V).
The Charter of the United Nations clearly
outlines that maintaining peace and security is one of
the purposes of the Organization. At this critical
juncture, we are called upon to live up to that goal, to
spare no effort to bring the violence in Gaza to and end
and to bring about a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I take the floor to express
our grave concern over the prevailing situation in the
Gaza Strip and to reiterate our solidarity with the
Palestinian people. Pakistan shares their pain and
suffering in these exceptionally trying circumstances.
The besieged populations of Gaza, who were
originally dispossessed and driven from their own
homes by the Israeli occupation, are being tormented
once again by a brutal military campaign by the
occupying Power. For 12 days now, the international
community has witnessed in shock and horror the
unimaginable human tragedy and grave humanitarian
crisis that have unfolded in Gaza as a result of the
callous, excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel.

9

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

The killing of any civilian on either side is
unacceptable. We have called for an end to the firing of
rockets on Israel. Those actions do not serve the
Palestinian cause in any way. However, attempts to
justify the overwhelming force and massively
disproportionate response by Israel to those rockets are
misplaced. Such attempts seem to try to mask the
origins of the conflict, the root cause — that is, the
occupation, human rights violations and the collective
punishment of the Palestinian people — and the
obvious frustration of an oppressed and deprived
population languishing under the stranglehold and
blockades of the occupying Power.
The colossal scale of death and destruction caused
by this campaign of terror especially targeted against
civilians and the infrastructure in Gaza has been widely
reported and documented by the international media,
human rights and humanitarian organizations and the
United Nations. Nothing has been spared — homes,
civilian facilities, places of worship, civilian shelters
and even United Nations schools. Indeed, in this
precision targeting and so-called smart bombing, among
the hundreds martyred and the thousands injured are
scores of women and children. Those actions cannot be
justified under any pretext whatsoever. They are in
flagrant violation of international law and of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. There should be
accountability for these violations.
Together with the entire international community,
the Government and the people of Pakistan have
strongly condemned this aggression and the spilling of
innocent blood in Gaza. We have appealed for the
cessation of hostilities and violence and support all
efforts to that end. We believe that the use of force not
only contravenes international principles and norms; it
is also counterproductive, as past experience has
proved. The failure to stop the aggression will only
perpetuate the cycle of violence and foment
desperation, anger and extremism. We take note of the
reprieve in attacks, and we sincerely hope that it
becomes permanent. The resumption of attacks, with
the resultant civilian casualties, however, is not
acceptable.
From the broader perspective, we are seriously
concerned that the deteriorating situation in Gaza as a
result of the Israeli attacks could lead to an escalation
of tensions in the region and undermine the efforts for
promoting a peaceful, just and durable settlement of

10

the question of Palestine, which is the key to achieving
a comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
The crisis in Gaza requires an urgent, collective
and effective response from the international
community. It cannot wait while innocent people
continue to be killed. In accordance with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council was expected
to galvanize and lead such a response. Yet the Council
has once again failed to act. To be truthful, it has not
been allowed to act. It has failed to recognize the
international condemnation of the situation in Gaza. It
has been unable to capitalize on the worldwide backing
for an immediate ceasefire and to support the numerous
ongoing efforts by regional and international partners
to secure peace. It has failed to reciprocate the sincere
and constructive approach and proposals by the Arab
Group, whose high-level delegation is currently with
us.
Under the circumstances, the silence and the
inaction of the Council are inexplicable and are a
further blow to its already questioned credibility and
legitimacy — a point that was repeatedly raised by
many delegations in the debate yesterday. Ironically,
this foot-dragging by the Council comes in the wake of
its own much-touted resolution 1850 (2008), adopted
recently, on 16 December 2008. While noting the
shortcomings of that resolution, we had nevertheless
hoped that serious and sincere efforts would be
undertaken to realize the underlying commitment for
peace embodied in it. We believe the Council must
stand firmly behind its call on the parties to fulfil their
obligations and to refrain from any steps that could
undermine confidence or prejudice the outcome of the
negotiations. The Council must stop the Israeli
aggression in order to contribute to an atmosphere
conducive to peace and negotiations.
We support the calls for the Council to adopt,
without further delay, a resolution that should compel
Israel to immediately stop its aggression, demand an
immediate and permanent ceasefire and its full respect
by both parties, provide for a complete lifting of the
siege of Gaza and opening of the border crossings,
ensure unhindered and safe access and conditions for
humanitarian work, establish a mechanism to ensure
the protection of the civilian population and the
monitoring of the ceasefire, and promote intraPalestinian unity and reconciliation.

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

In that regard, we support the draft resolution
submitted by Libya on behalf of the Arab Group, which
is also consistent with the final communiqué of the
extraordinary meeting of the Executive Committee of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) at
the level of foreign ministers, held in Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia, on 3 January 2009.
We would also like to note that, in coordination
with the Arab Group, the African Group and the
Non-Aligned Movement, the OIC Group in Geneva has
requested a special session of the Human Rights
Council on 9 January to address the grave violations of
human rights in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the aggression on the occupied Gaza Strip.
Together with these steps, the international
community must rededicate its attention and redouble
its efforts towards the larger objective of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East and the
resolution of the Palestinian question on the basis of
international law and the full implementation of the
relevant United Nations resolutions and agreements,
the obligations of the parties and the framework
provided by the Madrid terms of reference, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We would like to conclude by reiterating
Pakistan’s steadfast and complete support for the
achievement of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to exercise self-determination and sovereignty
in their independent, viable State of Palestine, on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji.
Mr. Badji (spoke in French): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on France’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council in this first
month of 2009. I am certain that, thanks to your mastery
of the procedures of and issues before this important
body, the Council’s work will be fruitful. I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to Ambassador
Neven Jurica, the Permanent Representative of Croatia,
for the excellent way in which he steered the work of
the Council over the past month.
I am grateful to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Council for having given me the

09-20163

opportunity to take part, as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, in this discussion of the serious
situation in Gaza due to the brutal, deliberate and
unrelenting military attack launched by Israel 12 days
ago.
The Committee most vigorously condemns this
military attack and the destruction perpetrated by Israel
in the Gaza Strip, which have killed more than 600
Palestinians and wounded thousands of others, mostly
innocent civilians. The Committee demands that Israel
cease immediately and without condition its deadly
military campaign against the Palestinian people in the
Gaza Strip. Israel must be held responsible for the
murders and wounding of innocent unarmed civilians,
including women and children, which is a flagrant
violation of the principles of international law. The
Committee also demands that Israel immediately open
the border crossings with Gaza in order to allow
emergency medical assistance to be delivered along
with other essential goods for the Palestinian people,
who desperately need them.
The blockade, which has strangled the Gaza Strip
over the past year, has already sparked humanitarian
disaster. The Committee underscores that the Fourth
Geneva Convention requires occupying Powers to
protect the civilians who are living under their
occupation, in particular by providing them with
essential services such as food and medicine.
The Committee has always opposed and has
continually condemned the rocket attacks launched by
Palestinian groups into Israeli territory. The Committee
once again calls for an immediate end to these rocket
attacks, which give Israel a pretext for its military
attacks against the Gaza Strip, although it is totally
unacceptable that the population of the Gaza Strip in its
entirety be collectively punished for attacks perpetrated
by groups or individuals.
The Committee reminds the Israeli Government
that the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention many times affirmed that
the Convention applied to the occupied Palestinian
territories. That was then reiterated by the General
Assembly and the Security Council. The Gaza Strip
continues to be an occupied territory by the very fact
that Israel controls the daily life of the Palestinian
population, down to the smallest details. The
international community needs to take immediate

11

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

action to put an end to what is a flagrant violation of
this important international instrument. Specifically,
the Committee urges the High Contracting Parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention to immediately take
decisive measures in order to meet their commitments
taken under article 1, that is, to comply with and ensure
compliance with the Convention under all
circumstances.
The Committee believes that the entire
international community is responsible for ending the
carnage. Given the gravity of the situation, the
Committee believes that the Security Council must
shoulder its responsibilities under the United Nations
Charter and do its utmost to end the crisis by
immediately taking specific and effective measures to
protect the civilian population. To that end, the
Committee believes that the Council must cooperate
closely with the parties and all actors involved, in
particular the Quartet and the regional partners. Such
an effort would help to prevent further victims and to
calm the situation on the ground. An immediate and
permanent ceasefire should be followed up forthwith
by measures aimed at finding a solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict in the framework of the ongoing
negotiations and at establishing a viable Palestinian
State living in peace and security alongside Israel.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by thanking you, Sir, for having convened this
meeting at this difficult juncture and by wishing you
success in your presidency of the Security Council this
month.
As many speakers have mentioned yesterday and
today, despite the enormous anger and worldwide
anguish shown by the international community, the
abhorrent carnage and the crimes against humanity
committed by the Zionist regime against the innocent
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip are continuing
unabated, and every day we witness a new face of this
vicious aggression and crime. As a result of this
atrocity, hundreds of civilians have been coldbloodedly massacred in Gaza and thousands wounded,
most of them women and children.
The world community is witnessing with outrage
and anguish the perpetration of some of the most
blatant examples of crimes against humanity and
genocide committed by an irresponsible and brutal

12

regime that knows no boundaries in violating the most
basic principles of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law. It would seem
as if the life of that criminal regime depends on
creating and perpetuating bloodshed, and as if it feeds
on nothing but war crimes, aggression, occupation and
State terrorism.
The people of Gaza continue to be subjected to
untold sufferings that are unprecedented in the recent
history of humankind. It is appalling that, in the
twenty-first century, the civilized world should witness
an entire population under crippling blockade, starved,
deprived of the most basic supplies, including bread
and drinking water, and slaughtered in the most
horrendous ways, having been left with nowhere to go,
nothing to eat and no safe place to take shelter. Even
the places that the United Nations has provided for this
innocent people to escape Israeli brutalities are
savagely attacked, as the world saw in yesterday’s
Israeli attack on schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, killing more than 40 people, many of them
children.
The Israeli regime is targeting every human
being, every house and every infrastructure in Gaza. It
is actually targeting every value that the civilized
world stands for and every principle of international
law that is dear to the world community. Mosques,
hospitals, schools, United Nations buildings, medicine
and food stores, and even the farms and private houses
of the people are callously bombarded and women,
men and children slaughtered in their beds, in their
homes and everywhere on the streets. To cover up all
these crimes, the media is not allowed access to the
area by the Israeli regime to cover the tragic
developments in the Gaza Strip.
This savagery should be stopped and it should be
stopped immediately. The Israeli war machine must be
stopped from shattering more lives and livelihoods,
and the Israeli war criminals should be brought to
justice for the crimes they have perpetrated, and
continue to perpetrate, and for the outrageous and
brutal pain and torment they have inflicted and
continue to inflict on the innocent people in Gaza.
As mentioned by some speakers yesterday, a
whole population is being massacred only because it
resists occupation and State terrorism and simply

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

because it has exercised its right to vote, which is the
most basic principle of democracy.
The credibility of the international community
and of the United Nations is at stake and has been
challenged once again by the Israeli regime’s war
crimes and crimes against humanity. It is long overdue
for the Security Council to live up to its responsibilities
to stop these atrocities. The Security Council must take
urgent and effective measures to stop this carnage and
to help ease the sufferings of the people in the Gaza
Strip. Every minute matters, since each entails more
crimes by the Israelis and more losses for the innocent
Palestinians. The Council must act and it must act now.
The Security Council should adopt a binding
resolution calling for an immediate end to the Israeli
attacks and aggression against the innocent Palestinian
people in Gaza; immediate Israeli withdrawal from
Gaza and the lifting of the blockade; the opening of the
crossings and the urgent provision of humanitarian
assistance to the people there. The international
community must hold that regime accountable for its
crimes and for the damages it has inflicted on the
defenceless Palestinians, and should mobilize its
efforts and resources to reconstruct the infrastructure in
Gaza.
The stalling tactics of some permanent members
to obstruct any action by the Security Council and to
render the Council incapacitated are neither acceptable
nor justifiable, and are tantamount to complicity in the
Israeli crimes against the Palestinian people. The
Security Council must be allowed to take action and to
stop this unbridled State terrorism. Indeed, if the
Security Council continues to fail to discharge its
responsibility to stop the carnage, the Member States
are fully ready to ask the General Assembly to take up
the issue on the basis of its resolution 377 (V) — the
“Uniting for Peace” resolution.
I do not wish to take the valuable time of the
Council to address the absurd statement made by the
Israeli representative in the Council yesterday, in
which certain baseless allegations were raised against
my country. Suffice it to stress that these are despicable
tactics that seek to distract attention from Israeli crimes
at a time when the whole world is united to counter
those crimes. These unworthy tactics have not worked
in the past and will not work in the future.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Nicaragua.

09-20163

Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): It is with deep sadness and grief that the
people of Nicaragua have learned the news of the
tragedy being experienced once again by our brothers,
the Palestinian people.
Six hundred and sixty people have been killed
and more than 3,000 injured as a result of the latest
Israeli aggression against the occupied Palestinian
territories. For more than 12 days now, the heroic
Palestinian people have been the victims of
bombardments by air, sea and land that constitute a
massacre of the Palestinian civilian population.
Yet again, history is repeating itself; regrettably,
that appears to be happening with respect to the
question of Palestine, whose population is suffering
under persecution and systematic genocide. The wall
that separates that population from its neighbours
isolates them, forces them to live in misery and denies
them the right to a homeland of their own. Regrettably,
it is the descendants of those who had been declared
stateless, who were the victims of Nazi persecution and
genocide and who were forced to live in ghettoes who
are now victimizing the Palestinian people.
But while the Jewish Holocaust ended with the
end of the Second World War and while the Jewish
people were given a State and territory, the
Government of Israel’s excessive campaign of
destruction has continued for more than 60 years. This
has denied the Palestinian people — the age-old
inhabitants of historic Palestine — the right to an
independent homeland. Thus far, the two-State solution
remains a solution on paper only.
The situation in Gaza is tragic. The attacks that
took place yesterday — the day of the Three Kings, a
very important day for children — on three schools
protected by the United Nations flag, claiming more
than 43 lives and injuring more than 100 people, was a
further Israeli scorn for human rights, for the right to
life, for international law, for the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and for the United Nations. It
is a clear example of the tragedy that the people of
Palestine are enduring.
Many
humanitarian
organizations
have
condemned the humanitarian crisis throughout the 362
square kilometres of the Palestinian territory of Gaza,
whose 1.5 million inhabitants have been living in
misery owing to the blockade imposed by Israel. The

13

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

Israeli military attacks have caused additional
shortages of basic food, medical supplies, drinking
water and fuel, as well as electricity cuts, because
assistance cannot be delivered.
This is a horrible tragedy. People continue to
arrive at hospitals; the number of injured continues to
rise. The director of Gaza operations for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, John Ging, has called the
situation incredible.
For its part, my Government regrets the fact that
the Security Council has not yet been able to reach any
outcome while we see the number of victims of the
barbaric Israeli attacks continue to rise. In that
connection, we support the statement issued by the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
which expresses deep disappointment at the inability of
the Security Council to uphold its responsibilities in
maintaining international peace and security, and notes
that, despite more than 12 days of sustained military
attacks that have gravely affected the civilian
population and heightened instability and tensions in
the region, the Council has regrettably been unable to
take any concrete measure to end the aggression.
The Security Council has the legal and moral
obligation to take all measures necessary to bring an
immediate end to the aggression against the Palestinian
people. Nicaragua rejects that aggression and
condemns in the strongest terms the extermination
practiced by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The current hostilities
are further destabilizing the situation in the occupied
territories and throughout the Middle East and are
making it ever more difficult to achieve a lasting
solution to the Palestinian problem.
The Security Council must compel Israel to put
an immediate end to its military operations and to open
all border crossings in order to guarantee unhindered
access to the area for humanitarian assistance.
Any decision to be adopted must not only lead to
a lasting solution, but must also guarantee that
hostilities will not resume. Any decision must respect
all relevant international resolutions. There can be no
military solution to the Palestinian problem. We
support a peaceful negotiated resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the right of the
Palestinian people to sovereignty and selfdetermination in an independent Palestinian State, on

14

the basis of the 1967 borders and with Jerusalem as its
capital. Only in that way cam we have lasting peace in
the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I call now on
the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving all countries the opportunity
to address the Security Council in this open debate.
On behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, I wish to express our firmest condemnation
of the genocide that the State of Israel is carrying out
in Gaza and to affirm our unconditional solidarity with
the Palestinian people. We are witnessing one of the
darkest facets of modern war: the punishment of a
civilian population in order to demolish its morale,
destroy its spirit of resistance, to crush all will to
struggle and to make people believe that benign
slavery is preferable to resistance in the quest for
freedom. In that context, the destruction of Hamas —
which, of course, is among the objectives here —
would be a collateral effect.
The State of Israel continues to sow the wind, and
it will reap the whirlwind. No tyrant has ever been able
to drain a people’s last drop of blood: before that
happens, peoples have risen up and have triumphed.
That is what took place with the resistance against Nazi
fascism during the Second World War — which, it
appears, has been forgotten.
Every cluster bomb of depleted uranium or white
phosphorus — whose use is a war crime — sows not
only death, but also a hatred that will become part of
people’s genetic code, generation after generation.
Israel is creating millions of suicidal human beings,
who will proliferate throughout the world. Then,
neither Israelis nor anyone else will have peace. That is
not the path we are seeking. The Israelis lost the war in
Lebanon in 2006; they are not invincible. A Nuremberg
tribunal will be awaiting them in the future in order to
judge them as war criminals.
With the permission of the Council, I shall read
out a communiqué issued yesterday afternoon by the
Government of Venezuela:
“The Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, along with the peoples of
the world, is once again witnessing the horror of

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

the death of innocent children and women
resulting from the invasion of the Gaza Strip by
Israeli troops, and the merciless bombing by air
and land systematically carried out by the State of
Israel on Palestinian territory.
“In this tragic hour of outrage, the people of
Venezuela express their unreserved solidarity
with the heroic Palestinian people, share in the
grief of thousands of families at the loss of their
loved ones and extends their hand to them,
affirming that the Government of Venezuela will
work tirelessly to see those responsible for these
atrocious crimes severely punished.
“The Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela categorically condemns
the flagrant violations of international law carried
out by the State of Israel and denounces its
planned use of State terrorism, by which that
country has placed itself at the margins of the
community of nations.
“For these reasons, the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has decided to
expel the Ambassador of Israel and some of the
personnel of the Embassy of Israel in Venezuela,
reaffirming its vocation for peace and its demand
that international law be respected. The
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela has instructed its Mission to the United
Nations, along with the majority of Governments
calling for the same thing, to pressure the
Security Council to apply urgent and necessary
measures to stop the invasion by the State of
Israel against Palestinian territory.
“President Hugo Chavez, who has met with
senior representatives of the World Jewish
Congress and has always been opposed to antiSemitism and to any type of discrimination and
racism, has made a fraternal appeal to the Jewish
people around the world to oppose these criminal
policies of the State of Israel, which recall the
worst chapters of the twentieth century. With the
genocide of the Palestinian people, the State of
Israel can never offer its people the prospect of a
necessary and lasting peace.”
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iceland.

09-20163

Mr. Hreggvidsson (Iceland): The situation in
Gaza is unacceptable. In the three weeks since the end
of the six-month ceasefire between Israel and Hamas,
hundreds of civilians, including many women and
children, have died in military actions and thousands
have been injured.
My country has condemned the killings of
civilians and aligns itself with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and with those Member States that
have called upon Israel to immediately stop its military
actions in that densely populated area. Iceland has also
condemned the firing of rockets from Gaza to terrorize
Israeli civilians. Hamas bears a heavy responsibility for
drawing civilians into the conflict zone. However,
Israel’s actions in Gaza in the past two weeks are both
disproportionate and clearly contrary to international
humanitarian law.
The immediate imperative is the suspension of all
violence by all parties. It will then be essential for
Israel to lift its blockade on Gaza so that humanitarian
aid can immediately be given access to Gaza.
The peace process must recommence with the
active involvement of the international community.
Iceland renews its call for the better inclusion of
women in the peace process, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). In that
regard, as it did in December, Iceland calls the
attention of the Council to the International Women’s
Commission for a Just and Sustainable PalestinianIsraeli Peace (IWC) — a tripartite body involving
Israelis, Palestinians and prominent international
women leaders. The solidarity among these women
across the lines of conflict can offer inspiration and
hope for their societies as a whole.
The Security Council is the international body
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security. The situation in Gaza demands a concerted
effort by the Council to bring an end to the bloodshed
and put forward a plan on how to further the goal of
ending the occupation and achieving a two-State
solution, which is a prerequisite for durable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Hill (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to contribute briefly to this very
important debate. Australia has been deeply disturbed
by the continuing violence in Gaza and southern Israel.

15

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

The escalation of the conflict underlines the urgency of
diplomatic efforts to find a resolution. Australia
supports the actions of the United Nations in seeking to
bring about an immediate ceasefire.
Australia continues to believe that a resolution to
the current situation must bring a halt to rocket attacks
against Israel by Hamas, an end to arms shipments into
the Gaza Strip and the opening of the border crossings
into the Gaza Strip. Furthermore, any diplomatic
solution must form part of a longer-term compact
involving Israel and Palestine, based on a two-State
solution to the Israel-Palestinian issue. Australia
welcomes the active role of Egypt and France in
working towards a diplomatic resolution to the conflict.
Australia is gravely concerned by the
humanitarian implications of this conflict and notes
that its expansion also exacerbated what was already a
grave situation in the Gaza Strip. It is critical that
Israel meet its obligations under international
humanitarian law to the people of the Gaza Strip,
ensuring that they have access to basic goods, food,
medical supplies and humanitarian assistance.
Australia welcomes Israel’s announcement that it is
establishing improved conditions for aid to flow into
the Gaza Strip.
Australia has been a long-time provider of
assistance to the Palestinian people, doubling its
assistance in 2008 to $45 million. On 1 January of this
year Australia announced an immediate commitment of
$5 million in additional assistance to the people of the
Gaza Strip. This assistance will go towards providing
emergency food and medical supplies, as well as cash
assistance to conflict-affected families. Australia stands
ready to provide further assistance as required.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): As a
founding Member of the United Nations, Ecuador
advocates a peaceful solution to international conflicts
and disputes and emphatically rejects the threat or use
of force as a mechanism to resolve them.
Unfortunately, in recent days my country, like the
entire international community, has seen the occupying
Power resorting once again to violence instead of
dialogue and subjecting the civilian population to death
and despair. Ecuador considers the military offensive
carried out by the Israeli army in Gaza unacceptable
and disproportionate.

16

On behalf of the President of the Republic, Rafael
Correa Delgado, I would like to express the deep
condolences of the Government and people of Ecuador
at the deaths of hundreds of civilians, especially
children, who have been victims of the military
activities.
We associate ourselves with the many statements
by different Governments, and with the calls for an
immediate ceasefire as an initial measure that would
make it possible to reach a peaceful, negotiated
solution to the conflict. It is imperative that the
international community, through this Organization and
its Security Council, adopt the measures set out in the
United Nations Charter with a view to guaranteeing
full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law in the conflict area.
In that respect, my Government believes it is
urgent to open all the recognized border crossings into
and out of the Gaza Strip so that the Palestinian
population can have access to humanitarian assistance,
including food and medicine, in order to prevent a
worsening of the current emergency humanitarian
situation, extreme vulnerability and famine. Ecuador
would like to particularly express its support and
gratitude to the United Nations agencies and to all
governmental and non-governmental organizations that
continue to provide assistance to the civilian
population and asks them to remain vigilant until peace
is re-established in that area.
Ecuador believes that any comprehensive
solution that would make it possible to establish a
lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be a military
one. It must be political and be carried out in full
compliance with Security Council resolutions, but
above all with the ongoing commitment to the
recognition of and respect for international law and
with a constructive dialogue that would promote the
future development of its peoples.
In that respect, my country reiterates its call to
the members of the Security Council to adopt all
measures necessary for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, a solution to the humanitarian crisis and, in
particular, a lasting solution and a durable peace in the
region. For Ecuador, a durable peace naturally includes
the right of the Palestinian people to exercise selfdetermination and to have a contiguous territory and an
independent State.

09-20163

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

Once again, we call on the Security Council to
act steadfastly and decisively. International public
opinion is awaiting a strong response from the United
Nations. A failure to respond would call into question
the legitimacy and effectiveness of this organ of the
United Nations system.
However, we also believe that the responsibility
of the Security Council does not exclude action by the
other organs of the United Nations, such as the General
Assembly, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter.
Along those lines, Ecuador would also like to
support the initiative to convene a special meeting of
the Human Rights Council to identify human rights
violations made during the recent attacks.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bolivia.
Mr. Siles Alvarado (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
The catastrophic humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip is keeping the whole international community in a
state of disquiet owing to the disproportionate military
action being carried out by Israel. The Government and
the people of Bolivia condemn and categorically
express their rejection of that aggression, which is
claiming innocent human lives, particularly children’s,
from whom the most sacred of human rights, the right
to life, is being snatched. The current situation in the
Gaza Strip is one of pain, bitterness and despair.
Israel’s actions once again clearly show its
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law,
international law, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
the human rights conventions. Added to that is the
serious impact on humanitarian issues, which hour by
hour are making it more difficult to meet even the
basic needs of the Palestinian people. Is it possible to
view this acute humanitarian crisis with indifference?
The credibility of the Security Council is once
again being called into question by international public
opinion. Therefore, within the framework of its
jurisdiction, the Council must provide a strong
response with the adoption of a binding resolution that
would reopen the way for peace and put an immediate
end to all acts of violence, which are only aggravating
the crisis. There must be no further loss of human life
owing to the occupying Power’s occupation of the
occupied Palestinian territories, which is at the very
root of the crisis.

09-20163

It is important to renew the peace process with a
constructive and creative dialogue for the benefit of the
region. In that regard, no efforts or initiatives should be
spared to that end within the framework of the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council and with a
view to the recognition of an independent Palestinian
State. Military action is not the way to build a lasting
peaceful solution.
The Government and the people of Bolivia
fervently appeal for the border crossings to be
reopened, to enable humanitarian aid to be delivered to
the Palestinian people, who have our full solidarity.
Finally, I should like to state that Bolivia fully supports
the statement made by the representative of Cuba on
behalf of the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Buffa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for me to make this statement on behalf of the
States members of the Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR) and associated States — Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru,
Uruguay, Venezuela and my country, Paraguay.
The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States express their gratitude to the Security
Council for the timely and necessary convening of this
open debate to hear the viewpoints and appeals of
Member States on the regrettable situation in the Gaza
Strip. Similarly, as they publicly stated at the beginning
of this conflict, they would like to reiterate before this
body their deep concern at the current tragic situation
in the Gaza Strip, whose high toll in loss of civilian life
and casualties is regrettable.
The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States condemn Israel’s land incursion into
the Gaza Strip and that country’s disproportionate use
of force. Similarly, they reiterate their condemnation of
the launching of rockets by Palestinian groups against
Israeli territory.
In that context, the States members of
MERCOSUR and associated States also vehemently
condemn the Israeli attacks against schools operated by
the United Nations in the Gaza Strip, as a result of
which over 40 innocent civilians have died. The States
members of MERCOSUR and associated States extend
their most heartfelt condolences to all family members
of the victims of that conflict.

17

S/PV.6061 (Resumption 1)

Amid this regrettable situation, we join the whole
international community in calling for an immediate
cessation of all hostilities. We urge both parties to
resume the dialogue interrupted by the violence, so as
to achieve the complete restoration of peace in the
region, which does not deserve to live constantly
punished by violence.
The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States want that dialogue to contribute to
achieving a peaceful and lasting solution to the
conflict, with strict adherence to international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The Security Council is the United Nations organ
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. For that reason, we
urge the Council, which acts through the mandate of
Member States, not to remain indifferent to its
responsibility and to adopt urgent and categorical
measures to remedy this appalling situation.

Similarly, we request the international community
and the parties to the conflict to guarantee, for
humanitarian reasons, the permanent reopening of
border crossings with Gaza to ensure the provision of
food, supplies and medicines, facilitating the
evacuation of the wounded and free access for
humanitarian assistance, in coordination with the
United Nations, to help alleviate the precarious
humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Lastly, we appeal for a continued belief in the
peace. We support all constructive efforts aimed at
bringing an immediate end to the violence and call for
the resumption of peace negotiations between the
parties involved as soon as possible, so as to establish
an independent Palestinian State, living side by side
with Israel, which would create the necessary stability
in the region.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18

09-20163
