188

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

ing particular attention to the elements identified in paragraph 3 of Council resolution 1987/53;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
measures to ensure that the United Nations programme of
work in crime prevention and criminaljustice is supported
by adequate resources through, inter alia, appropriate
redeployment of staff and funds, including from relevant
departments at Headquarters, and to ensure that the specialized and technical nature of the programme and the
high priority attached by Member States to crime prevention and criminal justice are fully reflected in the future
management and staffing of the Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Branch;
6. Endorses the recommendations related to the preparation of the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, to be
held in 1990, contained in Economic and Social Council
resolution 1987 / 49 of 28 May 1987, and requests the Secretary-General to take immediate steps to ensure the successful and cost-effective preparation of the Eighth Congress, including the early appointment of its SecretaryGeneral, the organization and appropriate scheduling of
the interregional and regional preparatory meetings and
the timely finalization and circulation of the required
documentation through the provision of the necessary resources, including temporary assistance;
7. Ca/ls upon Member States to participate actively in
preparations for the Eighth Congress, particularly
through involvement of the United Nations national correspondents in the field of crime prevention and criminal
justice, the submission of relevant position papers on the
different agenda items, the establishment, whenever appropriate, of national focal points and the encouragement
of contributions from non-governmental organizations,
academics and other experts;
8. Invites the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control at its tenth session to accord priority to preparations for the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders and to
ensure adequate follow-up to the review of the functioning
and programme of work of the United Nations in the field
of crime prevention and criminaljustice undertaken by the
Economic and Social Council;
9. Encourages Member States and relevant organizations, in particular the regional commissions, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Department of
Technical Co-operation for Development of the Secretariat, to support and complement the activities of the
United Nations regional and interregional institutes for
crime prevention and control, particularly the newly established African Regional Institute for the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, as well as the
United Nations Latin American Institute for the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, by providing technical and financial assistance;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to develop appropriate strategies to revitalize the United Nations Trust
Fund for Social Defence and appeals for increased contributions from Member States, private foundations and others able to assist;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly, at its forty-third session, on the implementation of the present resolution, taking also into account the relevant recommendations of the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control at its tenth session, providing updated information on preparations for the Eighth
Congress;

12. Decides to consider this subject again, under the
item entitled "Crime prevention and criminal justice", at
its forty-third session.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987
42/60.

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Wornen

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 ofthe Charter, is to
promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction of any kind, including distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979, by
which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of Ali
Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling a/so its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of 3 December
1982, 38/109 of 16 December 1983, 39/130 of 14 December 1984, 40/39 of 29 November 1985 and 41/108 of 4
December 1986,
A ware of the important contribution that the implemen tation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women 40 can make to eliminating ali
forms of discrimination against women and to achieving
legal and de facto equality between women and men,
Noting the emphasis placed by the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace on ratification of and accession to the Convention
on the Elimination of Ali Forms ofDiscrimination against
Women,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Elimination ofDiscrimination against Women on its sixth
session, 41 notably general recommendations 2, 3 and 4 on
ways and mea ns of implementing article 21 of the Convention,42
l. Welcomes the ratification of or accession to the Convention on the Elimination of Ali Forms of Discrimination against Women by an increasing number of Member
States;
2. Urges ali States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so as soon as possible;
3. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
Convention;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status of the Convention;
5. Takes note ofthe report ofthe Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention; 43
40 Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise rhe
Achievemenrs of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 Ju/y 1985 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.85.IV.10), chap. 1, sect. A.
41 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forry-.m·ond Session.
Suf¡Lement No. 38 (A/42/38).
!bid., sect. IV.
4 , A/42/627.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

6. Takes note of the report of the Committee on the
Elimination ofDiscrimination against Women on its sixth
session;
7. Urges States parties to make ali possible efforts to
submit their initial reports on the implementation of the
Convention in accordance with article 18 thereof and with
the guidelines of the Committee;
8. Takes note of the views on the report of the Committee expressed by delegations at the first regular session
of the Economic and Social Council of 1987;44
9. Decides that no action shall be be taken on decision
4 adopted by the Committee45 and requests the Committee to review that decision, taking into account the views
expressed by delegations at the first regular session of the
Economic and Social Council of 1987 and in the Third
Committee46 of the General Assembly at its forty-second
session;
10. Takes note of the general recommendations
adopted by the Committee pursuant to the discussions at
its sixth session on ways and means of implementing article 21 of the Convention; 42
11. Notes with concern the account by the Committee
ofthe present constraints within which it operates with regard to the backlog of reports awaiting consideration and
encourages the Committee to intensify its discussion on
ways and means of dealing with this problem, including
possible adjustment of the reporting system, and to formutate in an appropriate way suggestions to that effect for
consideration by the Economic and Social Council and by
the General Assembly at its forty-third session;
12. Welcomes the efforts made by the Committee torationalize its procedures and expedite the consideration of
periodic reports, and encourages the Committee to continue its endeavours to those ends;
13. Decides, on an exceptional basis, that the Committee may hold no more than eight additional meetings during its session in 1988 in order to advance consideration of
reports already submitted to it;
14. Invites the Committee and the States parties to
consider the question of holding future sessions of the
Committee at Vienna, taking into account the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions47 and all relevant factors;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effott to ensure adequate servicing within existing resources
for the effective functioning of the Committee;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources and drawing in particular on funds available
to the Department of Public lnforrnation of the Secretariat, to provide, facilitate and encourage public information activities relating to the Committee and the Convention, giving priority to the dissemination of the
Convention in the official languages of the United Nations;
17. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit
the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Dis-

44 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1987,
Plenary Meetings, vol. I, 9th to 12th and 14th meetings (E/1987/SR.9-12
and 14).
45 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,
Sufflement No. 38 (A/42/38), sect. V.
/bid., Forty-second Session, Third Committee, 22nd, 24th to 30th,
44th and 49th meetings and corrigendum.
47 /bid.. Forty-second Session. Supp/ement No. 7D (A/42/7/Add.4),
para. 11.

189

crimination against Women to the Commission on the
Status of W ornen for information.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/61.

Participation of women in promoting international peace and co-operation

The General Assembly,
Confirming the noble goal enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain peace and security in the
world and the determination of the States Members of the
United Nations expressed therein to save present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
Recalling that the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements ofthe United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, in adopting
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women 40 for the period up to the year 2000,
recognized that women should participate fully in ali efforts to strengthen and maintain international peace and
security and to promote international co-operation,
Reaffirming the interrelationship of the objectives of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Expressing the need for equal opportunity for participation by women in the decision-making process, including
that related to peace, disarmament and security at national, regional and international levels, including the
United Nations system,
Reaffirming its resolution 37/63 of 3 December 1982, by
which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Participation
of Women in Promoting International Peace and Cooperation,
Bearing in mind its resolution 40/102 of 13 December
1985, in which it, in ter alia, requested the Commission on
the Status of Women to consider measures which may be
necessary to implement the Declaration in the context of
the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women for the period up to the year 2000,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/109 of 4 December 1986,
in which it recommended that future medium-term plans
ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies should,
in accordance with the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies, contain intersectoral presentations ofthe various programmes dealing with issues of concern to women, including those relating to the participation of women in
promoting international peace and co-operation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/24 of 26 May 1987, in which the Council decided
that the work ofthe Commission on the Status ofWomen
relating to the priority themes of the long-term programme of work of the Commission should be closely related to the relevant provisions of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies and of other policy documents,
Wishing to encourage the active participation of women
in promoting international peace, security and cooperation,
Convinced that increased efforts are required to eliminate still existing forms of discrimination against women
in every field of human endeavour,
Conscious of the need to implement the provisions of the
Declaration,
1. Pledges its determination to encourage the ful) participation ofwomen in the economic, social, cultural, civil
