S/PRST/2014/11

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 June 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7208th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 June 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the holding of the second round of the
Afghan presidential election on 14 June and reiterates the importance of these
historic elections to Afghanistan’s transition and democratic development. It
commends the participation and courage of the Afghan people to cast their
ballot despite the threat and intimidation by the Taliban and other violent
extremist and terrorist groups. It further commends the participation of Afghan
women in the electoral process, and underlines the key role that they play in
Afghan-led peace, democracy and stability.
“The Security Council notes positively the efforts of the Afghan people
to prepare for and hold these elections, including security arrangements, and
reiterates the important role of the Afghan electoral institutions, including the
Independent Election Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission. It calls upon Afghan electoral institutions to uphold the high est
standards of integrity throughout this important and historic process, and
emphasizes that all efforts must be made to ensure the integrity, neutrality and
transparency of the electoral process, including the detection and prevention of
fraud.
“The Security Council calls on all stakeholders to engage with the
electoral institutions and processes with patience and respect, refrain from any
acts that incite imminent violence, civil disorder or lead to instability, and to
channel complaints through the established institutional mechanisms in line
with Afghanistan’s electoral laws and constitution.
“The Security Council looks forward to the conclusion of the electoral
process in accordance with the relevant laws and mandates of the electoral
institutions and the orderly transition to a new administration and welcomes
the ongoing support role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA).
“The Security Council calls on all political entities to work together in
accordance with the Afghan Constitution, with the aim of strengthening
Afghanistan’s sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national

14-56264 (E)

250614

*1456264*

S/PRST/2014/11

unity in order to achieve a peaceful and prosperous future for all the people of
Afghanistan.
“The Security Council condemns the actions of those who attempted to
disrupt the elections, such as terrorist attacks against civilians, including
election personnel and candidates, as well as attacks against election
infrastructure. It condemns violent and terrorist activities by the Taliban,
Al-Qaida and other violent and extremist groups and illegal armed groups
aimed at destabilizing the situation in the country.
“The Security Council recognizes the sacrifices of the Afghan people and
Afghan National Security Forces during the election pe riod, and reiterates that
no terrorist act can reverse the path towards Afghan -led peace, democracy and
stability.”

2/2

14-56264
