UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/692
17 June 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 17 JUNE 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 17 June 1999,
which I have received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-18012 (E)

170699

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/692
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 17 June 1999 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General

In accordance with United Nations Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
I attach for your information an initial report on the international security
force (KFOR) operations.
This report covers the initial phase of operation Joint Guardian. Since
then, of course, there have been a number of developments, including, in
particular, the further deployment of KFOR, talks with the Russian Federation on
their participation and the initiation of discussions with Kosovar Albanian
representatives on the demilitarization of Kosovar armed groups. I will send
you a written report in due course.
I would appreciate your making the report available to the Security
Council.

(Signed)

Javier SOLANA

/...

S/1999/692
English
Page 3

Enclosure 1
Initial report on the international security force (KFOR)
operations (12-15 June 1999)

1.

Status of the deployment of the international security force (KFOR):

(a) KFOR deployment continued throughout Zone 1 (see attached map) 6 days
after the military technical agreement was signed. All the brigades of KFOR are
now deployed in their initial area of responsibilities. As provided for in the
military technical agreement, KFOR deployment in Kosovo is being synchronized
with the phased withdrawal of forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
withdrawal of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces from Kosovo continues
with two thirds of personnel and equipment being cleared of Zone 1. In general,
the Yugoslav Army and the Ministry of the Interior Police are respecting the
timetable in the military technical agreement, however, logistic and maintenance
difficulties may well delay their withdrawal in the days ahead.
(b) The deployment of the Italian and German Brigades to western Kosovo on
the border with Albania has reduced tension in the area and allowed the Yugoslav
Army/Ministry of the Interior Police to withdraw with minimal interference from
the Kosovar Albanian population. Convoys from Pec and Pristina were escorted by
KFOR to deter attacks. The deployment of United States forces (Task Force
Falcon) has been advanced and they have assumed responsibility for the Kacanik
defile. The French Framework Brigade has advanced westward towards the area
around Gnjilane. The French Framework Brigade movement has been somewhat
constrained by the constant stream of withdrawing Yugoslav Army/Ministry of the
Interior Police vehicles, but they have established excellent liaison with the
Yugoslav Army and Ministry of the Interior Police in Gnjilane.
(c) Four United Kingdom Armoured Brigade conducted an extensive patrol
programme throughout their area of responsibility to include Pristina without
incident. The situation remains tense with incidents of violence between
Kosovar Albanians and Kosovar Serbs. The visible presence of KFOR troops is
proving to deter violence. Overall, the operation is proceeding as planned.
(d) Liaison with Yugoslav Army and Ministry of the Interior Police
commanders in Zones 2 and 3 has started in preparation for phase 2 and phase 3
deployments. Yugoslav Army and Ministry of the Interior Police forces are
withdrawing at a steady pace, but their operations have been hampered by traffic
congestion, a lack of fuel, and concerns over UCK attacks. The future pace of
the withdrawal could also be determined by the availability of heavy equipment
transport owing to maintenance problems in the Yugoslav forces resulting from
the operational pace of the past several months. The Yugoslav Army is currently
using about 22 heavy equipment transports to move armour and heavy equipment out
of the Province. Federal Republic of Yugoslavia air defence units are
continuing to withdraw from Kosovo in compliance with the military technical
agreement, but owing to logistical and communications difficulties, they were
unable to meet their 12 June deadline. Isolated clashes between departing
Yugoslav Army/Ministry of the Interior Police and UCK elements, as well as
burning and looting by departing Yugoslav Army/Ministry of the Interior Police
/...

S/1999/692
English
Page 4

forces continue to be reported. In some cases, Kosovar Albanian villagers fired
on withdrawing Federal Republic of Yugoslavia units. In general, the Yugoslav
Army and Ministry of the Interior Police are in compliance with the military
technical agreement. However, in the western region of Kosovo, they are
unwilling to depart until North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces fill the
vacuum between them and the UCK. The UCK established a border control point at
Globocica along Kosovo’s border with the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.* UCK uniformed personnel stopped traffic and demanded identity
cards and raised the Albanian flag in place of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia’s flag.
(e) Monday, 14 June 1999, was marred by three incidents, two of which
directly involved KFOR troops. In Prizren, two Serbs riding in a passenger car
opened fire on German troops with automatic weapons as they drove towards the
German soldiers. In self-defence, the soldiers returned fire, killing the
driver and wounding the passenger. One of the German soldiers was slightly
injured in the exchange of gunfire. In Pristina, British troops shot and killed
a Ministry of the Interior Police policeman after he began shooting at the
troops. The policeman was warned to stop, but he ignored the warning. In
Stimle, just south of Pristina, an unknown assailant shot two German
journalists. One of the journalists was killed instantly and the other died
later in a British military facility. In Skopje, despite the efforts of our
KFOR medical personnel, KFOR released press statements on the shootings,
notified Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities and urged all sides to
cooperate and avoid confrontation.
2.
Overall progress of withdrawal of Serb military, police and paramilitary
forces and demilitarization of other forces:
(a) Progress of Serb withdrawal. Yugoslav Army/Ministry of the Interior
Police appear to be making every effort to comply with the timelines contained
in the military technical agreement, nonetheless, there have been a few
technical problems and these may lead to some elements not achieving full
withdrawal within the required timelines. As of 14 June 1999, approximately
half of the Serbian forces had been withdrawn from Kosovo.
(b) Progress of demilitarization of other forces. To date there has been
very little progress in the demilitarization of other forces. On a few
occasions, UCK fighters handed over their weapons voluntarily in order to return
to their homes.

* Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia by its constitutional name.
/...

S/1999/692
English
Page 5

Enclosure 2
Military technical agreement phased withdrawal
