S/2019/817

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2019
Original: English

The situation in Abyei
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 34 of Security Council
resolution 2469 (2019), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA), including a transition strategy that would allow for an eventual exit for
the mission. It covers the period since the issuance of my previous report
(S/2019/319), from 16 April to 15 October 2019. The report provides updates on, inter
alia, political developments, the security situation, the operating environment,
intercommunal dynamics and progress made on the reconfiguration of the mission, as
well as recommendations for further revisions. The report also follows up on my letter
of 20 September 2019 (S/2019/768) on progress in the implementation of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

II. Abyei
Political developments
2.
Political developments in the Sudan and South Sudan during the reporting
period have had an impact on the context in which UNISFA operates in the Abyei
Area. In Khartoum, the assumption of power by the Transitional Military Council in
April 2019 resulted in the decision of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union on 6 June 2019 to suspend the Sudan from all activities of the African Union,
until the formation of a civilian-led Government. Subsequent negotiations with the
Forces for Freedom and Change, facilitated by the African Union and Ethiopia,
concluded in August 2019. On 5 September, a transitional Government was
announced, and the Peace and Security Council decided to lift the suspension of the
Sudan from all African Union activities the next day, before the transitional
Government was sworn in on 8 September. Meanwhile, in Juba, further delays
hindered the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
3.
While both countries undergo their respective transitions, their partnership has
remained strong. The President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, attended the signing
ceremony for the political and constitutional declarations in Khartoum on 17 August
2019, marking the beginning of the transitional rule in the Sudan. In addition, and in

19-17431 (E)

161019

*1917431*

S/2019/817

support of the peace process in the Sudan, Mr. Kiir hosted talks in Juba in September
between the transitional Government in Khartoum and a number of Sudanese arm ed
groups. Meanwhile, the Sudanese authorities, as guarantors of the peace process for
South Sudan, facilitated the visit to Juba of Riek Machar on 9 September 2019. The
Prime Minister of the Sudan, Abdalla Hamdok, also conducted a visit of significant
importance to Juba on 12 September 2019, during which he discussed with Mr. Kiir
ways to enhance bilateral relations, including on borders and trade. Mr. Hamdok
stated that he wanted to restore relations between people on the border as the first
step towards the resolution of the border zone disputes. While the continued
rapprochement between the two countries is encouraging, it is too soon to witness its
effects on the situation in the Abyei Area.
4.
In that regard, little progress was made by the parties on the issues of border
demarcation and on the process leading to a final status of Abyei. In particular, the
establishment of joint institutions in the Abyei Area, as foreseen in the Agreement of
20 June 2011, remained a challenge, notwithstanding continued advocacy by UNISFA
with the parties to convene meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee.
UNISFA also called for the timely resumption of meetings of the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism. Owing to the temporary suspension of the Sudan by the Pe ace
and Security Council of the African Union, the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel was unable to operate. However, the Joint Political and
Security Mechanism met in Juba on 2 October 2019.
5.
UNISFA leadership met regularly with officials in Khartoum and Juba and with
members of the diplomatic community on security and peace process -related matters,
as well as on issues related to the full implementation of the Status of Forces
Agreement, including in relation to freedom of movement of UNISFA and the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, in both Abyei and the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone. In meetings held in Khartoum with government officials,
including representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of
Defence, and the Sudanese Co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, on
23 and 24 April, on 15 and 16 July and on 1 September 2019, UNISFA reiterated the
need to issue visas for United Nations individual police officers and formed police
units to facilitate the deployment of police personnel, in accordance with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 2469 (2019). Officials in Khartoum
maintain that recommendations regarding a proposed increase in the number of police
officers and the deployment of three formed police units are not consistent with the
original intentions of the parties, as set out in the Agreement of 20 June 2011. The
authorities continue to insist upon the need for progress to wards the establishment of
joint institutions in Abyei, including the Abyei Police Service, as provided for in the
Agreement. Similarly, officials in Khartoum have maintained throughout their
meetings with UNISFA that the appointment of a civilian Deputy H ead of Mission
and the enhancement of the civilian component of the mission, mandated in Council
resolutions 2445 (2018) and 2469 (2019), would amount to a departure from the terms
of the Agreement of 20 June 2011, in which the establishment of a mission with an
interim security-related focus was foreseen. In addition, the request by UNISFA that
the Government of the Sudan reconsider its position on its use of the Athony airstrip
remained inconclusive. Unfortunately, this continues to undermine the mission ’s
logistical capabilities, including for medical evacuation and troop rotations.
6.
In Juba, UNISFA leadership met with officials from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, including the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, the South Sudanese
Co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, the head of the Abyei file and
representatives of the Ministry of Defence, including the Chief of Defence St aff, on
2 and 3 May, on 17 and 18 July and on 8 August 2019. UNISFA underscored the need
to implement all aspects of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 related to the establishment
2/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

of joint institutions in Abyei, including, as a first step, participation in the joint
integrated planning exercise towards the establishment of the Abyei Police Service.
Officials in Juba observed that arriving at a final resolution of the Abyei question was
their first priority and that, while the establishment of joint institutions might have
been a useful way forward in 2011, the time for such a decision had long since lapsed.
In that respect, the Government of South Sudan maintains that, in Security Council
resolutions 2445 (2018) and 2469 (2019), as well as in the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to the Council on 22 April 2018, the administration in Abyei
appointed by the Government and the Misseriya administration in Muglad have been
recognized, thereby taking precedence over the Agreement of 20 June 2011.
7.
In both Khartoum and Juba, UNISFA leadership underscored the need for both
parties to engage at a higher level in achieving a political resolution to o utstanding
issues, as called for in paragraph 8 of Security Council resolution 2469 (2019), in
which the Council requested, inter alia, an update by the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa on the proposal
made by it in 2012 and on the implementation of all of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee decisions by 15 October 2019. These matters were also discussed in Addis
Ababa with my Special Envoy on 24 May 2019 and with the Chief of Staff of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel on 27 May 2019.
Conflict dynamics and security situation
8.
The general security situation in Abyei during the reporting period remained
fragile, with continued low-scale intercommunal tensions, an increase in criminality
and the sporadic presence of armed elements in the Area, including the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone, as reported in my letter of 20 September 2019
(S/2019/768). Widespread poverty, unemployment, insecurity in areas neighbouring
the Abyei Area and the absence of functioning governance and rule of law institutions
have contributed to a potentially volatile situation. A total of 18 incidents of armed
violence were reported, resulting in 10 fatalities, all men, including a UNISFA
peacekeeper, with 3 deaths linked to animal rustling and 7 as a result of armed attacks.
During this period, 11 cases of shooting, 3 cases of homicide, 468 cases of theft, 210
cases of aggravated assault, 2 murders, 2 cases of rape and 13 cases of animal rustling
were reported, resulting in the loss of 1,537 livestock. A total of 18 weapons and 258
rounds of ammunition were also confiscated by UNISFA. However, the security
measures put in place by the mission resulted in the largely peaceful reverse migration
of the Misseriya through Abyei from May to September 2019.
9.
While UNISFA strives to maintain Abyei as a weapon-free area, it is surrounded
by armed groups from the Sudan and South Sudan, which are drawn to Abyei by the
dearth of administrative structures and local law enforcement mechanisms, as well as
by the economic activity in the area, in particular at the A miet common market. The
groups enter Abyei, including through corridors located on the eastern and western
edges of Abyei, where UNISFA is not deployed.
10. As a result of the insecurity, some 21 persons, all Dinka, were kidnapped by
unknown armed men during the reporting period, including 4 women on 28 May in
Sector Centre, and 9 children and 8 men. Two men were found dead. The perpetrators
are believed to be Misseriya and Nuer. Meanwhile, 38 cattle belonging to the
Misseriya rustled from the Amiet common market on 16 July 2019 were recovered in
Chak Chak, South Sudan, on 20 July, and handed back to their owners. On 17 August
2019, Misseriya and Nuer cattle traders on their way to Sector South to buy cattle
reported that they were attacked by unknown men, resulting in the killing of 12 cattle
traders, with another dying on 19 August 2019 as a result of gunshot injuries. The
survivors stated that the attackers were members of the Sudan People ’s Liberation

19-17431

3/16

S/2019/817

Army from South Sudan. However, investigations by UNI SFA revealed that the
killing occurred outside the Abyei Area, in Mayom, South Sudan.
11. No act of intercommunal violence was recorded during the reporting period.
However, one intracommunal fight occurred within the Nuer community at the Amiet
common market on 21 June, resulting in three injuries. On 8 September 2019, the
Nuer community requested UNISFA to recognize the community as one of those
living at the market, and for the mission to include the community in and consult it
on vital events and issues affecting the market. While it is difficult to measure with
precision the number of Nuer in the market area, it is steadily growing.
12. On 28 June 2019, unknown armed men fired on a UNISFA patrol at Gung
Garang, Sector Centre, but no casualties were sustained. In a subsequent attack on
16 July 2019 at the Amiet common market, an armed group, suspected to have come
from South Sudan to rustle cattle in the Abyei Area, killed six civilians, including a
baby, in an attack. While retreating, the assailants opened fire at a UNISFA
observation post, killing one peacekeeper and injuring another. On 19 August 2019,
UNISFA troops patrolling at the Dari market, Sector North, were attacked by local
youths, who forcefully tried to hijack their vehicle, communication equipment and
guns as they were attempting to apprehend a suspect, who managed to escape from
the scene. One peacekeeper was injured and a Misseriya man was killed during the
ensuing exchange of fire.
13. Despite the incidents mentioned above, insecurity in Abyei has remained
generally contained, owing mainly to swift response mechanisms put in place by
UNISFA forces. Regular patrols continued to ensure security and protection of
civilians in the Area. To avoid future attacks such as the one on 16 July 2019, UNISFA
has developed a plan to establish checkpoints on the main road from Agok in the south
to Farouk in the north and, where feasible, on lateral routes, with a view to conducting
search-and-seize operations to further enforce the weapon-free status of the area and
to providing an additional layer of protection for civilians against armed elements.
However, owing to troop reduction and delays in increasing the deployment of police
personnel, the Force has been unable to deploy to the eastern and wester n parts of the
Abyei Area, while continuing to engage its available resources in securing the areas
along the Agok-Diffra corridor. In line with the Agreement of 20 June 2011, UNISFA
has also sought to reactivate the Joint Military Observation Committee an d joint
military observer team concept, which had become defunct after the killing of the
Ngok Dinka chief in 2013. The objective is to enable the mission to undertake some
joint monitoring and verification missions with national monitors of both the Sudan
and South Sudan.
Mine Action Service operations
14. During the reporting period, 12 items of explosive remnants of war were
recovered by Mine Action Service teams in the Abyei Area and subsequently destroyed
in controlled demolitions. The Service also destroyed 17 AK-47 assault rifles, one
rocket-propelled grenade launcher and 432 rounds of small arms ammunition. It
assessed 22,609 m 2 of land in the Abyei Area as safe from explosive hazards. In
addition, it delivered 129 mine risk education sessions, which reached 3,820 men,
women, boys and girls living in the Area. A total of 17 awareness sessions on explosive
remnants of war were also delivered as part of UNISFA induction training, enhancing
the awareness of 350 UNISFA personnel (325 men and 25 women).
15. The Mine Action Service remained essential for the operations of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Teams assessed 1.36 km of patrol
routes as safe from explosive hazards. During operations, one explosive remnant of
war was found. The Service handed the item to the South Sudanese police for
4/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

subsequent disposal. In addition, the Service deployed patrol support teams in support
of 84 ground monitoring missions.
Rule of law issues
16. In the absence of the Abyei Police Service, UNISFA remains the only entity that
is mentoring and training the community protection committees on law and order
matters in Abyei. Despite their informal nature and the fact that they are not
recognized by the Sudan, the committees have contributed to the provision of timely
information on criminal incidents and activities. However, they continue to suffer
from a lack of logistical, administrative and financial resources.
17. The continued decrease in the strength of the United Nations police component
during the reporting period, as a result of the non-issuance of visas by the authorities
in Khartoum, has limited the mission’s capacity to respond to the rise in criminal
activity, in particular in and around the Amiet common market. Incidents of public
disorder were also recorded, with two demonstrations in the market involving
Misseriya youths, who insisted, in the first case, that loyalists of the Government of
Omer Al-Bashir leave the market and, in the second, that Misseriya elders involve
them more in market-related decision-making processes. Two demonstrations were
also staged in Diffra by Misseriya youths, who, in one case, voiced concern at
insufficient protection and, in the other case, expressed discontent following the
killing of a member of the Misseriya community at the Dari market. Disruptions of
public order were also caused by 12 incidents of fire at the Amiet common market,
Mul Mul market in Abyei town, Agok market, and Dari market in Diffra. There was
also one case of arson, which claimed the life of an Eritrean trader at the Amiet
common market. UNISFA police continued to conduct training on fire safety and
prevention as a mitigating measure.
18. The implementation of the UNISFA mandate remained complicated by the
reluctance of South Sudan to take part in the joint integrated planning exercise to
develop a road map strategy document aimed at establishing the Abyei Police Service.
UNISFA has thus far sent four invitations, to which only the Sudan responded
positively. Another concern remains the lack of a binding legal agreement with both
parties on the handling of criminals arrested in the Abyei Area. The memorandum of
understanding on procedures for handing over such criminals still needs to be signed
by both parties, despite several reminders issued since November 2016.
19. While UNISFA does not have a dedicated human rights capacity, the mission ’s
Community Liaison Office and the police have continued to engage with communities
on human rights, including international standards, with particular emphasis on the
rights of detainees and the treatment of other vulnerable persons, such as women and
children. In this context, UNISFA organized a workshop on 1 and 2 August 2019 with
representatives of traditional courts and the two communities to discuss challenges
related to detention, including prolonged or arbitrary detention, and the poor quality
of detention facilities. The workshop was also focused on ensuring women ’s rights in
the administration of justice, as well as cooperation between community-based
traditional justice mechanisms, the administration appointed by the Government of
South Sudan and the Misseriya administration. The discussions at and conclusions of
the event reconfirmed that, to address law and order issues, engagement cannot be
limited to community policing, but should also include comparable support for
traditional justice mechanisms and other relevant bodies.
Justice and corrections challenges
20. In the absence of functioning local judiciary authorities (police, prosecutors,
courts and prisons) in the Abyei Area, justice is administered through traditional
19-17431

5/16

S/2019/817

mechanisms, such as customary courts, where traditional leaders act as de facto
prosecutors, judges and arbitrators. In accordance with its mand ate, UNISFA has been
supporting these traditional mechanisms, notably the joint peace committee,
comprising representatives of Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities, which
constitutes a forum for community dialogue that performs both legislative and judicia l
functions aimed at ensuring the peaceful coexistence of the two communities. The
committee settles grievances regarding land disputes, cattle rustling, migration and
other conflict drivers. UNISFA is equipping traditional courts, which apply local
customary laws and are composed of local community leaders, who have basic
knowledge of international judicial standards, such as independence and rights of the
accused.
21. In terms of corrections, there are three community-operated detention facilities
in Abyei town, the Amiet common market and Agok town. The facilities are
consistently overcrowded and offer no separation between individuals in pretrial
detention and those sentenced by traditional justice authorities, although separate
cells are offered for men and women. The overall detention conditions are
inappropriate and fall short of minimum international standards. Within its limited
resources, UNISFA periodically monitors the facilities and provides guidance on how
detention conditions and practices can be improved, but additional improvements and
resources for the detention facilities are needed. With a view to improving human
rights standards in detention facilities, UNISFA has initiated, through the quick impact projects mechanism, the construction of a hard-walled detention centre at the
Amiet common market and the renovation of the Abyei community protection
committee station.
Local peace efforts
22. Intercommunal dialogue continued during the reporting period, thanks to
facilitation by UNISFA of regular joint community protection committee meetings
between Ngok Dinka and Misseriya representatives. Some 100 regular and ad hoc
meetings were held to deliberate on cases of murder, livestock rustling and the
payment of blood money. These meetings resulted in the handing over of
compensation money and the recovery of rustled livestock. To avert the possibility of
intercommunal conflict linked to acts of violence committed elsewhere in Abyei, the
joint community protection committee temporarily closed d own the Amiet common
market twice, following incidents that occurred on 23 April, during which Misseriya
youths expressed discontent over their lack of involvement in the market
management, and in the aftermath of the armed attack on 16 July 2019.
23. UNISFA continued to promote dialogue by enhancing awareness and
understanding of the mission’s mandate to protect civilians and by familiarizing
traditional judges with the concept of a fair trial in line with relevant international
legal instruments and national laws. To this end, UNISFA held a workshop on the
protection of civilians on 27 and 28 May 2019 in Diffra, attended by representatives
of both communities, including members of the joint community protection
committee, women’s and youth representatives and the traditional judges, to discuss
the protection of civilians, including women and children, human rights, the rule of
law and traditional justice.
24. During the past financial year, UNISFA launched 11 quick-impact projects in
the Abyei Area and two projects in support of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism at Kiir Adem (Gok Machar). The projects are focused on
basic livelihoods, small-scale infrastructure and enhancement of the rule of law and
generate short-term employment for the communities. Completion of some of these
projects was delayed owing to late approval by the Government of the Sudan for the
transportation of construction materials.
6/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

Women and peace and security
25. Women have remained underrepresented at all levels of decision-making in
Abyei, including in community-level conflict resolution and administration
mechanisms. To address these gaps, UNISFA continued to engage traditional leaders,
including local community leaders, on the importance of the participation of women
in all areas and levels of decision-making in Abyei. Advocacy efforts have
specifically targeted members of the joint peace committee, in which women are
completely absent, the administration in Abyei appointed by the Government in Juba,
and traditional leaders in the northern part of Abyei. While no significant progress
has been made in this regard, local leaders have expressed willingness to support
initiatives that empower women and promote their participation.
26. Gender mainstreaming activities continued to be focused mainly on
strengthening the capacity of women’s civil society groups, raising awareness among
local communities of women’s rights, including the prevention of sexual and genderbased violence, and advocacy efforts targeting traditional and administrative leaders
aimed at promoting and protecting women’s rights, including their participation in
decision-making. Efforts by UNISFA resulted not only in the recruitment of more
women in both the joint peace committee and community protect ion committees but
also in the establishment of a traditional leaders gender champion network comprising
male traditional leaders from the Misseriya community to advocate the promotion and
protection of women’s rights. A similar mechanism has been initiated by young
people in Diffra.
27. Other gender activities targeting women and traditional leaders of both the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities were focused on creating awareness of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security. This was done through various thematic discussions with women
leaders and workshops held on 13 May at Todach and 14 May 2019 at Diffra, in which
awareness of the subject of women and peace and security was raised, including the
role of women in conflict prevention. UNISFA also developed two tools to facilitate
the implementation of the women and peace and security mandate: a mission -wide
action plan for monitoring and reporting on the women and peace and security
indicators, as well as a monitoring and data-collection tool for sexual and genderbased violence. In the reporting period, UNISFA recorded five cases of sexual and
gender-based violence involving six victims, of whom three were minors. Four cases
involved rape, one involved abduction and another involved domestic violence.
Humanitarian situation and recovery activities
28. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as non -governmental
organizations, continued to provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to some
202,000 vulnerable people in need within the Abyei Area. They included 107,000
people from the Ngok Dinka community, 9,000 people displaced from neighbouring
states in South Sudan, 37,000 people from the Misseriya community, 6,000 other
South Sudanese (mainly Nuer), 38,000 seasonal Misseriya migrants and 5,000 Fallata
nomads who returned in June and July 2019.
29. Between late July and September 2019, heavy rainfall caused flooding,
displacing some 30,000 people from their homes in the southern part of Abyei, in
particular in Agok town and surrounding areas. Roads, bridges and public facilities
were destroyed by the downpours and agricultural farms were damaged. Most of the
people displaced by floods erected temporary shelters with wooden poles on the
roads, and many others occupied primary schools. United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, through non-governmental organization partners, distributed non-food
items, including plastic sheets, cooking utensils, blankets, mosquito nets and blue
19-17431

7/16

S/2019/817

bags to 2,800 verified households comprising 15,000 individuals, to meet priority
needs in four of the eight affected communities. The humanitarian community has
faced challenges in reaching victims in remote areas owing to poor road conditions,
including some roads cut off by water. Plans are under way to reach the remaining
affected communities by foot from Agok and Abyei during the first week of October
to assess the situation.
30. Despite the logistical challenges in South Sudan, 97 per cent of the food
requirements for the rainy season were pre-positioned in seven warehouses in
southern and central parts of Abyei. More than 111,000 vulnerable people benefited
from various food assistance-related activities, including general food distribution for
displaced people and school meals for children in the central and southern parts of
Abyei. Efforts to support community livelihood activities continued, with over
109,000 livestock vaccinated against various diseases and more than 19,000 livestock
treated, benefiting over 5,800 households. Training in basic animal health, handling
and processing of fish, beekeeping and honey production, poultry production, postharvest handling, the establishment of fruit tree nurseries, vegetable production and
business skills was provided. Other key activities included the provision of business
start-up materials, milk equipment, assorted vegetable seeds and fishing kits.
31. A total of 17 primary and 2 secondary health-care facilities throughout the Abyei
Area remained operational. In addition, humanitarian organizations provided routine
immunizations and health support, including cons ultations and essential drugs,
benefiting some 110,000 people during the reporting period. The highest level of
morbidity was from malaria, with a monthly average of 3,500 diagnosed patients.
Owing to access constraints caused mainly by flooding, limited mobile health services
were provided to the communities in the remote areas of northern Abyei. Nutrition
screening and support for patients with moderate and acute malnutrition in the Abyei
Area covered a monthly average of 10,500 children under 5 years of age, as well as
pregnant and lactating women. The health and nutrition services in all facilities have
been supported by awareness-raising and capacity-building activities, on-the-job
training for clinical staff, training for elementary health -service personnel at the
village level and health awareness sessions, including training on Ebola for 24 health
workers. Three blocks of brick wall latrines were constructed at the Rumamer, Malual
Aleu and Mading Achueng health facilities.
32. Six new handpumps and boreholes were drilled, eight handpumps were
rehabilitated, a new water yard was constructed in Marial Achak, a borehole was
upgraded to mini solar-powered water yards in Amiet Market and seven water yards
were repaired, benefiting 21,000 people. Small-scale water, sanitation and hygiene
projects supported 900 households and 4,000 schoolchildren throughout the Abyei
Area. In order to mitigate the challenges of lack of ownership and proper management
of water points in the area, humanitarian organizations, in consultation with
communities, identified water management committees for all water yards and
provided training on water systems, the roles and responsibilities of committee
members, leadership and conflict management. Plans are under way to conduct
technical training on the basic maintenance of water taps and generators once the
rehabilitation work for all water yards is completed.
33. The food-for-education programme supported the provision of meals for over
23,000 schoolchildren in 34 primary and secondary schools in southern and central
Abyei. Psychosocial support for schoolchildren through child -friendly schools and
the upgrading of schools in the north of Abyei continued. The rehabilitation work at
the Malual Aleu, Maibong, Mabyor, Nyiel and Rumbek primary schools is in
progress. The five schools are at different stages, but physical monitoring and follow up were not possible owing to the impassable roads. In some places, the rehabilitation
work was postponed as a result of heavy rain and floods. Othe r major activities
8/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

included the provision of school recreational activities and individual psychosocial
support and home visits.

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
34. As stated in my letter of 20 September 2019 (S/2019/768), modest progress has
been made regarding implementation of the benchmarks set out in Security Council
resolution 2465 (2019). This is largely because both parties are undergoing transitions
that have, for the past few months, diverted their attention away from border -related
matters. However, the current rapprochement between the two Governments, as
described above, opens prospects for a breakthrough in re solving all pending border
issues, provided that both transitional processes stay on track.
35. This lack of progress should not overshadow the importance of the stabilizing
role that UNISFA and the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism in
particular continue to play along the borders between the two countries. Monitoring
activities and regular outreach to key stakeholders on the ground, as well as
engagement by the two Governments, have constituted a deterrent to potential
spoilers. They have also served as a confidence-building measure between the two
parties. In that regard, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
remains an indispensable tool for the implementation of any border-related decisions
by the Joint Political and Security Mechanism in the future.
36. It is worth noting that, since my most recent letter on progress in the
implementation of the mechanism’s mandate, the two parties organized a meeting of
the Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Juba on 2 October 201 9, at which they
committed themselves again to withdrawing all their forces from the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone and to fostering the establishment of border crossing
corridors, requesting UNISFA support in monitoring the implementation of those
decisions and reporting on their implementation during the next meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism scheduled for 13 October 2019.

IV. Administrative aspects and mission support
37. UNISFA is among the most remote peacekeeping mission headquarters, located
in an incredibly challenging and inhospitable environment and facing serious support
challenges. There is no municipality to provide basic services and no local market or
vendors that can provide goods, services or other capabilities required by the mission.
In addition, the terrain and weather conditions during the rainy season pose real
challenges and hinder the mobility of the Force to carry out its mandate.
Consequently, infrastructure, Force mobility and real-life support are all major
focuses of the mission to improve its ability to implement the mandate.
38. As part of the implementation of the mission’s gender parity strategy, a
mechanism was established to monitor gender representation in all mission
components on an ongoing basis. As at 30 September 2019, women represented
10.6 per cent of UNISFA staff, accounting for 18.4 per cent of the civilian component,
10.1 per cent of the military component and 28 per cent of the police component.
UNISFA routinely conducts outreach to potential women candidates for all vacancies
to encourage applications, and all qualified women applicants are shortlisted and
interviewed. Living conditions, opportunities for promotion, training and wel fare
concerns are rigorously addressed in order to retain women staff.
39. As at 25 September 2019, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,150
personnel (3,871 troops, 140 military observers and 130 staff officers). During the
19-17431

9/16

S/2019/817

reporting period, the mission completed the repatriation of 655 personnel, in line with
Security Council resolution 2445 (2018), and a rotation of 611 personnel. The mission
has made plans to reduce the number of troops by 29 5 by November 2019, in
accordance with Council resolution 2469 (2019). With regard to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, the UNISFA military component stood at
582 personnel, comprising 515 men and 73 women (557 troops, 14 military observers
and 11 staff officers). The strength of the police component stood at 34 officers
(23 men and 11 women) against an authorized total of 640 police personnel
(148 individual police officers and 492 formed police unit personnel). This low rate
of deployment is attributed to the non-issuance of visas to police personnel. As at
15 September 2019, the number of civilian staff stood at 139 international staff,
33 United Nations Volunteers and 76 national staff, against authorized totals of
161 international staff, 33 United Nations Volunteers and 86 national staff. The
vacancy rate was 7.27 per cent for international staff and 10.8 per cent for national
staff.
40. The Government of the Sudan issued 108 visas for UNISFA personnel during
the reporting period, while 191 visas remained pending (8 for international staff
members, 8 for military personnel, 130 for police personnel, 5 for Mine Action
Service contractors, 12 for official visitors and 28 for ot her contractors).
41. Company operating bases remained deployed at Farouk, Diffra, Goli and Todach
in Sector North, Dokura/Rumajak, Noong and Abyei in Sector Centre and Marial
Achak, Athony, Banton, Tajalei and Agok in Sector South. UNISFA also supports
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism team sites 11 (Safaha) and
12 (As Sumayah) in Sector 1 (Gok Machar), as well as team sites 21 (Tishwin) and
22 (El Amira) in Sector 2 (Kadugli).
42. Infrastructure and environmental installations are being upgraded at all UNISFA
camps. A new mission headquarters is complete, and plans are being made to move
into the new facility. To address the road conditions, UNISFA is in the process of
contracting engineering services to operate its equipment and augment the military
engineering unit capabilities to increase the mission’s capacity to improve
accessibility and Force mobility.
43. The mission continues to face shortages for laterite and fuel deliveries from the
Sudan, leading to the suspension of additional infrastructure works. No progress has
been made on the two major road renovation projects, as clearance by the Government
of the Sudan has yet to be granted. This will continue to jeopardize the movement of
troops and supplies to many camps.
44. The implementation of the recommendation to reduce the mission fleet by one
fixed-wing aircraft to lower the aviation budget and increase cost -efficiency has had
a negative impact on the mission’s operations. Sharing an aircraft with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan resulted in a 20 per cent no-fly rate, which seriously
hindered medical evacuations, official travel and air cargo, as well as the mission ’s
obligations to personnel for rest and recuperation and leave. The mission has resumed
its fixed-wing aircraft operations to Entebbe by repositioning an aircraft from
Khartoum, since demand has decreased considerably on the route owing to the recent
disturbances in the Sudan.
45. Following the two military helicopter accidents in February and May 2019 and
the subsequent suspension of their operations by United Nations Headquarters, the
mission has received two helicopters under commercial contracts, which have filled
the gap left by the military helicopters. However, the Force still lacks the capability to
mount military air operations using military-pattern helicopters should the need arise.

10/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

Culture of performance
46. UNISFA tracks and reports mission performance through metrics and targets
that it has developed as part of a performance management system. The intention is
to measure and improve outcomes related to force mobility, the environment,
infrastructure development and mandate implementation. Results are regularly
reported to mission leadership, managers, relevant end users and United Nations
Headquarters. The metrics used are specifically designed to better inform decision making on, inter alia, infrastructure, environmental issues and Force deployment.
47. UNISFA continued to conduct the quarterly performance evaluation of units in
addition to other scheduled inspections. A total of 12 performance evaluations have
been conducted over the past 12 months.
48. A major impediment is the inability of formed units to conduct test firing of
weapons to ascertain the continuous serviceability of weapons, owing to the refusal
of traditional and community leaders to release land in the mission area for this
purpose. UNISFA continued to engage with the community on this matter. One
recurrent issue concerning the welfare of the troops was the lack of Internet
connectivity. This has now been resolved, with UNISFA providing Internet capability
for all formed units, which has boosted the morale of troops in the mission.
49. All units performed their duties diligently and adhered to rules and regulations,
as well as the provisions of existing standard operating procedures and United Nations
policies. There were no issues related to sexual exploitation and abuse and other forms
of misconduct during the reporting period.
Mission reconfiguration
50. As described above, the situation on the ground remained marked by a high
crime rate, with the reported increased involvement of armed groups, often fuelling
persistent intercommunal tensions. However, while the UNISFA troop ceiling has
decreased in accordance with Security Council resolution 2445 (2018), the mandated
increase in the strength of the police forces from 50 to 640 has not materialized,
creating a vacuum in the mission’s capacity to deliver on all fronts. This decrease in
the strength of the uniformed components will particularly reduce the mission ’s
ability to simultaneously maintain its focus on the main hotspots along the Agok Diffra road and deploy enough forces along the migration corridors in the western
and eastern parts of the Abyei Area during the upcoming dry season.
51. In line with Security Council resolution 2469 (2019), an assessment mission and
a military and police capability study were conducted in August and September 2019.
The overall objectives were to assess the progress in the implementation of the
mandate, as well as the mission’s capacity to fulfil its tasks on the basis of the current
and projected security situation, with a view to updating the recommendations for the
reconfiguration of the mission, including a transition strategy that would allow for an
eventual exit. On the basis of the findings of the military and police study, it is
recommended that UNISFA update its operational concept, improve its peacekeeping
intelligence capabilities and protection of civilians capabilities and reconfigure its
enablers, including by upgrading its mobility with night-flying assets and its
engineering capability, as well enhance its existing medical capacity. There will also
be a need to deploy troops with the range of skills and training standards adequate for
the new operational concept and to carry out the police deployment in order to address
law and public order issues.
52. Two approaches are proposed for consideration by the Security Council. The first
option is derived from the provisions of Council resolutions 2445 (2018) and 2469
(2019), regardless of the recent security and political developments on the ground.
19-17431

11/16

S/2019/817

First, it involves the repatriation of 295 troops to complete the Force reduction set out
in resolution 2445 (2018), which did not take place as planned by May 2019. The
Force will be further reduced by 295 troops in accordance with Council resolution
2469 (2019), bringing the authorized ceiling to 3,550, while the police strength will
be augmented to 640 personnel through the deployment of three formed police units
and 148 police personnel. The mandate of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism would be extended by at least six months to support potential progress on
border issues that could result from the current political momentum between the Sudan
and South Sudan. The repatriation of the first 295 troops commenced in October, while
the second phase will be achieved by 15 November.
53. The second option follows the conflict and criminal trends over the past six
months and the positive political developments between the Sudan and South Sudan
described above. It provides UNISFA with sufficient force to fulfil its ma ndate and
intervene with appropriate resources throughout its area of responsibility, given the
difficulties encountered to date in implementing the mandated increase in police force
strength. Requested by UNISFA leadership and the two main parties, it als o gives the
mission enough time to assess the impact on its overall operational capacity of
reducing the 655 troops set out in resolution 2445 (2018), and to adapt its posture and
capabilities to the new operational concept recommended in the military and police
component study. Should this flexible approach receive the approval of the Council,
it would involve the postponement of the reduction of the 295 additional troops
decided by the Council in its resolution 2469 (2019) until the end of the dry season,
by May 2020. While maintaining the Force within the authorized uniformed personnel
ceiling, all efforts will be made to impress upon the two parties the need to
expeditiously facilitate the deployment of the authorized police increase provided for
in Council resolution 2469 (2019), in a phased approach starting with the deployment
of at least one formed police unit and 140 police officers by January 2020, while the
remaining two units could be deployed by May 2020. As in the first option, the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would be extended by at least six
months to support any potential progress on border issues.
54. For UNISFA to efficiently fulfil all aspects of its mandate, the reconfiguration
of the uniformed component described above should be accompanied by the
strengthening of the mission’s civilian capacities, as recommended in my letter of
20 August 2018 (S/2018/778). The recent review mission assessed an urgent need to
deploy political affairs officers at mission headquarters and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism headquarters, as well as in the liaison offices
in Khartoum, Juba and Addis Ababa. It also recommended an increase in civil affairs
officers in the mission, sectors and Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism headquarters to improve outreach to local administrations and
communities and to increase the communication and awarene ss-raising capabilities
of UNISFA. Finally, with regard to the rule of law, it recommended the establishment
of a small team to address all the corrections and justice aspects for support and
implementation purposes under the community liaison office.

V. Financial aspects
55. The General Assembly, by its resolution 73/311 and decision 73/555,
appropriated the amount of $260.2 million for the maintenance of the Force for the
period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020. As at 1 October 2019, unpaid assessed
contributions to the special account for UNISFA amounted to $91.9 million. Total
outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date
amounted to $3,798.9 million. Troop costs have been reimbursed for the period up to

12/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

30 April, while the costs of contingent-owned equipment have been reimbursed for
the period up to 31 March, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VI. Observations and recommendations
56. In the past few weeks, encouraging steps have been taken by the new authorities
in Khartoum and their counterparts in Juba to improve their relationship and pave the
way for new momentum between the Sudan and South Sudan. I wish to commend the
efforts made by the leadership of the two countries, including Mr. Kiir’s visit to
Khartoum on 17 August 2019 to attend the historic signing ceremony of the political
and constitutional declarations marking the beginning of the transitional rule in the
Sudan, and the subsequent visit of the new Prime Minister of the Sudan, Abdalla
Hamdok, to Juba on 12 September 2019. I was particularly encouraged by their
resolve to enhance bilateral relations, including on borders and trade, and by the
commitment made by Mr. Hamdok to restore relations between people on the border
as the first step towards the resolution of the disputed border zones between the Sudan
and South Sudan. I call upon the Security Council to seize this opportunity and extend
its support to both countries as they strive to overcome years of conflicts and division.
57. Time is of the essence to consolidate the gains made in recent weeks. I therefore
urge the two Governments, with the support of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and my Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa, to spare no efforts
to make some progress on these sensitive issues in the coming months. In that regard,
I welcome the recent convening of a meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism in Juba on 2 October, during which the Sudan and South Sudan committed
themselves again to withdrawing all their forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone and to fostering the establishment of border crossing corridors, with the support
of UNISFA, before the next meeting of the Mechanism scheduled for 13 October. I
urge the two parties to pursue the talks to overcome their disagreements regarding the
disputed and claimed areas along the border, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 2416 (2018), including by considering the concept of a “soft border” agreed
upon in 2012, in order to reach an agreement on the final demarcation of their common
border. UNISFA remains committed to supporting the implementation of any future
agreement on demarcation in collaboration with the African U nion Border Programme
Technical Team, and to fostering community reconciliation and awareness -raising and
supporting integrated border management at the border crossings.
58. Despite protracted delays on border demarcation, the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism has remained a vital part of the framework that regulates
the relationship between the two countries. Since the Security Council decided to
include support for the Mechanism as part of the mandate of UNISFA in 2012, there
have been no incidents or confrontations between the two armies. In that context, I
encourage the Council to continue to support the Mechanism as part of the mandated
activities of UNISFA, while at the same time applying pressure on the two parties to
make progress. However, as emphasized in my letter of 20 September 2019 containing
an assessment of the progress made in the benchmarks set for the Mechanism
(S/2019/768), the important role that it plays as a monitoring and confidence-building
mechanism should in no circumstances supplant the obligation of the parties to
resolve border demarcation issues and agree on a final status for Abyei through
continued dialogue.
59. In the current context, with the effects of the rapprochement between the Sudan
and South Sudan yet to materialize in, and with regard to, the Abyei Area, the
continued presence of UNISFA will remain crucial to sustaining the stability achieved
since its deployment in 2011. Indeed, recent incidents, incl uding the one that claimed

19-17431

13/16

S/2019/817

the life of an Ethiopian peacekeeper in July 2019 in the Amiet common market area,
are a clear indication that, pending progress between the two Governments on the
sensitive issues of border demarcation and a final status, the Ab yei Area will continue
to be a volatile environment characterized by the presence of armed elements from
both countries, combined with random criminal activities. In that regard, I emphasize
the urgent need for the Sudan and South Sudan to overcome their d ifferences on the
presence of mutually agreed administrative and rule of law institutions in the Abyei
Area. The continued absence of governance institutions in the Area affects the life,
security and well-being of all communities.
60. In the future, I intend to continue to adapt the mission’s configuration and
posture to the new political realities and security dynamics on the ground, in
accordance with the recommendations presented in my letter of 20 August 2018, and
the adjustments decided upon by the Security Council in its resolutions 2445 (2018)
and 2469 (2019). Considering the recent steps taken by the parties to accelerate their
discussions on outstanding issues, I would like to recommend that the Council
positively consider the second of the two options presented in paragraphs 52 and 53
above. That option, if endorsed, would allow the mission to maintain the minimum
required strength to achieve its security-related mandated tasks while the
reconfiguration of its posture and concept of operations proceeds, and would provide
space and time for the sequenced deployment of the required police personnel, as
mandated in relevant Council resolutions. I would recommend the extension of the
mandate of UNISFA for a further six months, until 15 May 2020, along with the
implementation of the proposals contained in paragraphs 53 and 54 of the present
report.
61. Furthermore, as I mentioned in my letter of 20 August 2018, while the division
of labour between UNISFA and the African Union since 2011 has resulted in the
mission focusing most exclusively on security issues while political support was
provided by the African Union, in recent years UNISFA ha s become increasingly
exposed to the political shortcomings of the process and the insufficient political will
and interest of the parties, in particular with regard to the most needed administrative
arrangements in the Abyei Area, as well as discussions o n the border demarcation. I
will therefore continue to impress upon the parties the need to support enhancement
of the civilian capacities of the mission, notably on local conflict resolution, the rule
of law and protection. A particular focus should also be placed on intensifying dayto-day engagement in political mediation and dialogue between the two parties. In
that context, I will continue to engage with the two parties, and in particular the new
authorities in Khartoum, with a view to securing their a greement for the nomination
of a civilian Deputy Head of Mission and for the deployment of adequate civilian
capacities to support the mission leadership, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 2445 (2018) and 2469 (2019).
62. In 2018, I emphasized the important nexus between peace and development, and
more specifically the mutually reinforcing effect that security and political
facilitation, on the one hand, and recovery and development programmes, on the
other, could have for the stabilization of the Abyei Area. I therefore suggested that a
dedicated programme be developed for both communities by the respective country
teams in the Sudan and South Sudan. I welcome in that context the United Nations
joint programme initiative for Abyei by the country teams in the Sudan and South
Sudan, which is aimed at addressing five key objectives in the Abyei Area, namely:
strengthening local institutional capacities and support for the rule of law; fostering
community peacebuilding and capacity-building; improving access to basic social
services; promoting and supporting the local economy; and promoting gender
equality and combating sexual and gender-based violence. I urge donors to support
this laudable initiative.
14/16

19-17431

S/2019/817

63. Lastly, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the acting Head of
Mission and Force Commander, Major General Mehari Zewde Gebremariam, and to
all UNISFA personnel for their tireless efforts to maintain peace and security, often
under very difficult conditions. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, the African Union, including the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, and the Government of Ethiopia, for their active
engagement in support of the stabilization of the Abyei Area.

19-17431

15/16

S/2019/817

16/16

19-17431
