OFFICIAL
FORTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

12 JUNE

1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2587)
of the agenda

The situation

. , . . . . . . . . . , .. . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . . . . . . . .

1

. . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . ,. , , . . . . . . .

1

in Namibia:

(a)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);

(b)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
es......
Namibia (S/17242) ,,.,....*,....................*.....***..

WPV.2587

1

:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

2587th MEETING
Held
presi&nt: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

in New York on Wednesday,
(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2587)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(h) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/17242)
The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Repre-

sentative of India to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Repro
sentative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/17242)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Council table.

12 June 1985, at 3 p.m.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sinclair, Acting
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and
the other members of the delegation took a place at the
Council table.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at the previous meetings on this item [2583rd to 2586th
meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic
Yemen, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Poland, Seychelles, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam,
Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan),
Mr. Bessaieh (Algeria), Mr. Van-Dunem (Angola), Mr.
Choudhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr, Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mboumoua (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus), Mr. AlAshtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Lautenschlager (Federal
Republic of Germany), Mr. Asamoah (Ghana), Mr. Karran
(Guyana), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Barnett
(Jamaica), Mr. Kiilu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr.
Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic), Mr. Azzarouk
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Zain (Malaysia), Mr. Muiioz
Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoo (Mongolia), Mr. Alaoui
(Morocco), Mr. Davane (Mozambique), Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann (Nicaragua), Mr. Gambari Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz
(Pakistan), Mr. Cabrera Jovane (Panama), Mr., Nowak
(Poland), Mrs. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. von SchirndinF

of aggression as well as its immoral economic measures
against the front-line States with a view to exercising pressure on those States and influencing their anti-apartheid
position.

(South Africa), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri Lanka), Mr. Birido
(Sudan), Mr. Al-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Tiirkmen
(Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Mkapa (UnitedRepub
lie of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Golob
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

10. The resolutions of the United Nations and other international organizations calling for a boycott of the Government of South Africa are totally defied by some parties.
This defiance has reached the extent of aiding and supporting the South African Government economically and militarily. This has been demonstrated
in continuous
rejections of any measures that the Council attempted to
take against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations to force it to comply with the
resolutions of the United Nations and to withdraw its
forces from Namibia. This position, which is contrary to
the international will as expressed by the Members of the
United Nations, has been further demonstrated by the
abuse by some, Western States of the veto power with
regard to the draft resolutions on Namibia brought before
the Council in past years.

5. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Czechoslovakia, Haiti, Japan, the United Arab Emirates
and Zimbabwe, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, Ce’sar(Czechoslovakia), Mr. Charles (Haiti), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. AlMosfir
(United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

11. The defiance of the resolutions of international
organizations reached its peak when the racist-Zionist
entity in occupied Palestine and its racist counterpart in
South Africa, with the assistance ofsome Western Governments, established a close collaboration that covered all
economic, military and technical fields, including cooperation in the production of nuclear weapons. This has
encouraged the South African Government to persist in its
defiance of the international will, enabling it to continue to
pursue an aggressive policy against the front-line States.

6. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
7. Mr. AZZAROUK
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, Sir, I should like, on
behalf of the delegation of the Libyan Socialist Arab Jamahiriya, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. We are confident
that your wisdom and experience will lead the Council to
the best possible outcome. I should like also to express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and the representative of Thailand for the excellent
manner in which they conducted the work of the Council
last month.

12. The majority of the peoples of the world have discovered long ago the expansionist and racist nature of the
Pretoria rCgime, its inhuman alliances and its links with
world imperialism and Zionism, as a bastion for the preservation of the colonialist strategic and economic interests in
southern Africa. This alliance of colonialism and racism has
enabled the Pretoria rtgime to continue its defiance and
scorn of the international will. It is the main reason why the
Namibian people have so far been prevented from achieving
their freedom and independence. This alliance has opposed
the forces of liberation and progress in Africa and the Third
World in their attempt to abolish all forms of colonialist
domination and racial discrimination. The alliance has
sought, in defiance of the international will, to impose sham
settlements with a view to bringing about a fait accompli.
An example of this is the recent attempt by the racist rtgime
to establish a so-called interim government in Namibia.
There have also been other manoeuvres that preceded this
attempt to establish false constitutional structures in Namibia, such as the so-called state council and national conference. It was a desperate attempt by that rtgime to
circumvent the legitimate national demands of the Namibian people and to bypass SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people.

8. The Council is meeting to resume its deliberations on
the question of Namibia at a time when the gravity of the
situation in southern Africa is increasing and jeopardizing
international peace and security. The schemes and conspiracies of the racist Pretoria rCgime against the Namibian
people are continuing with the aim of frustrating the legitimate and heroic struggle of that people under the leadership of the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), its sole and legitimate representative.
9. The racist rigime is making a desperate attempt to
prolong its illegal occupation of the Territory. This is the
persistent attitude of the racist rCgime, which defied the will
of the international community and flouts the resolutions
of international organizations calling for an end to that
occupation, particularly
General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and the resolutions of the
Security Council, including resolution 264 (1969), which
calls for the immediate withdrawal of Pretoria’s forces
from Namibia, resolution 435 (1978), which endorses the
United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia, and
resolutions 385 (1976), 532 (1983) and 539 (1983). At the
same time, the racist rCgime is escalating its threats and acts

13. The attempt by that rtgime to link the withdrawal of
its forces from Namibia to the withdrawal of the Cuban
forces from Angola is only another in the series of conspiracies in a continuing effort to obstruct the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia. It has been con2

dcmned by the international community as an element
extraneous to the question and the provisions of Council
resolution 435 (1978), an attempt to divert the attention of
the people of the world from the essential question,
namely, the illegal occupation of theTerritory by the forces
of South Africa. It was a pernicious bid to find a pretext for
continuing this occupation, and, at the same time, it is
considered as blatant interference in the internal affairs of
Angola, an independent country, which requested, under
Article 51 of the Charter, the assistance of Cuban troops in
deterring repeated acts of aggression and military incursions into its territory by South African troops.

the international will and to reinforce the authority of the
United Nations.
18. In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the Jamahiriya’s support for the Namibian people in its liberation
struggle under the leadership of its sole, legitimate representative, SWAPO, for the achievement of its independence and the exercise of permanent sovereignty over its
territory. I should like also to reaffirm our solidarity with
the front-line States against the repeated threats and acts of
aggression by the racist Pretoria rCgime.
19. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya regards itself as one of
the front-line States against the racist: rtgime of Pretoria. It
therefore contributes, and will continue to contribute, in
every way to supporting the struggle of the peoples of
southern Africa, believing that the cause of freedom is an
integral whole and that the racist rtgime of South Africa is
a natural ally of its twin, the Zionist racist rCgime in occupied Palestine, and that eliminating the one will accelerate
the elimination of the other.

14. Nineteen years after the adoption by the General
Assembly, in 1966, of resolution 2145 (XXI), which called
for the ending of South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia, 16
years after the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 264 (1969), which called for the immediate withdrawal
of South African forces from Namibia and the ending of
South African administration of the Territory, and at a
time when numerous plots, oppression, suppression, persecution and assassinations are being perpetrated by the
Government of South Africa against the Namibian people,
the situation in Namibia now leads us to reaffirm the need
to redouble international efforts at all levels for the achievement of the legitimate demands of the Namibian people,
under the leadership of SWAPO, and to support the liberation struggle being waged by SWAP0 against the South
African Government, so that South Africa will withdraw
its forces unconditionally
from Namibia. This would
ensure the total independence of the Namibian people and
its sovereignty over all its territory, including Walvis Bay
and all the Namibian offshore islands.

20. In compliance ‘with all the relevant resolutions and
decisions adopted by international bodies and forums, my
country has supported all international efforts to implement the United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia. We shall continue to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Council for Namibia, since we appreciate the important role they play in
the endeavour to speed up the attainment of independence
by the Namibian people and to end the colonialist, racist
domination over them.
21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Mongolia, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

15. The prestige of the United Nations and the credibility
of the resolutions adopted by its organs, particularly the
General. Assembly and the Security Cquncil, are in jeopardy because of the deadlock on the question of Namibia
ever since the adoption by the General Assembly on 14
December 1960 of resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

22. Mr. NYAMDOO
(Mongolia): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to offer you the sincere congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency for the
month of June, I thank you and the members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in the
debate. I wish you every success in discharging your
responsible duties as President.

16. We believe that the Council bears responsibility for
restoring the credibility of the United Nations by establishing that it is an effective instrument for the achievement of
international peace and security through the immediate
and complete implementation of General Assembly resdlutions, and particularly resolution 39/15, entitled “Adverse
consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of political, military, economic and other forms of assistance given
to the racist and colonialist rtgime of South Africa”,
adopted on 23 November 1984, and 39/72, entitled “Policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa”,
adopted on 13 December 1984.

23. I should also like to thank your predecessors, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative ofThailand, for the able manner in which they guided the Council’s work last month.
24. In the light of recent developments in Namibia,
including the decision taken by Pretoria to impose a socalled internal settlement in Namibia, Mongolia was in
favour of the convening of these meetings of the Council,
as called for by the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Council ofMinisters of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU).

17. We also believe that, at the very least, all parties
should apply strictly a comprehensive system of sanctions
against the racist Pretoria regime under Chapter VII of the
Charter and that that rCgime should be expelled completely
and finally from the United Nations and all other international bodies and forums so as to force it to comply with

25. I wish to recall my letter of 10 June 1985 to the
Secretary-General [S/17253], in which, upon instructions
from my Government, I had the honour to state the position of Mongolia, expressing its indignation and grave
concern over the decision taken by the South African
3

regime to install a so-called interim government in Namibia. Mongolia views that decision as an attempt by the
South African regime to obstruct the implementation of
the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia,
endorsed by resolution 435 (1978). The Mongolian
Government resolutely condemns and rejects any attempt
by South Africa to impose a so-called internal settlement in
Namibia and considers such action null and void, in
accordance with Council resolution 439 (1978).

the international community in persisting in its illegal occupation of the Territory, Mongolia fully supports the call of
the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries and
the OAU for the imposition of comprehensive mandatory
sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa, as
provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
31. Mongolia is of the view that the United Nations has
primary responsibility for Namibia, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), and that it is
therefore incumbent upon the Organization to ensure the
speedy attainment by the people of Namibia of genuine
independence. It is most appropriate for the United
Nations, in this the,very year of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, to take concrete action for the
granting of independence to Namibia. We should also bear
in mind the fact that this year marks the fortieth year ofthe
United Nations efforts to bring independence to the
Territory.

26. South Africa’s occupation of Namibia has repeatedly
been declared illegal by the United Nations. In defiance of
the will of the international community, Pretoria, encouraged by the support of its Western allies and collaborators,
especially the United States, persists in that occupation,
The people of Namibia are being subjected by the regime to
brutal repression, cold-blooded murder, arbitrary arrests
and detention. Western transnational corporations and
South Africa continue ruthlessly to plunder and exploit the
natural resources of the Territory, in flagrant violation of
United Nations resolutions and decisions. In order to reinforce its illegal occupation and colonial domination of the
Territory, Pretoria is engaged intensively in a massive militarization of Namibia.

32. We commend the valuable efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering
Authority for the Territory until its independence, aimed
at protecting and promoting the interests of the Namibian
people, and first and foremost their right to selfdetermination
and independence. Mongolia
wholeheartedly welcomes the Declaration contained in the Final
Document adopted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia a few days ago, at its extraordinary plenary meetings held at Vienna [see S/17262, annex].

27, Moreover, Namibian territory is being continuously
used by the racist regime for the commission of acts of
aggression and subversion against neighbouring sovereign
and independent African States, That’ poses a serious
threat to international peace and security, In this context,
mention should be made of the most recent aggressive
military actions carried out against Angola by the special
forces of the South African army from Namibian territory,
actions which were resolutely condemned by my country,
28. Mongolia categorically rejects any delaying tactics
and the.policy pursued by the Pretoria regime and the
United States of linking Namibian independence to
extraneous and irrelevant issues, including the withdrawal
of Cuban troops from Angola. In fact, the linkage concept
has been unequivocally condemned and totally rejected by
the majority of States. Here I should like to refer to the
Final Document adopted by the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi
from 19 to 21 April, in which the Bureau stated that it

33. Mongolia also expresses its full support for the decisions on Namibia taken at the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi last April.
34. Mongolia reaffirms the inalienable right of the Namibian people to self-determination, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity in their own territory,
including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands. It considers
that the Namibian people have a legitimate right to struggle for their freedom by all means, including armed
struggle.

“considers such linkage as repugnant to the United
Nations plan and a blatant interference in the internal
affairs of the People’s Republic of Angola and designed
to subvert its sovereign rights as an independent State”
[S/l 7184 and Cow. 1, annex, para. 25J.

35. Mongolia reiterates its full solidarity with and support for the just struggle of the Namibian people led by
SWAPO, their sole authentic representative, against colonial domination and for national independence.

29. The policy of the present United States Administration of so-called constructive engagement with Pretoria is
rightly viewed by the majority of Member States as an
attempt to block the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) on the granting of genuine independence to Namibia, and as such has been condemned by them.

36. In connection with the twenty-fifth anniversary ofthe
establishment of SWAPO, we wish to extend to the people
of Namibia and to the members of SWAP0 and its leader,
Comrade Sam Nujoma, our sincere congratulations and
best wishes in their heroic struggle.

30. In view of the South African racist regime’s continued sabotage of United Nations efforts to bring independence to Namibia and its arrogant defiance of the will of

37. In conclusion, my delegation would like to urge the
Council to respond to the need to achieve independence for
Namibia.
4

38. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative ofMexico. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

essential that an end be put to such double-talk and that
each Member State assume its own national and world
responsibilities. Only in that way can we isolate the South
African regime, achieve the true independence of Namibia
and put an end to apartheid.

39. Mr. Mm02
LED0 (Mexico) (interpretution.fiom
Spanish): Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure for my
delegation to see you guiding the work of the Council.
Mexico greatly appreciates Trinidad and Tobago’s contribution to the quest of peace and the independence of
peoples, both in the hemisphere and worldwide. We are
confident that under your leadership this body will adopt
concrete measures commensurate with the magnitude of
the challenge that South Africa has placed before it.

46. ‘On 27 April 1981, some States members of the Council proposed a group of draft resolutions on the question of
Namibia [S/Z4459 to S/14463] that included economic
and political sanctions, as well as an arms and oil embargo,
against South Africa. In introducing those draft resolutions, my delegation pointed out that the Geneva meeting
had clearly established the limit beyond which any new
offer or concession to the occupying Power would be-as it
indeed turned out-ineffective and a mockery of the international community. We affirmed that it was necessary to
show, by means of strong decisions, that the patience of the
front-line States was not indicative of weakness and that
the tasks entrusted to the Western Powers implied no sort
of complicity. Three days later, at a meeting that left a
profound mark on the world’s conscience, those draft resolutions were vetoed. At the end of that meeting, the Secretary for Foreign Relations of SWAP0 stated:

40. May I also commend the skilful and expeditious work
done by your predecessor, the representative of Thailand,
during whose term of office decisions of particular significance for the developing countries were reached.
41. The Council is obliged to meet once again because of
the critical situation in southern Africa. This series of meetings none the less has special characteristics since they
involve the convergence of two growing but opposing processes:on the one hand, an increasing number of political
decisions by Pretoria that demonstrate its rejection of the
decisions of the United Nations; on the other, the mounting indignation of world public opinion and its clear effect
on Governments, including those that have thus far protected or abetted South Africa.

“Again, the arrogance of power of a minority has undermined the actions of the majority” [2277th meeting,
para. 1301.

And he added:
“When Namibia achieves liberation, then we shall
differentiate between those who stood with us during
the days of the bitter struggle and those who actively
participated in the depletion of our mineral resources,
armed and supported our enemy and belittled our
sacred cause.” [Ibid, paru. 134.1

42. The Council must reach a decision. This is not the
time for a mere verbal exercise, nor for compensatory
gestures that barely conceal the real impotence of this
body. Nor is this the time to relate a lamentable past with
which we are all familiar. The time has come to reflect,
through the implementation of Chapter VII of the Charter
‘of the United Nations, the resolve of the States Members to
exert real pressure on the South African regime and to
compel it to comply with international law.

47. Had the course of action we proposed at that time
been followed, had pressure upon South Africa been continued and had proposals been made periodically to the
Council to adopt sanctions, it would have been possible to
eliminate ambiguities and resolve contradictions. There
would have been a gradual breakdown ofresistance to the
application of sanctions, and such measures would have
finally been adopted.

43. The fact are irrefutable. In recent years, South Africa
has been receiving contradictory signals from the international community. On the one hand, the United Nations
adopts decisive resolutions concerning the independence of
Namibia and the ending of apartheid,bodies are established
and publicity campaigns mounted, and there is an interminable series of condemnations and warnings. On the other
hand, there has been strategic, economic and military collusion, a search for so-called negotiated solutions that have
only led to new excuses and further delays and to the
strengthening of South Africa’s real power and its regional
links, as well as of its influence in the West.

48. The firmness of the international majority and its
unswerving commitment
to principles would have
unequivocally defined the political dimensions of the question and would perhaps have made it possible to change
the course of events in southern Africa. Moreover, the
effectiveness of this body would have been upheld, in the
case of Namibia as well as with regard to others of extreme
gravity in which the impotence of the Council has had
tragic consequences.

44. We are often subjected to campaigns designed to
discredit the United Nations, campaigns in which we are
accused of political ineffectiveness, but we are incapable of
replying that that paralysis within the Organization derives
from a system of alliances between the very countries or
regions that judge us with the greatest severity.

49. There is still time to act and to safeguard the primary
role of this body, The most recent events in Namibia and
the reactions to South Africa’s intransigence in all democratic and progressive sectors throughout the world facilitate international unanimity and would, if we wished,
make it possible to negotiate and adopt a draft resolulion
calling for sanctions.

45. Clearly, our own internal contradictions have served
to encourage Pretoria’s intransigence, not to curb it. It is
5

the United Nations Council for Namibia resolved to promote the imposition of sanctions at the current meetings of
the Security Council and urged the permanent members of
this body which have shielded South Africa in the past to
demonstrate the necessary political will to implement those
sanctions, The responsibility to promote the adoption of
sanctions at this time by their very decision falls on all
members of the United Nations Council for Namibia
which approved that Programme. My own delegation
assumes that responsibility with the greatest sense of duty
and conviction.

50. Such a decision would constitute the best means of
supporting the legislative decisions and political actions
that are being taken in many countries to isolate South
Africa. By acting in this way, the Council would be lending
a decisive impetus to the process of adopting sanctions now
under way in many countries, despite the hesitancy of the
Council, a process that deserves our complete support.
5 1, The meetings held by the United Nations Council for
Namibia, as well as the relevant information we receive
daily, reveal a discernible trend in international public
opinion in favour of immediate sanctions against South
Africa. To ignore that universal call, .to fail to respond to it
promptly, would be to act irresponsibly, to say the least,
and to relegate the Security Council to the sidelines of
history.

57. The measures we adopt to isolate the South African
regime must be effective and must be accompanied by
appropriate means of verification. It is essential that all
States, in particular those with the closest economic and
political links to South Africa, implement them. There
must be no escape clauses. If sanctions are not observed in
practice, that would undermine the Security Council’s
authority and encourage those who have most resisted the
application of the provisions under Chapter VII.

52. We believe it highly unlikely that at this juncture any
State member can have any valid reason for objecting to
the application of the provisions of Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. We cannot imagine that
any Government would cast doubt upon its own responsibility by isolating itself and by refusing to act in accordance
with the law in the case of conduct that so flagrantly
violates human freedoms and the basic principles of international morality.

58. I should like to,recall that the arms embargo imposed
against South Africa in resolution 418 (1977) is still being
violated, with the implicit tolerance of the Council, which
has done little to strengthen the embargo and ensure its
implementation.

53. For that reason, the General Assembly, in resolution
ES-812 of 14 September 1981, strongly urged the Security
Council to respond positively to the overwhelming
demand of the international community by immediately
imposing comprehensive mandatory sanctions agarnst
South Africa.

59. In June 1980 [resolution 473 (1980)], the Council reiterated its appeal to all States to apply those sanctions
strictly and rigorously and requested the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 421(1977) concerning
the question of South Africa to redouble its efforts to ensure
the complete application of the embargo.

54, At the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April of
this year, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
affirmed that if South Africa persisted in its intransigence
there could be “no other option but the imposition against
it of comprehensive mandatory sanctions under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter” [S/l7184 and Corr.1,
annex, para. 281. That intransigence, to which the Ministers
of the Non-Aligned Movement referred, has been clearly
demonstrated since then, as the Council itself has
acknowledged.

60. In response to that mandate, the Committee prepared
a detailed and enlightening report which it submitted to the
Council in September 1980 [S/14179]. Since then, the
Council has avoided a debate and postponed taking action
on that report which was prepared at its request and
approved by the very members of the Council at the Committee level. In that document, various ways in which the
embargo was violated were specified and precise measures
were recommended to strengthen the embargo.
61. Before relinquishing the chairmanship of the Committee in September 1982, my delegation appeared before the
Council once again to request that the report be taken up.
Unfortunately, almost nothing has been done in all this
time.

55. During its extraordinary plenary meetings, held at
Vienna last week under the chairmanship of the representative of Guyana, Mr. Noel Sinclair, the United Nations
Council for Namibia considered in depth the present situation and explored the most appropriate ways and means of
speeding the achievement of a solution to the conflict. In
this connection, it recalled the Security Council’s duty to
ensure the implementation of its own resolutions, in particular resolution 435 (1978). It also considered-and this is a
very important point-that
the imposition of mandatory
sanctions was the most effective means of ensuring compliance with the resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations on this question.

62. Now that Trinidad and Tobago has assumed the
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of
South Africa, I appeal respectfully to your delegation, Mr.
President, and to the other members of the Council to
proceed without delay to reconsider strengthening the
arms embargo against South Africa and take the necessary
measures in this respect. Only in this way will our acts
match our words.

56. In the Programme of Action, contained in the Final
Document which it adopted on 7 June [S/172152 annex],

63. We are aware of the practical difficulties involved in
applying sanctions against States. We know that in the
6

others over the past days-in particular, reaffirmations by
the parties and countries more deeply concerned: the frontline States, South Africa, SWAPO, members of the contact
group and others. Namibia is an issue on which the Council, acting on behalf of the international community,
should be prepared to send a strong and unified message.
Our goals and our directions are clear: we should not allow
extraneous issues to divide us.

short term important economic interests may be affected
and that there may even be immediate negative consequences for neighbouring countries. None the less, none of
those considerations should prevail over the urgent need to
return to the Charter its stature, to the Council its authority
and to the United Nations its prestige.
64. The observance of principles has a price which all
States have agreed to pay, when necessary, in order to
safeguard international peace and security. The independence and dignity of nations also on occasion are won at a
high cost that all free countries are prepared to bear.

70. As we meet this week on Namibia, we find ourselves
at a very serious juncture. This is the first time the Council
has met in formal session to discuss the question of Namibia in 19 months. These are months in which we have
seen substantial progress towards a Namibia settlement.
We have seen developments which seem to bring into
question the commitment of some to proceed with implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

65. The Council will have before it a draft resolution
which, I am confident, will be adopted unanimously.
Regardless of the final result of this debate, South Africa’s
isolation should not be subject to further delays that might
lead to undue concessions. The most honourable way of
commemorating
the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations is to place all the power of Member States at the
service of the prompt independence of Namibia and in
favour of the abolition of racism and colonial exploitation,
which are fundamentally in opposition to the very essence
of the United Nations.

71. It is one of these developments which prompted the
call for the current meeting of the Council-specifically,
the announced intention by South Africa to establish an
“interim government” in Namibia. The United States has
made its view on this “interim government” absolutely
clear. Our statement on that subject, issued by the Department of State on 19 April 1985, declares that:

66. Mr. SORZANO (United States of Americ): It is
indeed a pleasure for my country and for me personally to
welcome you, Sir, the representative of an exemplary
democracy, to the Council. Trinidad and Tobago is a
shining example of how strong democratic institutions and
principles serve simultaneously to foster respect for human
rights and economic development. It is fitting that Trinidad and Tobago should honour the office of the presidency
by sending one of its most capable and eminent public
servants to guide the Council as it undertakes such important discussions. We note also that you bring to our proceedings a wealth of international experience iri economic
and political affairs which has distinguished your illustrious career.

“it has long been our position, and that of our contact
group partners, that any purported transfer of power
that might take place now or in future to bodies established in Namibia by South Africa is null and void. Such
institutions will have, as Secretary Shultz stated on 16
April, no standing. We have not recognized them in the
past and will not do so now. Our negotiating effort
continues with the Governments concerned. Thus, we
view the announcement regarding internal administrative arrangements inside Namibia as without effect on
these negotiations or the agreements already achieved
thereunder.” [See S/17119, annex.]
72. We were also pleased to join in the statement by the
Council on,3 May [S/17151] that was consistent with this
position. It is clear that no internal settlement can succeed
as long as the international community and the Council
stand together and oppose it. In this regard, it is important
that we speak with one voice, We must reaffirm that no
settlement outside the framework of resolution 435 (1978)
is acceptable. We must be prepared to reject any attempt by
any party to impose such a settlement.

67. We wish once again to pay tribute to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Thailand and to the representative of
Thailand for the excellent manner in which the Council
was led during the month of May.
68. We welcome this opportunity for the Council to meet
once again to review developments in Namibia. We can all
agree that the Council bears a unique responsibility for this
troubled Territory and for moving it rapidly to internationally accepted independence. This is a responsibility we in
the United States take seriously, and it is, moreover, a hope
we have laboured diligently over many years to bring to
fruition.

73. While the “interim government” has not been presented as an independent authority representing an internal settlement outside resolution 435 (1978), this is not
sufficient. The international community is entirely justified
in rejecting the creation of institutions which have no standing and can serve no conceivable purpose if the early
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) is intended.

69. Namibia is a subject on which there is a wide area of
international consensus. Foremost among these points of
agreement is the need to bring the Territory to independence in accordance with Council resolution 435 (1978).
The United States remains dedicated to this goal. We
remain actively involved in negotiations to create conditions to allow implementation of the United Nations plan
to proceed. We are heartened also by the reaffirmations of
support for resolution 435 (1978) that we have heard from

74. In our view, all Namibians should have the right to be
heard, to express their views freely, to form political parties. They also have the right, as provided in resolution 435
(1978), to stand for election to represent their people. By
the same token, however, none can be permitted tu Lake
power into their own hands or to proclaim themselves the
7

leaders of the Namibian people or the government of Namibia. Rather, it is for the people of Namibia to choose
their own leaders in free and fair elections under United
Nations supervision and control. This remains our goal.
75. In the absence of Namibian independence, the
scourge of war has continued to afflict the region. A major
goal of my Government in southern Africa has been to
reduce the level of violence, and especially cross-border
violence.
76. It was our goal of reducing violence and tension and
ending cross-border operations that led us over a year ago
to the negotiations that resulted in the Lusaka accord. That
agreement was intended to give new impetus to the negotiations to stop the violence between Angolan and South
African forces and to end the presence of outside forces in
southern Angola. Those objectives were essentially
achieved, and the violence that preceded the agreement
was followed by 12 months of peace and practical cooperation between Angola and South Africa. Cooperation continues between the military forces of South
Africa and Angola along the Namibian border itself, and
we are heartened also by South Africa’s announced withdrawal of its troops from the dams at Ruacana and
Calueque.
77. Nevertheless, the achievement has been marred by
the recent incident at Cabinda, which my Government has
condemned. Respect for the national sovereignty of all
States and the inviolability of international borders isa key
principIe in international relations. The United States cannot condone violations of this principle in whatever direction they may be launched or in the name of whatever goal
they be justified. In this regard, we deplore South African
violations of Angolan territorial integrity. Violent actions
across borders, be they military attacks, sabotage or terrorism against innocent civilians, can only serve to undermine
the confidence necessary for the settlement of disputes. In
this instance, they can only detract from the prospects of
the early ,independence of Namibia.
78. Constructive progress towards the resolution of disputes is the only way to bring about progress towards peace
in the region. There can be no military solutions. In our
view, the events of decent weeks-including the incident at
Cabinda-underscore
the importance of an early and comprehensive settlement which would address the root causes
of violence in the region.
79. A settlement, however, could be within our grasp,
given sufficient will by the parties most concerned. Prior to
the Council’s last meetings on Namibia, the SecretaryGeneral reported [S/15943, pam. 25’Jthat only one barrier
remained to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978),
namely, South Africa’s insistence on an agreement on the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. Since that
report was issued, we have seen substantial movement
towards the resolution of this final key issue. By late last
summer, it became Clear that we had moved beyond the
stage of rhetorical debate on the issues of “linkage’‘-that
is, whether Cuban troop withdrawal and Namibian independence should be related. Cuban lrobp withdrawal is-

as a practical matter, and with the support of all
concerned-being discussed in the context of implementation of resolution 435 (1978). In November 1984, the Angolan Government, for the first time, put a detailed and
concrete negotiation proposal on the table [S/16838]. This
major step forward was followed by a South African proposal [S/16839, annex]. The two proposals showed agreement between South Africa and Angola on a number of
broad principles.
80. My Government has been involved for the past several months in intensive discussions with the two parties
aimed at narrowing the remaining gap between their positions. We remain convinced that the gap can be bridged,
Even in the wake of the events of the past days, it is our
view that the door clearly remains open to a settlement and
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The United
States, for one, remains committed to pursuing the search
for peace for as long as there is prospect for success.The
only alternative would be to acquiesce in continued war
and suffering for the people of the region.
81. My Government notes that the Secretary-General’s
latest report [S/17242] confirms that the position of South
Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola remains unchanged, The SecretaryGeneral has urged all parties to make a new and determined effort to expedite implementation. My Government
will take this call by the Secretary-General seriously, as we
have in the past, and continue our efforts to bring the
parties together.
82. I should like to pay special tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his role in pursuing the task given to him in
resolution 435 (1978). We have admired his unstinting
efforts to bridge the gap separating the contending parties,
in order to bring about independence for Namibia under
that resolution. My Council has co-operated closely with
the Secretary-General in this effort and, in turn, has kept
him fully informed of our own efforts towards the same
end, SO that our actions are mutually reinforcing.
83. Enormous problems of confidence and trust must be
overcome to achieve a settlement. Each party must make
difficult decisions regarding its security, its relations with
its neighbours and its very future. These issues involve
important questions of political will. These are the real
decisions before the parties today as we debate the issue of
Namibia. The answers they give will determine the future
course of events not only in Namibia but throughout the
region. It is up to us, asmembers of the Security Council, to
give them every encouragement to make the right decisions, to abandon violence and to choose instead the path
of peace.
84. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
85. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) (interpretation
from
Arabic): My delegation wishes at the outset to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are confident that your wellknown ability as Minister .for Foreign Affairs of your

friendly country will assist the Council to complete its
tasks.

91. It is clear that the present situation is favourable to
South Africa, especially since we witness the Pretoria
rCgime pursuing its policies in spite of all the pressure
exerted upon it. That regime has obtained frequent guarantees and promises that the international community will
never impose sanctions against it. But is is not only from
such guarantees that the Pretoria rtgime gains its sense of
security; there have also been open, explicit declarations
based upon the policy of one of the parties playing a
fundamental role in the search for a settlement. I refer, of
course, to the United States policy of “constructive engagement” with the Pretoria rCgime.

86. We wish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor, our
friend the representative of Thailand, who displayed
remarkable talent during his presidency of the Council last
month.
87. We cannot but praise the Secretary-General for his
efforts in the preparation of his valuable report concerning
the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) on the question of Namibia.
88. Kuwait attaches the greatest importance to the Council’s current discussion of the situation in Namibia. Unfortunately, pressing engagements prevent the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of my country,
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber AI-Sabah, from participating in these deliberations. He has conferred upon me
the important responsibility of supporting the joint effort
undertaken by his colleagues in the Movement of NonAligned Countries on the basis of a specific mandate from
the Extraordinary
Ministerial
Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April of
this year. In its call for the convening of these meetings, the
Non-Aligned Movement stresses its grave concern about
the question of Namibia, its persistent quest for peace and
justice, and its pioneering role in defence of peoples under
occupation.

92.

That policy has strengthened and bolstered the aparfheid regime, rather than bringing pressure to bear on it, as

demanded by the situation. We are apprehensive about the
United States position and its linkage of the independence
of Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola. That linkage runs counter to the provisions of
resolution 435 (1978), as reiterated by the Council in its
resolution 539 (1983). That position will undoubtedly
assist South Africa to carry out its plan to impede talks on
the achievement of a settlement.
93. South Africa is exploiting that situation and that
position in order to continue its hegemony over Namibia
and extend it throughout the region. It is determined to
impose its own interpretation of the settlement plan
together with the form of government it believes should be
at the helm in Namibia. Moreover, it persists in interfering
in neighbouring countries in an attempt to define their
choice of allies and political systems. We vigorously condemn that policy. We believe that the States, that, through
their well-known policies, strengthen the racist rigime in
South Africa should have responded favourably to the
demands for pressure on that rtgime and, even more,
should have supported the efforts made to that end.

89. The Council’s deliberations are taking place not only
because of that concern; they also reflect and reaffirm the
responsibility of the international community for the Namibian people. The question of Namibia is a primary
responsibility of the United Nations. It is therefore the duty
of the international community to take a frank and clear
position on that question and its evolution.

94. Kuwait supports the Council resolution on the prohibition of the export and import of arms to and from South
Africa. It caIls for increasing the scope of that resolution SO
that it will include other sectors, particularly oil and investments. Furthermore, Kuwait calls for finding ways and
means to guarantee implementation of that resolution, and
it expressesits readiness to participate in all efforts in lhat
regard. I should like to recall that Kuwait, when it was a
member of the Council, attempted to produce a solution in
the matter of the arms embargo, and two years ago it
participated in defining the different aspects of the oil
embargo.

90. The situation in southern Africa is fraught with
threats to international peace and security. On the political
level, we are faced with a rtgime which has made prevarication and intransigence the cornerstone of its policy. It has
shown shrewdness in the delaying tactics it has employed
to evade a peaceful settlement of the issue. The policies of
the racist rigime are exemplified by its intention to install
on 17 June a so-called interim government in Namibia,
having invited parliamentarians from Western countries to
participate in the celebration of that sham. On the economic level, we are faced with a rigime which, strengthened by foreign economic interests, has persisted in
exploiting and depleting the natural resources of Namibia.
On the military level, we are faced with a rCgime which has
turned to policies of intimidation
and repression in
Namibia and aggression against neighbouring countries.
Among the aspects of those policies are the imposition by
the’aovernment of South Africa of compulsory conscription for all Namibian males, that Government’s military
manoeuvres inside Namibia, its infiltration into Angolan
territory notwithstanding its claim to have withdrawn its
forces from that area, and its attempts to carry out sabotage and destabilization in that country.

95. Because of the policies of South Africa, the Namibian
people have indeed made great sacrifices. Yet, despite its
grave difficulties, the Namibian people, through its sole,
legitimate representative, SWAPO, has proved its commitment to peaceful settlement, Kuwait, for its part, has consistently supported the noble stand taken by that
organisation and has endeavoured to strengthen its ties
and relations with it. These endeavours have been marked
by the recent visit of President Sam Nujoma to Kuwait,
following the New Delhi meeting last April.
9

peaceful ‘settlement of international disputes, the elimination of the threat or use of force in international relations,
and respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States. Thus, we condemn
colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism and all forms of domination, subjugation or discrimination based on differences
of sex, nationality, race, social class, religion or political
ideology.

96. We deem it necessary at this crucial stage for the
Council to establish firmly the full responsibility of the
United Nations for the process of Namibia’s accession to
independence. As the Council is duty-bound to implement
its resolutions, it should adopt a clear position towards the
defiance of its efforts in that regard; it should reaffirm its
resolutions so as to guarantee the full implementation of
resolution 435 (1978), the only basis for a peaceful settlement. The Council should reject any departure from the
provisions of that resolution and any attempts to undermine a peaceful settlement. The Council is called upon to
adopt effective measures to that effect. We hope that its
deliberations will yield results that will advance peaceful
efforts.

103. These meetings of the Council to consider the question of Namibia happen to coincide with the commemoration of important dates on the United Nations calendar of
decolonization, giving us an opportunity to give serious
thought to the role played by the United Nations in this
field, as well as to the prospects for the immediate future.

97. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the ViceMinister for Foreign Relations of Panama, Mr. Cabrera
Jovane. I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
98.

Mr. CABRERA

104. A period of 19 years has gone by since the General
Assembly adopted, by an overwhelming majority, resolution 2145 (XXI), which put an end to South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory of Namibia, and since the United
Nations assumed direct responsibility for administration
of the Territory and for the preparation of a programme
which would enable its people to exercise its right to self?letermination.

JOVANE (Panama) (interpretation

from Spanish): Sir, it is a pleasure for me to congratulate

you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of June. In the few days in which you have
presided over this important United Natidns organ you
have enhanced the well-deserved prestige you enjoy in the
international community. We are all the more pleased
since you are a representative of Trinidad and Tobago, an
outstanding country of our own region, with which Panama has indissoluble geographic, ethnic, historical and
cultural ties.

105. Today is the seventeenth anniversary of the adoption by the,General Assembly of resolution 2372 (XXII),
which gave the Security Council the responsibility of
adopting urgent measures under the Charter to ensure “the
immediate removal of the South African presence from
Namibia and to secure for Namibia its independence in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2145
(XXI)-‘.

99. I should like to congratulate the representative of
Thailand on the able and dis‘tinguished manner in which he
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month.

106. My country has no doubt that sufficient time has
elapsed and that we have considered all the possible means
for an orderly and peaceful transition of Namibia to independent life within a united and integrated territory. The
international community has exceeded all the acceptable
bounds of patience on this issue, while the Namibian
people continue to pay a j’ery high price in bloodshed and
sacrifice, for the sole reason that they aspire to live in peace
and freedom in an independent and democratic Namibia.

100. The question of Namibia has a special place among
the main concerns in Panama’s foreign policy. This is so
because the question of Namibia embodies fundamental
principles which the international community has been
establishing in its unceasing efforts to ensure a world of
peace, freedom and social justice.
101. For that reason, we have unreservedly supported
the decision by the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries to call for these urgent meetings of the Council;
we feel particularly honoured that the Bureau authorized
Panama, together with 17 other members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries to participate in this debate. We
do so deeply convinced of the seriousness of the situation
that has brought us here and profoundly alarmed at the
intensification of unlawful acts by the racist Government
of South Africa, which, in repeated demonstrations of its
open defiance of the overwhelming will of the international
community, persists in placing new obstacles in the path of
Namibia’s attainment of independence.

107. In spite of the present serious situation, the South
African Gove-nment has sought to take further dangerous
steps, which not only obstruct the implementation of the
categorical decisions of the Council with regard to Namibia but also openly contravene resolutions 435 (1978)
and 439 (1978) and relevant decisions of the General
Assembly, thus seriously endangering international peace
and security.
108. The South African rkgime’s decision to establish a
so-called interim government in Namibia, in flagrant disregard of provisions of the Council on this matter, constitutes a further defiance of the express will of the
community of nations, defiance to which the Council
should respond with exemplary determination.

102. Panama, a full-fledged member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, has affirmed its recognition of the
principles and norms of international law and therefore
bases its international policy on those principles and, in
particular, on the legal equality of States, regardless of size
or might, the right of peoples to self-determination, the

109. Panama associates itself with the unanimous rejection by the international community of this new manoeuvre of the racist regime and expresses its support for the
10

his contribution is of the greatest importance in promoting
the full implementation of resolution 435 (1978) without
delay or conditions and without any linkage to questions
unrelated to those explicity set out by the Security Council.

Final Document adopted by the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi
from 19 to 21 April of this year [S/I7184 and Corr.1,
annex], a meeting whose decisions have been eloquently
presented to the Council by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of India, Mr. Khurshed Alam Khan [2583ra!
meeting].

117. The time has come to move from words to deeds.
There is an urgent need for all States Members to act in
accordance with the resolutions and decisions of the Security Council and the General Assembly with regard to
Namibia and take the necessary measures to isolate the
racist rkgime of South Africa and bring about Namibia’s
independence without delay. However, we wish to point
out that, for the accomplishment of this task, it is up to the
Council to shoulder with determination its prime responsibility to deal with situations that, as is the casewith the one
we are considering, seriously threaten both regional and
international peace and security.

110. Today, as in the past, it is right to stress the special
responsibility of the United Nations with respect to the
people and Territory of Namibia, as has been recognized
by the Council in various resolutions. Given this indisputable fact, South Africa’s intransigence makes it more urgent
than ever for the United Nations effectively to shoulder its
responsibility and act with determination in accordance
with the Charter so that the people of Namibia may attain
genuine, internationally
recognized independence in a
united Namibia, with complete territorial integrity, a Namibia that includes the Caprivi Strip, Walvis Bay and the
Penguin Islands and other offshore islands.

118. This year, as we commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Magna Carta of decolonization, the members of
the Council, and in particular its permanent members, bear
the heavy responsibility of proving worthy of the great
trust that mankind, represented by the States Members,
has placed in them.

111. That is why Panama is appearing before the Council
to add its voice to the demands of the community ,of
nations for an immediate end to the Pretoria rtgime’s
illegal occupation of Namibia and for the adoption, once
and for all, of urgent measures to implement, without
further delay or pre-conditions, the United Nations plan
for Namibia, as endorsed in Council resolution 435 (1978).

119. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Poland. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

112. In that respect, my country categorically rejects any
attempt by the South African rCgime to impose internal,
unilateral settlements of the Namibian question, and we
firmly support the statement made by the President of the
Council on 3 May 1985, on behalf of al1 its members
[S/17151], that any unilateral action by South Africa leading towards an internal settlement outside of resolution
435 (1978) is unacceptable and that the establishment of
the so-called interim government in Namibia is null and
void.

120. Mr. NOWAK (Poland): I should like to congratulate you, Sir, the repreintative of Trinidad and Tobago,
on your assumption-of the presidency of the Council for
the month of June and to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the representative of Thailand, for the efficient manner in which he conducted the Council’s business
last month.

1f3. My delegation reaffirms its unceasing solidarity
with SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the
people of Namibia, and we are happy to greet its President,
Sam Nujoma, whose cause we regard as our own.

121. Poland, as one of the co-founders of the United
Nations and a member of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until its independence, is deeply concerned about Namibia, as well as about the situation throughout the region.
That is why Poland welcomed the convening of these
urgent meeting of the Security Council.

114. We also reiterate our solidarity with thC front-line
States, suffering systematic aggression by the Pretoria
rbgime, and express to them our appreciation of the valuable contribution they are making to the struggle for the
final elimination of colonialism in southern Africa and for
the eradication of apartheid.

122. The high-level representation of some States
members of the Council and of the States that have asked
to be allowed to express their views emphasizes the gravity
of the situation. That gravity stems from tensions and
insecurity created by South Africa’s policies, its armed
aggression against neighbouring States, its illegal occupation of Namibia and its defiance of the United Nations and,
indeed, of the international community as a whole.

115. My country reaffirms its complete support for the
United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until its independence,
and we express our appreciation of, and support for, the
self-sacrificing w&-k done by the Council to promote the
prompt independence of Namibia.

123. The statements made by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, as well as those by Mr.
Noel Sinclair, Acting President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, and Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of

116. The Secretary-General deserv’esour warmest tribute
for his indefatigable perseverance and exemplary tenacity
in the cause of Namibia’s independence. We beliive that
11

feel happy that the presidency is in the hands of a representative of a country with which we are bound by the affinity
of belonging to the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and to the Commonwealth. Your vast experience and
renowned diplomatic skills give us the assurance that
under your presidency the Council will be able to live up to
its important responsibilities in once again considering the
situation in Namibia and doing justice to its people.

SWAPO, are a sharp reminder of the plight of the Namibian people,
124. These meetings are also a reminder that special
responsibility rests with the Security Council to act without
further delay. The whole complex of United Nations decisions, including, first, Council resolution 435 (1978),
should show the ways and means to ensure the transition of
Namibia from South African rule to statehood, in coniunction with United Nations-supervised elections.

133. I should also like to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of Thailand, for the exemplary manner in which he conducted the business of the
Council last month.

125. Guided by those decisions and by the principles of
its own foreign policy, Poland rejects “linkage”, “parallelism” or a so-called internal settlement, as yet another of
South Africa’s and its collaborators’ games aimed at prolonging the colonial occupation of Namibia.

134. Twenty-five years have passed since the General
Assembly adopted the epoch-making resolution 15 14
(XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

126. My Government fully shares the indignation of th,
United Nations Council for Namibia and supports its communique, adopted at Vienna on 5 June, regarding Pretoria’s plan to install a puppet administration in Namibia

135. Forty years have passed since the adoption of the
Charter of the United Nations, which created an international organization whose primary purpose is to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to
safeguard fundamental freedoms.

[see S/l 7262, annex].

127. In that connection, it is our opinion that the Security
Council should fully assume its responsibility, condemn
such delaying manoeuvres and enforce implementation o[
its own resolutions without modification or qualification.
If South Africa continues to show no willingness to cooperate and continues its cynical disregard for those decisions and opinions of the United Nations, the non-aligned
countries and the Organization of African Unity, the Council should urgently and with determination undertake
more concrete measures envisaged under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations.

136. For 100 years the people of Namibia have been
struggling for the realization of their inalienable right to
self-determination and national independence and for the
abolishment of the abhorrent yoke of colonialism and the
degrading system of apartheid imposed upon them by the
Pretoria regime.
137. Meeting here on the anniversaries of such important
historical developments, and considering that mankind is
on the threshold of the twenty-first century, the obligation
and responsibility placed on our shoulders to assist the
people of Namibia in their efforts to attain their precious
goal of freedom and national independence are both
immense and pressing.

128. The intransigence of the Pretoria regime, and its
political manipulations together with some of its supporters, should be curbed; Council resolution 418 (1977),
which call< for an c;ms embargo against South Africa,
should be strengthened; Decree No. 1’ of the United
Nations Council for Namibia should be strictly enforced.
The statement by South Africa’s representative on 10 June
before this Council [2583rd meeting], a statement characterized by arrogance and cynicism, convinced us only of
the urgency of those steps and their utmost importance.

138. The case of Namibia is a clear case of colonialism,
racism and foreign occupation and oppression, which are
allowed to persist in flagrant violation of the fundamental
rights of the Namibian people and in defiance of the very
authority of the United Nations. The Organization faces
serious responsibilities, for Namibia is the only Territory
placed under its direct administering authority. Yet the
resultant stalemate in the situation in Namibia obviously
raises the question of the credibility of the United Nations
because of the inability of the Organization to give effect to
the resolutions of its principal organs and because of the
compelling need to take the measures expressly provided
for in the Charter, thus giving substance and validity to the
Organization.

129. We do not believe that a durable peace can be
achieved until all the remnants of colonialism and the
inhuman system of apartheid are removed and the illegal
occupation of Namibia ends.
130. It is our sincere hope and our earnest expectationas it is the hope of the Namibian people and their authentic
representative, SWAPO-that
these meetings of the Council will contribute to that cause.

139. If South Africa, or any other aggressor or occupying
Power which, through its acts, threatens international
peace and security, is allowed arrogantly and with disdain
to flout the repeated calls of the international community,
and if the United Nations cannot ensure the implementation of its own decisions, the Organization cannot function
effectively, and its very concept, or even its very existence,
is in jeopardy,

13 1. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cyprus. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
132. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): At the outset I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of June, We
12

140. Non-implementation
of the resolutions of the
United Nations is the essence of the Namibian situation
and other similar cases. It is the root cause of the perpetuation of all unsolved and proliferating international problems. The forces of aggression and injustice are allowed to
prevail over the principles of freedom and justice, thus
adding to the escalation of already explosive situations,
with unforeseen consequences, to the detriment of international peace and security. It is therefore not resolutions
alone, however masterfully drafted, that can bring the
solution of problems closer and lead to the achievement of
desired goals; it is their effective implementation that is of
paramount importance.

upon the Namibian people and the declaration of the
northern region of Namibia as a “security zone”, and we
call for the immediate and unconditional
retease of all
Namibian political prisoners held by the South Africans in
prisons and concentration camps.
14’1. The Government of Cyprus, which is an active
member of the United Nations Council for Namibia, has
consistently and fervently supported the liberationstruggle
of the Namibian people, led by their sole authentic representative, SWAPO, for independence in a united Namibia.
We have extended all possible support in the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and in the United Nations. We
remain steadfastly committed to the goal of an independent, united Namibia, including Walvis Bay, the Penguin
Islands, and other offshore islands. We hold firmly to the
view that this goal should be achieved in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the Organization. It is rhe duty of all of us to
redouble our efforts to help the Namibian people in realizing their goals. It is the duty of the five members of the
Western contact group to see that their initiative in favour
of a genuine political solution in Namibia is carried out to
its logical conclusion.

141. That is why my delegation strongly holds the view
that Council resolution 435 (197Q which reflects the international consensus on this issue and provides the solid
basis for a peaceful solution to the problem, should be
implemented immediately. To this end, we join our voice
with the voices of previous speakers in appealing to the
Secretary-General to convene a meeting of the parties
concerned-SWAP0
and South Africa--to finalize details
in connection with the active implementation of that
resolution.

148. Cyprus, for its part, will continue to join the intensified efforts of the international community until Namibia
becomes truly independent on the basis of resolution 435
(1978), which provides the only acceptable solution of the
Namibian problem.

142. On the occasion of SWAPO’s twenty-fifth anniversary, Cyprus would like to reiterate its brotherly solidarity
with and support for SWAP0 and its leadership and for
the heroic people of Namibia struggling valiantly for their
liberation from the oppression of the colonial Power, the
racist South African rCgime.

149. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

143. The Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi last April, evaluated
the situation in and relating to Namibia and considered
ways by which the non-aligned countries could further
intensify their solidarity with and assistance to SWAP0
and the Namibian people. We endorse the Programme of
Action it adopted [see S/17184 and Corr.1, annex].

150. Mr. VONGSAY (Lao People’s Democratic Republic) (interpreiation from French): The Laotian delegation
would like to extend to you, Sir, its warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
June. We are sure that, under the guidance of such a
distinguished representative of a peace-loving and justiceloving country whose sympathy for the cause of decolonization is so well known, the work of the Council will yield
the results for which we all hope. My delegation would also
like to express its gratitude to the Council for having
granted its request to participate in the debate on this
important question, entitled “The situation in Namibia”.

144. That important meeting, and the Extraordinary Plenary Meetings of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
held at Vienna last week, meetings which are taking place
in the context of the intensification of our endeavours to
achieve speedy implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
aimed at the achievement of independence for Ihe Territory, coincide with the decision of the South African apartheid rtgime to establish a so-called Multi-Party Conference
and an interim government, against the will of the Namibian people.

151. We should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Thailand, for the remarkable
manner in which he guided the proceedings of the Council
last month.

145. We once again reject as null and void any such
attempts by the South African rigime to circumvent the
United Nations plan for the immediate independence of
Namibia. In a rare show of unity, the international community adopted that plan of action as providing the only
acceptable solution to the problem of Namibia. Responsibility for its non-implementation
rests with the South African rigime.

152. Peoples and Governments throughout the world
that cherish peace, freedom and justice have been following with concern and relief the debate now being held in the
Council on the tragic situation in Namibia and in the whole
of southern Africa because of the resurgence of acts of
intimidation,
repression, destabilization
and aggression
being perpetrated by the illegal and racist Pretoria rtgime.
These peoples and Governments,
together with the
oppressed peoples of South Africa and occupied Namibia,
have finally realized, with indignation and bitterness, that

146. At the same time, we reject the imposition by the
occupation rtgime of South Africa of military conscription
13

the international community, the United Nations and, particularly, the Council, have been the dupes of a series of
fraudulent moves carried out by the colonial and racist
Pretoria rtgime. That diabolical rtgime has not only
deIayed the implementation of the United Nations plan for
true independence for Namibia, as approved by Council
resolution 435 (1978), it has totally undermined that plan,
one which nevertheless, in the view of the international
community and the United Nations, constitutes the only
valid and acceptable basis for a peaceful settlement of the
Namibian problem.

Territory which it continues to occupy illegally, in flagrant
violation of the relevant resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations and the International Court of Justice.
However, verbal condemnation, no matter how energetic,
cannot suffice in this case. Only concerted, decisive and
binding measuies can, in our view, act as a deterrent to the
guilty party.
158. In the past few months the international community
has witnessed an escalation of tension and violence in
South Africa and Namibia, and throughout southern
Africa, because of a whole series of acts of intimidation,
repression, destabilization and aggression committed by
the racist and colonial regime of Pretoria against the
oppressed masses in those countries as well as independent
States of the area.

153. One morefait accompli-or, rather, a further criminal act-has just been committed by Pretoria against the
oppressed people of Namibia and SWAPO, their sole
authentic representative, whose President, Mr. Sam
Nujoma, made a particularly moving statement before the
Council last Monday [2583rd meeting].

159. It is clear, as was stated here by the President of
SWAPO, that the policy of State terrorism at present being
pursued so frenetically by the illegal racist Pretoria rtgime
is aimed ultimately not only at perpetuating its illegal
occupation of Namibia and plundering with impunity the
vast human and natural resources of that Territory, but
also at bantustanizing it.

154. Several speakers, including the acting President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until its independence,
have already told the Council that the formal establishment of a puppet administration is scheduled for 17 June in
the Namibian capital. We know that everyone, including
the United States and other friends and allies of the criminal Pretoria rtgime, have been condemning and denouncing that illegal act and those responsible for it. However,
we must not allow ourselves to be lulled by soft words and
insincere professions of faith. We must be in a position and
have the courage to denounce and condemn both the
author of that criminal act and its most notorious accomplices and paymasters.

160. It is tragic and immoral that the United States,
certain Western military-industrial Powers and the Zionist
rtgime should continue to support that diabolical rCgime
openly, covertly or through transnational corporations.
That explains the intransigence and persistence with which
the apartheid rCgime has made the implementation of the
United Nations plan for Namibia’s independence dependent on withdrawal from Angola of the internationalist
Cuban contingent.

155. Like the President of SWAP0 and other speakers
here, the Laotian Government unreservedly condemns the
policy of “constructive engagement” with aparrheidsouth
Africa that has been pursued for almost five years by the
United States Government. It is precisely that policy of
“destructive engagement”-to
use the words of President
Nujoma-that
has consolidated the system of apartheid
and encouraged Pretoria to adopt an attitude of arrogance,
defiance and intransigence towards the entire international
community. It is that policy of destructive engagement and
appeasement that has incited and encouraged the racist
Pretoria rtgime to trample underfoot with impunity a considerable number of resolutions and decisions on the subject adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council, including resolution 435 (1978), which, as we
know, endorses the United Nations plan for the true independence of Namibia.

161. We know that the Government of Angola, the international community and the Council have on more than
one occasion categorically repudiated this pre-condition
known as “linkage”, which is entirely extraneous to the
subject with which we are concerned.
162. The international community is duty-bound to
demand :&hat Pretoria withdraw immediately and unconditionally its forces of occupation and aggression from southern Africa. It was with profound indignation that the
international community learned that the representative of
the illegal racist Pretoria rkgime-as is made clear in the
further report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439
(1978) concerning the question of Namibia [S/172&l--made so bold as to tell the Secretary-General, on 26 April
1985, a pack of lies when informing him that the process of
disengagement of the South African forces of aggression
from southern Angola had been completed.

156. Pretoria’s reprehensible actions thus seriously
weaken the authority and the moral and political credibility of the United Nations, and particularly of its supreme
organ, the Security Council, because the question of Namibia falls especially within the competence and direct
responsibility of the Organization.

163. Those lies were conclusively exposed by the message
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola [S/17246,
annex], describing the act of aggression and sabotage committed on 21 May by South African “commandos” in the
Malongo region, province of Cabinda. Those “commandos” were, in fact, taken prisoner by the people’s liberation
forces of Angola.

157, Everyone was pleased when, on 3 May of this year,
the Council issued a statement [S/171.51] condemning and
rejecting as null and void the decision taken by Pretoria on
18 April to set up a puppet administration in Namibia, a
14

164. That is the true face of the racist South African
rigime, a rtgime which, as we have seen, an imperialist,
expansion coalition that includes international reactionaries continues to support. In this regard, a recent report
from Agence France Pressr, drawing on South African
sources in Johannesburg, informed u; that the leaders of
the Angolan, Nicaraguan, Afghan, Laotian and Khmer
Pol Pot criminal and counter-revolutionary organizations
were to meet in the main base of UNITA [UniZEo National
para a IndependEncia Total de Angola], near the Namibian frontier.

liberation struggle against colonialist and imperialist
aggression and hegemonistic expansionism, would like
to reaffirm its unswerving support for the valiant and
tenacious struggle now being waged by the fraternal
Namibian people, under the resolute and far-sighted
leadership of SWAPO, to recover its inalienable rights
to freedom, self-determination and independence.
“We should also like to reaffirm our unswerving support and sympathy for the Governments and the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and the other front-line
States, whose contribution to the Namibian cause has
been so valuable.”

165. That news should not surprise us because it is public
knowledge that these imperialists, expansionists, racists,
Zionists and international reactionary forces still continue
to pursue a belligerent policy of provocation, intervention,
all forms of sabotage, oppression, repression and direct
aggression against independent, sovereign countries and
peoples and, indeed, the oppressed peoples and their
national liberation movements in Asia, Africa and Latin
America.

170. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
171. Mr. WIJEWARDANE
(Sri Lanka): I should like at
the outset to thank you, Sir, and the members of the
Council for giving me this opportunity to take part in the
debate. I would also like to take this opportunity warmly to
congratulate you on your assumption of the high office of
the President of the Council for the month of June.

166. These diabolical forces still continue to make use of
traitors and counter-revolutionaries in the countries concerned, with the support and criminal complicity of the,
extreme right and expansionist circles in certain neighbouring countries. The case of my own country is a good
example of that. We ourselves were victims of the same
manoeuvres used against Namibia and the front-line States
in southern Africa.

172. I wish also to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of Thailand, for guiding the Council’s defiberations with skill and efficiency last month.
173. It was the intention of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sri Lanka, Mr. Hameed, to attend this meeting
of the Council. Regrettably, pressing engagements at home
have prevented his being here. He has requested me to
make the following statement on his behalf:

167. To come back to the problem of Namibia, the international community, and in particular the Security Council, which has primary responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations to preserve and promote international
peace and security, should take the necessary measures to
ensure the implementation of its own decisions and, in the
case of recalcitrance, obstruction or continued defiance by
the illegal racist Pretoria rCgime, to impose comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against it, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter.

“The decision to convene these meetings of the Council to consider the situation in Namibia is most timely
and necessary. Although Council resolution 435 (1978)
endorses a comprehensive plan to enable the people of
Namibia to exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence, seven frustrating
years have passed since that resolution offered so much
hope.

168. Furthermore, it should be pointed out that, wishing
to accelerate the process of the accession to genuine independence by the oppressed people of Namibia, in keeping
with the spirit and the letter of Council resolution 435
(1978), the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, which was held from 19 to 21 April 1985
at New Delhi and in which my country participated,
adopted a Declaration and a Programme of Action of
great importance [S/I 7184 and Corr. I, annex].

“Sri Lanka believes in the continued validity of resolution 435 (1978) as the only blueprint for Namibian
independence, and also believes that it should be implemented unaltered and without further delay. Extraneous conditions put forward, including the so-called
linkage between Namibian independence and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, must be rejected,
since they help to delay the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

169. My delegation hopes that the Council, which has
been convened at the express request of that meeting, will
fully take account of the judicious recommendations contained in those documents. By way of conclusion I shall,
with the Council’s permission, quote the following passage
from the statement made at the New Delhi meeting by the
head of our delegation:

“The decision of South Africa to establish an interim
government in Namibia can only obstruct and complicate the process towards independence.

“The Lao people, having suffered a long and painful
colonial past and knowing full well the cost ofa national

“Sri Lanka fully supports the efforts of the United
Nations, particularly those of the Secretary-General,

“Sri Lanka recognizes SWAP0 as the sole luthenlic
representative of the Namibian people.

15

and of the non-aligned group and the Organization of
African Unity for a speedy implementation of resolution 435 (1978) so that the people of Namibia can exercise their right to self-determination and independence.
and take their long overdue place among the free
nations of the world.

the United Nations taken in accordance with the Charter, to the contrary.” [See S/17152, annex, appendix I.]
178. This statement confirms the stubborn and intransigent attitude of South Africa and its callous disregard of
innumerable Security Council and General Assemblyresolutions, including Council resolution 435 (1978), which
reaffirms the legal responsibility of the United Nations for
Namibia and reiterates that its objective is the withdrawal
of South Africa’s illegal administration of Namibia and the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia with the assistance of the United Nations, in accordance with resolution
385 (1976)., In addition to these resolutions, there is the
insirtent demand of the international community, both
governmental end non-governmental, and the persuasions
of the contact group.

“I wish the deliberations of the Council all success.”
174. Much has been said in the Security Council, the
General Assembly and various other forums by those who
are concerned with the fate of Namibia and the struggle of
the valiant people of that country. The time is now opportune for the Council to assume its internationally recognizeu responsibility over that coumry and act swiftly in a
decisive manner. It will be supported in this endeavour by
the non-aligned group, the OAU and the overwhelming
majority of the international community.

179. The South African representative devoted a major
portion of his statement made on 10 June to Angola rather
than Namibia. He said that: “It is significant that participants in this debate this afternoon should have referred to
developments in Angola in conjunction with the question
of South West Africa” [2583rd meeting, para. 2051.

175. The best means of achieving independence for Namibia lies in the implementation of resolution 435 (1978),
which endorses a detailed plan for this process. We recognize the role played by the contact group in negotiating this
resolution and securing the agreement of all parties for its
implementation when it was adopted in 1978. The people
of Namibia have waited with the international community
for the past seven years for the implementation of this
resolution, but as of now there has in fact been no progress
towards the goal of Namibian independence. It is an unfortunate fact that, apart from resolution 435 (1978), the
international community has not donemuch to press home
its political will to achieve the goal of Namibian independence. It is imperative at this stage for the Council to take
decisive action for the following reasons.

180. What he failed to mention, however, was the fact
that the overwhelming majority who had spoken on the
question of Namibia in the past and during the current
meetings of the Council have done so only to reject categorically the concept of linkage between the independence of
Namibia, which is an issue of decolonization, and a decision taken by a sovereign country, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, I should like to reiterate the
position of my Government that Sri Lanka totally rejects
the linkage of extraneous issues to the independence of
Namibia. If Angola was dragged into the discussion on the
question of Namibia, it was done by those elements that
saw an advantage to such a linkage. South Africa did not
refer to the presence of foreigq troops when accepting,
resolution 435 (1978).

176. During the last 40 years the United Nations has been
preoccupied with Namibia without achieving any tangible
result. The international community had every reason to
be proud of resolution 435 (!978). Even South Africa,
which stubbornly maintains its stranglehold on Namibia,
went on record that resolution 435 (1978) was acceptable to
it. What remained to be done after the adoption of that
resolution was its implementation,
which would have
granted independence to ‘the Territory under the plan
endorsed in the resolution.

181. In his statement, the South African representative
declared that South Africa “will continue to search for a
reasonable formula for genuine Cuban withdrawal from
Angola. If a firm agreement can be reached in this regard, it
will carry out its undertaking to implement the international settlement plan.” [Ibid., para. 215.1

177. Adding .to the sense of urgency is South Africa’s
plan, through the involvement of the Multi-Party Conference, to install a so-called interim government in Namibia
on 17 June. The time is indeed opportune for the Council
to take firm and positive steps to implement resolution 435
(1978). As far as the international community is concerned,
the years of waiting are running out, andit now looks to the
Security Council to assume its responsibility. This is all the
more important in view of the position taken by South
Africa in its Aid-m&nloire of 18 April 1985, which states
that:

182. It is time for the Council to remind South Africa of
resolution 264 (1969), which stated that the presence of
South Africa in Namibia was illegal and called upon South
Africa to withdraw immediately from Namibia. That was
many years before Angola became independent and Cuba
troops set foot in Angola.
183. It is a well-known fact that Namibia is endowed with
vast mineral resources and that over the years these resources h&e been systematically exploited for the benefit of the
few, depriving the indigenous people of Namibia of their
inheritance. This exploitation runs on classic colonial lines,
and not content with exploitation of natural resources,
there is now a definitive attempt to exploit the human
resources of that unfortunate country.

“The South African Government is well aware of its
responsibilities in South West Africa. They derive from
its position that its presence and administration in the
Territory are legal. There is no legally binding decision
of the International Court of Justice, nor any decision of
16

184. What we require from the Council at this stage is a
plan that will grant independence to Namibia within a
short period of time. To agree to anything less will only
encourage South Africa to conti.,ue its intransigence, thus
delaying the independence of Namibia, which will result in
the destabilization of the entire region, with possible consequences for international peace and security.

with its neighbours will not be possible until Pretoria
decides to withdraw from Namibia and remove the last
vestiges of apartheidfrom South Africa.
The meetingroseat 6p.m.

NO’SE

185. The representative of South Africa indicated in his
statement: the desire of his country to resolve problems
concerning the region through peaceful means rather than
resort to violence. Peace that South Africa claims to seek

I Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27
September 1974 (Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-f;Vth
Session. Special Supplement No. 24 (A/35/24), vol. I, annex II).

17
