A /67/PV.76

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

76th plenary meeting

Friday, 10 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Momen
(Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/67/693/Add.12)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/67/693/Add.12, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/67/693/Add.11, Vanuatu has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Request for the inclusion of an additional item in
the agenda of the sixty-seventh session (A/67/234)
The Acting President: In his note contained in
document A/67/234, the Secretary-General requests,
pursuant to rule 15 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, the inclusion in the agenda of the

sixty-seventh session of an additional item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali”.
Owing to the nature of the item, unless there is
an objection, may I take it that the General Assembly
agrees to waive the relevant provision of rule 40 of the
rules of procedure, which would require a meeting of
the General Committee on the question of the inclusion
of this additional item in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that the General
Assembly, on the proposal of the Secretary-General,
wishes to include in the agenda of the current session
an additional item entitled “Financing of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali”, under heading I, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Owing to the nature of the
item, the Secretary-General also requests that it be
allocated to the Fifth Committee. May I take it that it
is the wish of the Assembly to allocate this item to the
Fifth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that this additional item becomes agenda item
171 in the agenda of the current session.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-32966 (E)

*1332966*

A/67/PV.76

Agenda item 110 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(a) Election of seven members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination
Note by the Secretary-General
(A/67/125/Rev.1/Add.2)
The Acting President: Pursuant to decision 42/450
of 17 December 1987 and upon nomination by the
Economic and Social Council, the Assembly elects
the members of the Committee for Programme and
Coordination.
Members will recall that at its 34th plenary meeting,
held on 12 November 2012, and its 56th plenary meeting,
held on 14 December 2012, the General Assembly
elected six members to the Committee for a three-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2013.
Members will also recall that by its decision
2012/201 C of 26 November 2012, the Economic
and Social Council decided to further postpone the
nomination of one member from the Western European
and other States for a term beginning on 1 January 2013
and expiring on 31 December 2015, and four members,
also from the Western European and other States, for
terms beginning on the date of election and expiring on
31 December 2014.
In that connection, the Assembly has before it a
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/67/125/Rev.1/Add.2. As indicated in that document,
by its decision 2013/201 C of May 2013, the Economic
and Social Council nominated the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America to fill outstanding vacancies in the
Committee for a term beginning on the date of the
election and expiring on 31 December 2014.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of
procedure, all elections should be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations. However, I should
like to recall paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby
the practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for
elections to subsidiary organs when the number of
candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.

2

In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I therefore take it that
the Assembly wishes to declare the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America elected as members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination for a term beginning
on 10 May 2013 and expiring on 31 December 2014?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 110.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee under
agenda items 129, 130 and 146.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee”.
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth

13-32966

A/67/PV.76

Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance. This means that where recorded
votes were taken, we will do the same. I should also
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in
the Committee.
Agenda item 129 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/673/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision, entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
decision without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 67/552 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
129.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/677/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/254 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
130.

Agenda item 146
Administrative and budgetary aspects of
the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/858)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report.
Before proceeding to the consideration of the
draft resolution, I should like to inform members that
the statement by the Chair of the Fifth Committee, as
delivered at the Committee’s 27th formal meeting, as
well as the supplementary information provided by the
Under-Secretary General for Field Support, as reflected
in the official records of the Fifth Committee, on the
implementation of paragraphs 9 through 12 of the draft
resolution form part of the decision.
The statement delivered by the Chair of the Fifth
Committee reads as follows:
“I would like to state that it is the General
Assembly’s understanding that the notion of
‘existing rotation arrangements’ included in
paragraph 5 of the draft resolution includes
financial arrangements.
“Furthermore, it is the General Assembly’s
understanding that in cases where the SecretaryGeneral determines that operational circumstances
and requirements demand rotation other than every
12 months, in accordance with paragraph 108 (b) of
the Senior Advisory Group report, the determined
rotation will be at the expense of the United Nations.
“Finally, it is also the understanding of the
General Assembly that the provisions of paragraph
108 of the report of the Senior Advisory Group,
including the continuation of the supplementary
payment equal to 6.75 per cent of the base rate as
stated therein, will apply from 1 April 2013, subject
to the implementation provisions of the draft
resolution.”
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Report of the Senior Advisory
Group established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 65/289 to consider rates of reimbursement to
troop-contributing countries and other related issues”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution

13-329663

A/67/PV.76

without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/261).

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
146.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

4

13-32966
