S/PV.7228

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7228th meeting

Monday, 28 July 2014, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana/Mr. Nduhungirehe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The United Nations and regional partnerships and its evolution
Letter dated 3 July 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/478)

14-48638 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1448638*

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

a testament to the importance of our combined efforts
to keep and build peace.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The United Nations and regional partnership
and its evolution
Letter dated 3 July 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/478)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Brazil, Egypt, Estonia,
Fiji, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Malawi, Malaysia, Morocco, New
Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Romania, Spain,
Sweden, Thailand, Turkey and Zimbabwe to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the following individuals to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Maciej
Popowski, Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service; His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; and Ms. Erini Lemos-Maniati,
NATO Senior Civilian Liaison Officer to the United
Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/478, which contains the text of a letter
dated 3 July 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Rwanda for convening this discussion on regional
partnerships and United Nations peacekeeping,
especially in Africa. This is the second debate on
this subject this year (see S/PV.7196). Such active
engagement and such high-level representation by the
African Union (AU) and the European Union (EU) are

2/65

28/07/2014

We have seen how the effectiveness of the AU
and and the United Nations can be enhanced when we
coordinate and complement our efforts. This partnership
has also benefitted from the European Union’s growing
involvement in crisis management and post-conflict
stabilization. From Operation Artemis in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2003 to this
year’s deployment of the European Union Force in the
Central African African Republic, the United Nations
and the EU have increased their strategic partnership.
By engaging early during the planning phase, we have
achieved an effective division of labour — for example,
in the areas of police and security sector reform.
Mali offers another important example of
effective cooperation. Our partnership with the
EU and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) allowed for the rapid deployment
of military and police elements under the Africanled International Support Mission in Mali, which
was subsequently re-hatted under the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. That cooperation led to the signing of the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement in June 2013
under the mediation of Burkina Faso on behalf of
Economic Community of West African States.
Separately, the European Union has launched a
training mission to build the capacity of the Malian
armed forces. We have continued to work closely with
the European Union, which is launching a new mission
in Mali to build the capacity of law enforcement
institutions, as well as with the African Union Mission
for Mali and the Sahel on the regional dimensions of
the conflict. We are also working with the AU and
ECOWAS, along with Algeria and other regional
actors, in support of the ongoing political process. I
congratulate the Malian parties on the adoption of a
consensual road map for the inter-Malian negotiations
in the past week. I remain, however, deeply concerned
about instability in the north. I call upon all parties to
cease hostilities and cooperate with the joint security
commission led by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations has been collaborating with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
the AU, the EU and other key partners. The United

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the African-led International Support Mission to
the Central African Republic (MISCA) are working
hand-in-hand to prepare for a transfer of authority on
15 September. An international mediation team has
recently been formed to support the political process,
including ECCAS, the United Nations and the AU.
I welcome the agreement reached on 23 July under
the leadership of President Sassou Nguesso of the
Republic of the Congo with the support of the AU,
ECCAS and my Special Representatives to the Central
African Republic and to Central Africa. That is an
essential first step in ensuring durable peace, respect
for human rights, the protection of civilians and the
rule of law.
In South Sudan, our peacekeeping mission, namely,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, has been
working closely with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) since the outbreak of the crisis
in December. However, despite our efforts, the Council
heard on Wednesday, 23 July, that the situation is the
most rapidly deteriorating humanitarian crisis in the
world today, worse even than that in the Central African
Republic and Syria. I repeat my call to the leaders
on both sides to abide by the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement signed on 23 January.
In Darfur, despite political and logistical challenges,
the United Nations and the AU will continue to intensify
their efforts to support the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur so that it can
discharge its mandated tasks. In addition, the United
Nations, the AU and the Government of Ethiopia are
jointly engaging the Sudan and South Sudan so as to
encourage both Governments to consolidate the peace
in the disputed territory of Abyei, with the support of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei on
the ground. Our partnership with the AU and IGAD also
extends to Somalia, where my Special Representative
is working with the envoys of the AU and IGAD to
advance the political process.
Partnerships with regional organizations should
continue to be based on the comparative strengths of
each organization. It is also important that we draw
detailed lessons from our recent transition experiences
in the context of Mali and, very soon, the Central
African Republic. We will continue to work to enhance

S/PV.7228

the predictability and sustainability of African-led
peace-support operations.
In Côte d’Ivoire, we will proceed with the
establishment of a quick reaction force to support the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
and our Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). That effort
would not compete with existing mechanisms nor with
our support for regional initiatives, such as the African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African
Standby Force and its ECOWAS brigade.
It is consistent with our effort to transition out
of countries where peacekeeping operations have
contributed to restoring peace, security and stability.
By mid-2015, the peacekeeping footprint in West
Africa will be lighter, as UNOCI and UNMIL
downsize. In that process, it is important that regional
organizations play a greater role. But we are conscious
that the root causes of the conflicts have not yet been
fully addressed, and emerging transnational threats
pose new challenges to stability. It is therefore critical
to ensure that all precautions are taken. We strongly
support cooperation within the framework of the AU,
ECOWAS and the Mano River Union to reinforce the
individual and collective security of the countries of
the subregion.
Bearing in mind the evolution of transnational
threats, we will need to continue our dialogue on how
best to support host Governments. That could include
embedding specialized units in our operations so as to
provide policing and law-enforcement expertise and
capacity-development assistance for host Government
agencies.
We have been talking for some time about the need
for the United Nations and key regional actors to be able
to deploy more rapidly, especially in acute emergencies.
The EU Battlegroup was created for that purpose, as
was the African Standby Force. But despite years of
investment, we are still far from having predictable
and effective mechanisms for rapid deployment. In the
Central African Republic, the force generation process
for the European Union-led peacekeeping force was
slower than expected, and the EU Battlegroup was not
used. We are in a race against time for the re-hatting of
MISCA on 15 September, trying to secure the necessary
enablers and other contributions to MINUSCA.
We — the United Nations, the AU and the EU,
together with other key partners — need to do better. I
am convinced that we can, if we use existing mechanisms

14-486383/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and capacity much more effectively and predictably,
and in a way that further strengthens others. The United
Nations stands ready to further support the efforts of
the AU and the regional economic communities to fully
operationalize the African Standby Force. We should
also stop looking at different tools in isolation or only
through the lens of the organizations concerned. Instead,
we should see how we can bring them together in a way
that will finally allow the international community to
respond much more quickly.
I recently announced in the Council Chamber my
intention to undertake a review of peacekeeping as we
approach the 15-year anniversary of the Brahimi report
(see S/2000/809). Over the past decade and a half, the
Council has repeatedly shown its confidence in the value
of United Nations peacekeeping by deploying missions
with complex mandates to tough environments.
We are constantly working to keep pace with
rising demands and emerging challenges. We are
already innovating and applying creative solutions in
coordination with our valued partners. The review will
help us further improve our mobility and agility so
that we can better fulfil our duty to protect civilians
in need. The review will also examine the tremendous
growth in our partnerships with regional organizations.
Deepening and strengthening those partnerships will be
critical to our collective efforts to meet the challenges
of the future.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

28/07/2014

to an end. The continent still hosts half of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and their annual
budget represents more than 70 per cent of the global
peacekeeping budget of the Organization.
We appreciate the increased United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations in peace and
security activities under Chapter VIII of the Charter
and the acknowledgment of the role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping. Peacekeepers transform
mandates into concrete actions on the ground and keep
the hope for peace alive. Clearly defined mandates,
adequate resources and reliable command and control
structures are crucial for successful peacekeeping.
They are also crucial for a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
We strongly believe in the central importance
of protecting all civilians, particularly women
and children, in armed conflict, and in the central
importance of protecting civilian mandates, where
they exist. That is often decisive for the success and
legitimacy of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Protection often implies taking a more robust approach.
As we know, that of course needs to take into account
resources, mandates and host-State responsibilities. In
that context, we welcome the agreement on the rates
of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries,
although that means, of course, that the global budget
to support peacekeeping operations now surpasses
$8 billion.

Mr. Popowski: At the outset, let me congratulate
Rwanda on taking this initiative to bring us together
today. It is a timely initiative, timely not only because
of the challenges we collectively still face, but also
because it is time to measure the progress made
20 years after the genocide and our collective failure
at that time.

Cooperation on peacekeeping between the European
Union (EU) and the United Nations has developed
steadily since the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809)
referred to by the Secretary-General, with the aim of
improving the efficiency of peacekeeping operations
around the world. The engagement of the European
Union in peacekeeping efforts is demonstrated by the
very existence of its Common Security and Defence
Policy, within which Africa, with 10 missions and
operations deployed on the continent, remains a centre
of gravity.

The African continent has shown tremendous
resolve in solving the conflicts on its soil. The best
illustration is the role played by the African Union in
conjunction with other regional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community. Thanks to
their efforts, most lasting conflicts have been brought

The EU cooperates very closely with the United
Nations at the strategic level, including through joint
consultative mechanisms. Our aim is to enhance
practical support to United Nations peacekeeping,
building on the 2003 Joint United Nations-European
Union Declaration on Crisis Management. We continue
to develop that cooperation, notably through effective
coordination during the assessment and planning phases

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary
General of the European External Action Service.

4/65

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and during the conduct of the respective missions and
operations, in line with the agreed EU plan of action
to support United Nations peacekeeping. We are still
exploring various other avenues for cooperation,
such as ways to make available to the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations some of the
military capabilities of EU member States.
The most recent meeting of our EU-United Nations
steering committee on crisis management looked into
progress made in the implementation of the EU Action
Plan, as well as cooperation in theatres of operation
such as the Central African Republic and Afghanistan,
as well as trilateral cooperation with the African
Union and the systemic issue of the so-called DACability of peacekeeping, which is to say the extent to
which peacekeeping can be regarded as development
assistance. We also cooperate very closely with our
African partners. We welcome the intense participation
by African countries in peace support operations on the
continent, whether it be it in United Nations, hybrid or
African missions, such as the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic.
When African and European leaders met in
Brussels on 2 and 3 April for the Fourth EU-Africa
Summit, they reaffirmed their joint commitment to
peace and security on both our continents in conformity
with the aims and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. The EU has been and will remain an
active partner for Africa with a view to bringing about
peace and stability. We continuously pay attention to
the security and development nexus, including in the
context of the ongoing discussion on the post-2015
sustainable development goals. That is the strength of
the EU, but our focus today is on our role in support of
peacekeeping operations.
Before looking at the different ways in which the
EU has been active operationally, it is important to
stress the significance of politics and political dialogue.
Without political leadership and ownership from the
continent, at the continental, regional and national
levels, it is hard to imagine any progress — hence
the importance of strengthened political partnership
between the European Union and the African Union
and with the regional organizations that I mentioned
before. Joint and coordinated action is essential to
finding political solutions and, more importantly, to
preventing conflict. The more united Africa is in its

S/PV.7228

peace efforts, the stronger will be its partnership with
the international community.
Looking now at peacekeeping operations and
the role of the EU, apart from the participation of its
individual member States in United Nations missions,
the EU’s engagement includes building African
capacity to restore and maintain peace, supporting the
AU and regional organizations to deploy peacekeeping
operations and deploying autonomous EU missions and
operations.
In order to improve the African capacity to predict
and prevent or respond to crises, the EU has been a
strong supporter of the African Peace and Security
Architecture through the capacity-building component
of the African Peace Facility, contributing €100 million
over the past 10 years, which has included support for
early warning systems and the multidimensional African
Standby Force. We also recognize the African capacity
for immediate response to crises as a complementary
tool for further enhancing the capacity of the African
Union to respond to crises.
We increasingly focus on national capacity,
which is the starting point, and on national security
forces, which are capable of maintaining stability
after complex peace processes, tackling increasingly
complex transnational threats and participating in
broader peacekeeping operations That has led to a
number of security sector reform projects and EU
training missions, both military and civilian, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, Mali, the
Niger and the Horn of Africa. By 2016, the EU will have
trained more than 10,000 African soldiers. Overall, the
European Union is supporting more than 50 capacitybuilding projects in more than 20 countries, using all
available instruments — not only crisis management
instruments but also development cooperation.`
With respect to support for the African Union, the
African Union Mission in Darfur was the first mission
to receive, in 2004, financial support from the EU,
followed by the African Union Mission in Somalia,
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
and the International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic. For that purpose, we have been using
the African Peace Facility, as mentioned before, which
has played a crucial role in supporting AU operations.
Given its success, the African Peace Facility has been
extended and endowed with €750 million for the next
four years.

14-486385/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Finally, in order to respond to urgent crisis
situations, the EU has deployed autonomous executive
and non-executive missions, including Artemis, the
EU-led Force Congo, the EU-led Force Chad, the EUled Force Central African Republic and, for the first
time, a maritime security mission, European Naval
Force Operation Atalanta in the Horn of Africa.
Military missions are generally bridging missions,
designed to preserve a critical environment with a clear
exit strategy and geared towards an eventual takeover
by United Nations peacekeeping operations. As the
Secretary-General mentioned, the transition in the
Central African Republic is well advanced, as I had a
chance to witness during my visit to Bangui on 18 July.
Finally, I think we should also look beyond
peacekeeping. Peacekeeping operations can achieve a
great deal, but they can never substitute for a viable
political process. When there is no clear path towards
peace, crises will inevitably recur. Cooperation should
go beyond fire-fighting. We need to stress prevention and
mediation. Peacekeeping remains the flagship activity
of the United Nations and a crucial tool that paves the
way for the longer-term stability and development of
countries emerging from a crisis. The important work
of all actors in partnership with the United Nations is a
tremendous effort that may not always have been given
due recognition.
We need to focus on policy frameworks, continental
and regional structures, and the tools and mechanisms
to anticipate, prevent, manage and resolve crises, which
is in line with the EU’s own comprehensive approach to
crisis situations. Peacekeeping operations must focus on
enabling emergence from crisis and on re-establishing
both the local authorities and the United Nations country
teams at the heart of peacebuilding efforts. Continued
work on the peacekeeping-peacebuilding nexus remains
important. Peacekeepers should provide support to
the host State’s authorities, while preserving the goal
of achieving a transition capable of consolidating the
country’s emergence from crisis. If a State is fragile
or failing, peacekeepers can help restore the State’s
authority and assist it, particularly with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, along with security
sector reform and justice.
Transitions, whether from the African Union to the
United Nations, as in the case of Mali or the Central
African Republic, or from peacekeeping to other forms
of United Nations presence such as United Nations
country teams or peacebuilding structures, continue to

6/65

28/07/2014

be pertinent subjects that merit further joint reflection.
It remains very important to get those transitions right.
We need to draw lessons learned from past experiences.
The European Union closely follows the
development and effectiveness of the peacebuilding
structures of the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, and stands
ready to contribute to their improvement during the
next review. The Council should rest assured that the
European Union will continue to look for ways to
enhance its support for United Nations peacekeeping.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, the Permanent Observer
of the African Union.
Mr. António (African Union) (spoke in French):
On behalf of Ms. Nkosazana Diamini-Zuma, the
President of the African Union Commission, who,
owing to circumstances beyond her control, is unable
to be here with us today, I would first like to thank
the Rwandan presidency of the Security Council for
taking the initiative to hold this important debate on
the United Nations and its regional partnerships in
peacekeeping. In so doing, the Government of Rwanda
has once again demonstrated its untiring commitment
to strengthening the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations, as well as to promoting
the continent’s goals and positions alongside the two
other African Union members of the Security Council,
Nigeria and Chad. We greatly appreciate Rwanda’s
invaluable contribution to the operations that help to
support the maintenance of peace in Africa.
Today’s timely debate, which is taking place in a
context characterized by an increasing commitment
on the part of the African Union and its regional
mechanisms to preventing, managing and settling
conflicts, unquestionably gives us an opportunity to
take stock of our joint efforts and to agree on practical
measures for strengthening our collective capacity to
deal with the challenges we face in the area of peace
and security. In this debate we should draw on previous
Security Council deliberations on the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the funding of operations conducted by the
African Union, which were initiated in particular by
South Africa when it was a member of this body. This
is an opportunity for me to commend the continuity of
African efforts within the Security Council, which are
certainly proof both of effectiveness and of strengthened

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

coordination between the Council’s current three
African members in the framework of what we call the
A-3.
We should also draw on the wealth of experience
acquired over the past few years. From the Darfur
region of the Sudan to Mali, through the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Somalia and the Central African
Republic, there are now many examples that illustrate
the advantages and potential of a flexible approach to
addressing the challenges to peace and security on the
continent, as well as the importance of maximizing
the complementarity between the United Nations and
regional structures, particularly the African Union.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Security Council for the continued attention it has
paid to promoting peace and security in Africa and the
support it has given to African efforts. The renewal
of the logistical support package to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the deployment of
several peacekeeping operations on the continent, as
well as many other initiatives, are eloquent expressions
of that support.
I would also like to reiterate the African Union’s
thanks to the Secretary-General for his tireless
commitment to peace, security and stability in Africa.
I am pleased to note the continued strengthening of the
partnership between the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission within the framework
of the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, particularly those in Chapter VIII, as well as
the directions indicated by the decision-making bodies
involved, that is, the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union.
Over the past few years, the African Union and its
regional mechanisms have proved their determination
to play their full part in promoting peace, security and
stability on the continent. There is no better illustration
of this than the deployment of several operations
supporting peace in various regions of Africa, enabling
Africa not only to put into effect the relevant positions
of the protocol that established the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, but also to contribute an
approach to collective security that complements that
of the United Nations, as envisioned in the Charter.
Most of the peacekeeping support operations in
Africa have been aimed at establishing the conditions
that would subsequently enable the United Nations to
deploy multidimensional peacekeeping operations in

S/PV.7228

support of the long-term stabilization and socioeconomic
recovery of the countries in question. They occur in
unstable environments where peace has not been fully
established. Their success obviously involves taking
significant risks and using, where necessary, coercive
measures in helping to establish conditions conducive
to the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
missions.
It was in that spirit that the African Union deployed
its mission in Darfur before it was transformed into the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Based on a judicious and innovative
combination of the respective comparative advantages
of the African Union and the United Nations, that
operation, by its very nature, has demonstrated an
unquestionable capacity to adapt to the situation. I
would like to pay tribute to UNAMID and its leadership
for the remarkable work it has done on the ground in
conditions rendered even more difficult by the number
of armed groups that, despite the continuing efforts of
the Joint Chief Mediator and other international actors,
have not yet joined the peace process.
I note that the African Union and its regional
mechanisms, such as the Economic Community of
West African States and the Economic Community of
Central African States, have deployed operations in
Mali, through the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali (AFISMA), and in the Central African
Republic, through the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). In
the first case, the United Nations has already taken
over, through the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and it is
preparing to do the same by incorporating MISCA
into the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. It
is clear that AFISMA and MISCA’s initial stabilization
efforts and the sacrifices made by their personnel
have greatly facilitated the task of the United Nations.
I would also like to commend the commitment and
determination of the countries that have contributed
troops and police to them.
Finally, the African Union Mission in Somalia
has also operated in that spirit. Clearly, in seven years
of deployment, AMISOM and the Somalian security
forces have recorded remarkable successes in the
fight against the terrorist group Al-Shabaab and in
extending the State’s authority. These results are due
in particular to the Mission personnel’s courage and

14-486387/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/07/2014

enormous sacrifices made in the region through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
troop- and police-contributing countries. I would like
to express the African Union’s gratitude for this. At
the same time, we should recognize that much remains
to be done in order to create the kind of conditions
that will enable us to make an even more sustained
international commitment, including through a classic
United Nations peacekeeping operation.

States of America. More recently, the establishment
with bolstered mandates of an Intervention Brigade
within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
a protection force within the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, whose troops are provided by African
countries, is another illustration of the advantages
arising from an innovative partnership between African
actors and the United Nations.

All these examples point clearly to the close
complementarity that exists between the efforts of the
African Union and the United Nations, both of which
work to promote collective security, as envisioned
in the Charter. They show clearly that, in the face of
the increasingly complex nature of the challenges to
peace and security that confront the continent, success
is founded on how coherent our goals are, the wise
and flexible use of available resources, our combined
efforts and the coordination of our actions on the
ground. For some years, based on that conviction
the African Union has been advocating a dynamic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. That partnership would be based on a
flexible and innovative interpretation of the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
When the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union met in New York last September, it reiterated the
importance of that approach and recalled the principles
that should underpin it.

While welcoming that progress, the African Union
is convinced of the need to go further and to innovate
even more, as it is true that our capacity for action and
our efficiency would be considerably bolstered if we
did so. In that regard, I would like to stress in particular
the issue of the financing of African peacekeeping
operations. The experience of the past few years has
amply illustrated that one of the greatest constraints
facing the African Union and its regional mechanisms
relate to the issue of flexible, sustainable and predictable
financing of their operations. It is crucial that a lasting
solution be found on this matter.

The fact is that significant progress has been
made. As I stressed earlier, coordination between
the Secretariat and the African Union Commission is
constantly being bolstered. Specifically with regard
to peacekeeping operations, we are very pleased with
the crucial support by the Secretariat in the area of
planning, implementation and support to missions, as
clearly illustrated by both the examples of AFISMA
and MISCA. The Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union are also
endeavouring to strengthen their partnership and
to further enhance the synergy between the United
Nations and the African Union. From that perspective,
the Security Council’s decision to authorize putting in
place a logistical support cell to help AMISOM speaks
volumes.
It is clear that the results obtained owe much to
this support and to the contributions of other partners,
both bilateral and multilateral partners, specifically
the African Union, the European Union and the United

8/65

The recommendations of the Prodi report (see
S/2008/813), based on an in-depth analysis of the
evolution of peacekeeping and the related challenges,
remain more than ever current. The case of Somalia
through AMISOM clearly showed that a wise
combination of financing through United Nations
assessed contributions and voluntary contributions by
the European Union and other partners offer the surest
means to promote our common goals. We would urge
the Security Council to take the expected decisions on
this financing matter bearing in mind that by taking
the initiative to deploy operations on the ground, the
African Union and regional mechanisms are acting on
behalf of the Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility for peacekeeping and international
security.
By calling upon the Security Council to help find a
lasting solution to the issue of financing peacekeeping
operations conducted by Africa, I am of course not losing
sight of the responsibilities that fall on the continent
itself. From that point of view, there is very little
doubt that African countries, in addition to supplying
troops and necessary police staff for operations on
the ground — and we can never underscore this
enough — the enormous sacrifices agreed to in this
context have significantly increased African countries’
contributions to the financing of such operations. The
resources supplied by African countries during fund-

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

raising conferences organized by the African Union
for both AFISMA and MISCA are a testament to this
renewed commitment. Efforts undertaken will be
continued in the broader context of the mobilization
of the resources acquired at the continent-level for
financing the African Union on a more sustainable
basis. However, it is understood that this effort cannot
replace the responsibility of the Security Council in
international peacekeeping and security.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to our international partners that support our
operations. The financing provided by the European
Union through the African Peace Facility (APF) and by
other partners, as well as the logistical support from
the United States, has greatly facilitated our actions.
In parallel to deploying peacekeeping operations, the
African Union is also working to bolster its long-term
capacity through the operationalization of the African
Standby Force. That will make it possible to find more
ideal responses to some of the gaps that have been
discovered in the operations in question led by the
African Union, be they related to planning, mobilizing
forces, command, monitoring or to support for missions.
On the basis of the Gambari report recommendations
assessing the African Standby Force and its rapid
deployment capacity, a number of measures are being
taken. The goal of these measures is to the attain full
operational capacity by 2015 at the latest.
We welcome the renewed commitment of the
United Nations to support us along that path, based
on the recommendations and the consultative mission
that visited Addis Ababa towards end of May 2014.
In the meantime, the bolstering of the immediate
response capacity of the African Union to crises should
significantly strengthen both our speed of reaction to
emergency situations and our robustness.
In conclusion, it is my hope that this Council
meeting will mark a new phase in the strengthening
of the partnership between the United Nations and
regional organizations, especially the African Union.
The complexity of the challenges before us more
than ever demand a greater synergy of actions and
greater flexibility in the interpretation of the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, and
greater flexibility in the use of the tools available to us.
In that regard, beyond the issue of financing African
peacekeeping operations, we need to pay increased
attention to the handover modality from an African
Union operation to a United Nations operation. We

S/PV.7228

await with interest the feedback exercise that the United
Nations Secretariat must undertake in consultation with
the African Union regarding the transition between
MISMA and the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Mali, and also the upcoming transition between
MISCA and MINUSCA.
This exercise should provide us with an opportunity
for an open and constructive debate on the best modalities
to ensure the successful handover of an African Union
operation to a United Nations operation. We must not
avoid dealing with any of the issues at stake, which
relate, inter alia, to timelines for a transition, bearing
in mind that the creation of conditions conducive to a
successful handover to countries by the United Nations
requires time, a political role on the part of the African
Union and its regional mechanisms in the pre-transition
period, and also the appointment of the leadership for
the new mission.
To conclude, I would like to wish all Muslims a
happy holiday.
The President: I thank Mr. António for his
statement.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/532, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, Australia, Chad,
Chile, Jordan, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic of
Korea and Rwanda.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2167 (2014).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Rwanda.
I wish to thank all present for being here today.
I would like to thank our briefers; the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy

14-486389/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secretary-General of the European External Action
Service, Mr. Maciej Popowski; and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Ambassador Téte António.
I wish also to recognize the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Tariq Fatemi, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Special Assistant to the Prime
Minister of Pakistan, and His Excellency Mr. Urmas
Paet, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia, who will
join us later.
Unfortunately, owing to unforeseen last-minute
circumstances, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Rwanda, cannot
be here today, and she asked that I pass on her sincere
apologies and regrets to all Council members and other
representatives.
As Rwanda comes close to the end of its presidency
of the Council, I would like to say that we saved the
best for last. Indeed, I can think of no better way in
which to end Rwanda’s presidency than with this open
debate and the adoption of resolution 2167 (2014),
which is intended to bear fruit in concrete ways to
strengthen coordination among partners and regional
and subregional organizations, so as to ensure a
comprehensive strategy for effective responses to
threats to international peace and security.
In our assessment, we believe that this is an
opportune time to hold this debate on the evolution
of the United Nations and regional partnerships in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
especially in peacekeeping. As peace is shared, so are
the consequences of insecurity and conflicts in the
global world in which we live today.
Indeed, the framers of the Charter of the United
Nations had foreseen the need for coordination and
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
agreements in the maintenance of peace and security,
as set out in its Chapter VIII. The spirit of the Charter
has been transformed into action today with an evident
engagement on the part of regional organizations
in international peace operations. The challenge we
have today is to promote the positive evolution of
these kinds of partnerships so that they move from ad
hoc partnerships to more structured frameworks for
partnership.
We have learned from the tragic failures in Rwanda
and Srebrenica, 20 years ago, that rapid regional

10/65

28/07/2014

engagement and response mechanisms are essential in
a world where political will and defence budgets are
both declining. There is an obvious need for rapid
responses to often-unpredictable violent conflicts, and
partnerships with regional organizations in Africa and
elsewhere are fundamental in achieving this endeavour.
Acknowledging the benefits of peacekeeping
partnerships, the Security Council has adopted
various resolutions and presidential statements on
the subject, with the last one being resolution 2033
(2012), which requested the Secretary-General to
conduct, in consultation with the African Union, a
comprehensive analysis of the lessons learned from
practical cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU), in particular with regard to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the African Union Mission in
Somalia.
The issue has not been discussed since then,
despite the fact that the Council has continued to
rely on partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations to support peacekeeping efforts. When
it comes to the African continent, it is clear that the
AU and regional organizations often have political
legitimacy, the advantage of proximity and access to
African capabilities. Partners bring funding, experience
and logistical capabilities as well as political leverage
in specific cases. All of these comparative advantages
have come into play in various forms in support of
African peace-support operations to date, but largely
on an ad hoc basis.
This forum therefore offers an opportunity to
explore ways in which regional partners can best
bring their comparative advantages to United Nations
peacekeeping and how their operational capacities can
be enhanced and supported, so that they may share the
peacekeeping burden and, ultimately, make operations
more effective at the strategic, operational and tactical
levels.
Over the past decade, African countries, with the
support of international partners, have engaged in
a collective effort to develop regional capacities for
peace-support operations, as per the creation of the
AU Peace and Security Commission and the African
Standby Force. As a result of those efforts as well as
of bilateral support to Member States, there has been a
steady improvement in African capacities to respond to

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

crisis situations through the deployment of increasingly
larger and more complex peace-support operations.
UNAMID is no longer a one-of-a-kind partnership.
In Mali, Somalia, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, the United Nations has worked with
organizations including the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the Southern African Development Community and
the East African Community as well as the European
Union in various peacekeeping models.
Rwanda today is proud to have been part of such
operations for the past 10 years, including the transitions
from the African Union Mission in the Sudan to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, which is one of the largest peacekeeping
operations in the world to date; from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali; and soon from the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.
With an already large presence in the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), Rwanda recently
deployed another battalion alongside IGAD, which
has deployed a robust force of three battalions under
UNMISS command in order to protect civilians and
IGAD monitors in the face of escalating violence. We
are currently in talks to deploy two military helicopters
in support of the IGAD and UNMISS operations.
We want to also give special thanks to all of our
partners, especially the United States, for their valuable
support. While great things have been achieved through
these and other partnerships, there are lessons to be
taken and room for improvement, the fact remains that
the AU has often struggled when it comes to operational
capacities, which highlights the importance of matching
resources to mandates.
Mandated missions must have adequate funds and
other necessary resources, including troops that are
appropriately prepared. Just last Friday, we convened
an informative meeting of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations to discuss the issue of troop
and police preparedness. We recognized the steps taken
by African leaders at the Malabo Summit last month, as

S/PV.7228

well as those taken by the African Union Commission
to operationalize the African capacity for immediate
response to crises.
The East African Community aims to have full
operationalization of its stand-by force by December
2014, and we commend the East African Community
for this remarkable achievement and its efforts to
generate the required contributions. We invite all
regional and subregional organizations to accelerate the
establishment of such stand-by arrangement systems.
I believe that resolution 2167 (2014) will help the
Council to address many of those challenges as we
forge ahead, including how organizations will pull their
resources together and allocate roles and responsibilities
and how we can streamline coordination processes
and frameworks. It lays out measurable requests and
recommendations that can provide benchmarks for
progress and evaluation, including from political,
operational and financial perspectives. On a larger,
longer-term scale, in paragraph 28 the resolution
“[r]equests the Secretary-General, in close
consultation with the AU Commission and EU
to produce, not later than 31 March 2015, an
assessment report and recommendations on the
progress of the partnerships between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations in
peacekeeping operations”.
On financial cooperation and support, the
resolution recognizes that one major constraint facing
some regional organizations, in particular the AU, in
effectively carrying out the mandate of maintaining
regional peace and security is securing predicable,
sustainable and flexible resources. Rwanda therefore
welcomes the steps taken by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission to generate resources from
within AU member States in support of peace support
operations, but we also urge external partners to
seriously consider the capacity in which they can assist
regional organizations.
In particular, consideration should be given to the
findings contained in the 2008 joint AU-United Nations
report on AU peacekeeping operations, otherwise
known as the Prodi panel report (see S/2008/813),
which established that a peace support operation that
is eventually to be transferred to the United Nations
should be sponsored by the United Nations from
the beginning, through assessed contributions for
six months before being handed over to the United

14-4863811/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations. That will truly limit inadequate funding
and unpredictable resource capacity. The AU is
currently very active in peacekeeping operations that
are mandated by the Security Council and that have
transitioned or are in the process of transitioning to
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Today is another step towards better structuring
and elaborating on the burden-sharing needs among
African States, regional and subregional organizations
and partners, including the AU, the EU and the United
Nations. Resolution 2167 (2014) and today’s discussion
display the resolve of the international community to
establish more predictable frameworks and working
relationships when it comes to integrated peacekeeping
operations. We must help each other to build up our
unique abilities so that together we can forge a collective
security system for a safer and more secure world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
the Secretary-General; the European External Action
Service Deputy Secretary General, Mr. Popowski; and
the Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, Mr. António. I thank you, Ambassador
Gasana, for convening and framing today’s debate,
which could not be more timely. Rwanda knows of
what it speaks. Rwandans understand the importance
of getting peacekeeping right, having experienced the
catastrophic consequences of it going terribly wrong.
As we meet, regional organizations are playing a
more central role in peacekeeping than ever before,
particularly in Africa. They have proven swift and
nimble in responding to serious crises. They have been
willing to take on robust protection mandates. As we
have seen in the past 18 months alone, the African Union
(AU) and the Economic Community of West African
States have deployed to address the urgent burning
crises in Mali and the Central African Republic.
When African countries came together in 2002 to
form the new African Union, they decided that they
never wanted to stand by as atrocities were being
committed on the continent. They refused to accept
the arguments of those who said that such violence
was endemic to Africa, that their newly created Union
lacked the capacity or the authority to stop it, and that
it was not in their collective interest to intervene. They

12/65

28/07/2014

knew that such atrocities could be stopped and that they
had the power and the responsibility to do so, so they
enshrined a commitment to non-indifference in the very
Charter establishing their new Union. They committed
not to turn a blind eye to atrocities.
Not only does the AU have the right to intervene in
the face of atrocities, but any member can request an
intervention when such horrors occur. The AU Charter
gives letter to the growing consensus that neighbours,
regions and the entire international community have a
profound stake in the security and stability of countries
in conflict. In every region of the world, we have seen
that conflicts do not respect borders, especially when
they are fueled by groups intent on targeting civilians
and sowing terror. Ignoring those conflicts can be
devastating not only to the countries and regions in
which they occur, but to all of us.
In order for mandates to protect civilians to be
effective, they must be enforced, and enforcement is
the key to deterrence. Warlords and militant take notice
of peacekeepers’ willingness to stand up or to stand
by. The failure to uphold the commitment to protecting
civilians in one mission can undermine the legitimacy
of all of the others. That is part of why it is so troubling
that, according to a March report (A/68/787) of the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS), United Nations peacekeeping missions have
routinely failed to use force to protect civilians under
attack, despite the mandates under which they operate.
Of the 507 attacks against civilians that it reviewed
from 2010 to 2013, the OIOS found that peacekeeping
missions almost never used force to protect civilians
under attack. The Secretary-General has launched a
comprehensive review of peacekeeping, which needs
to tackle that grave challenge head on. It should draw
lessons from the leadership of Rwanda, as well as other
countries, such as Ethiopia and Nepal, with regard
to the protection of civilians. Rwanda’s troops were
among the first boots on the ground when conflicts
metastasized in the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. Not only do Rwandans volunteer for
complex and dangerous missions but, because of their
commitment to protect civilians, the populations in
countries where the Rwandans serve trust them. Troops
from other countries who serve alongside them draw
strength from their fortitude, and aggressors who would
attack civilians fear them.
We recognize the many challenges to making
regional and international peacekeeping missions

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

work, namely, the challenges of training and equipping
troops, of airlifting them into theatre and of maintaining
their supply lines once they are there. We are therefore
investing greatly in regional missions and in the
capabilities of troop-contributing countries. The United
States contributed more than $500 million to the African
Union Mission in Somalia, and $166 million towards
equipment and training for the African contingents
deploying to the United Nations mission in Mali, as well
as logistical support to its African-led predecessor. We
are also providing up to $100 million in similar support
to the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic. The training and assistance
programme for our African contingency operations has
trained nearly 250,000 peacekeepers from 25 partner
countries since 2005.
Our support for regional initiatives is a clear
affirmation of our broader commitment to making
peacekeeping more effective, as well as to our
partnerships with countries that contribute troops to
critical missions. Next week, President Obama will
meet African Heads of State at the United StatesAfrica Leaders Summit in Washington, D.C., to discuss
how the United States can deepen its partnership with
countries that commit troops both to United Nations
and to regional peacekeeping and how we, along with
other partners, can help them to address persistent
operational challenges.
Such regional cooperation is in everyone’s interest.
First and foremost, it is in the interest of civilians
threatened by violent conflicts. It is in the interest of
the United Nations because regional peacekeepers often
lay the foundation for United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping efforts and advance the core principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. It is in the interest of
countries that send troops whose stability is enhanced
by the investment in training and equipment that come
with such interventions and arises from their having
played a role in preventing deadly conflicts from
spreading across borders.
Perpetrators who commit atrocities are routinely
testing peacekeepers’ limits. When the first killings
began in Rwanda in the spring in 1994, Romeo Dallaire,
the United Nations Force Commander there at the time,
appealed for reinforcements. He cabled United Nations
Headquarters and said that he could do more. He
needed more and better trained peacekeepers, he said.
He recognized that if he could send a clear message
early on, a wholesale massacre might be averted.

S/PV.7228

Regional organizations have shown that they not
only can do more but also are willing to do more. As
they step forward, it is not only the people whom they
protect who benefit from greater peace and stability,
we all do. We owe it to regional and international peace
and security and to the many civilians in harm’s way
right now to give them our full support.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this timely
open debate. One of the greatest strategic issues that
the Security Council faces is its relationship with regional
organizations. Such relationships are constantly
evolving. We are grateful to Rwanda for this opportunity
to take stock of the peacekeeping partnerships, to reflect
on the progress that we have made and to anticipate the
challenges ahead. I thank the Secretary-General and
the briefers from the European Union and the African
Union for their contributions this morning.
The founders of the United Nations originally
envisaged a United Nations standing army. That proved
to be unrealistic. Yet the need for rapidly deployable
and adequately trained, equipped and financed troops
has increased considerably since 1945. In the face of a
multitude of African conflicts, the United Nations has
turned in particular to the continent of Africa as a critical
partner. In response to that, the maxim of African-led
solutions to African problems was developed. The
United Kingdom welcomes the aspiration behind that
maxim.
Such partnerships have brought many advantages
to international and regional peace and security efforts.
Over the past decade, 10 African Union and regional
missions have deployed. African contributions to
United Nations peacekeeping missions have increased
from approximately 10,000 troops in 2003 to more
than 30,000 troops in 2013. The African Standby Force
(ASF) was developed and achieved notable milestones,
including an annual continental training programme.
Good progress has also been made towards developing
a rapid reaction force within the ASF.
Troops in African-led missions often demonstrate
the kind of proactive peacekeeping required in modern
threat environments. I have in mind in particular
the troops deployed in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic
(MISCA). Such troops have the attitude and skills

14-4863813/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

necessary for the effective protection of civilians in
terrain teaming with spoilers.
Nonetheless, there is still progress to be made
in the development by the African Union and other
regional organizations of policy, guidance and training
in key areas, such as child protection and the prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence. We very much
welcome the framework of cooperation signed between
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the African Union
ealier this year. That demonstrates a real commitment
to developing standards and practices, and we urge its
speedy implementation.
Having highlighted some good progress, we should
also reflect on two key challenges that threaten the
delivery of rapidly deployable and adequately trained,
equipped and financed troops.
First, financial resources pose a huge challenge. A
key limitation to African capability with regard to peace
and security is the lack on access to adequate, timely
and predictable financing for peace support operations.
That hampers African Union missions and the activities
of regional economic communities as well. The African
Union’s overwhelming dependence on outside parterns
for its operational budget is a significant constraint on
the narrative of African solutions. That issue is rising
up the African agenda and, as resolution 2167 (2014),
which we adopted today, reiterates, regional bodies have
a responsibility to secure human, financial, logistical
and other resources for their organizations.
In the absence of a ready solution, the United
Kingdom is pleased that the European Union has been
able to be a suoorting partner to AMISOM and MISCA
through the African Peace Facility. However, that
cannot continue forever. A better means of financing
African peace operations and more sustainable financial
arrangements must be found. If African nations are
serious about taking greater responsibility for solving
the continent’s problems, they need to be prepared to
devote more of their own resources to the task.
Secondly, the transition from African missions
to United Nations peacekeeping operations raises
a number of challenges. In Mali we saw a failure to
deploy critical enablers ahead of troops and an inability
to raise the number of troops deployed or to deploy them
at an adequate pace. We need to learn those lessons
for the Central African Republic, where difficulties
are also loomimg ahead of the 15 September handover

14/65

28/07/2014

date to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
We therefore welcome the request in resolution 2167
(2014) for a full lessons-learned exercise for both
transitions. The challenges of re-hatting an African
Union mission into a United Nations one has yet to be
resolved.
Looking beyond the African Union, the United
Kingdom also commends the increasing cooperation
between NATO and the United Nations in the sharing
of doctrine, training and best practice. The traditional
peacekeeping model of an interposition force has been
superceded by a more multidimensional one, often with
the protection of civilians at its core. The Secretariat
should continue to forge close ties with organizations
able and willing to share their expertise and comparative
advantages.
I wish to highlight two important aspects of the
resolution that we adopted today. The first aspect is the
comprehensive review of United Nations peacekeeping
that the Secretary-General announced in June and to
which he referred this morning. The relationship with
regional organizations will no doubt form a key element
of that review. We encourage the Secretary-General to
be bold in his vision while ensuring concrete gains for
peacekeeping. In particular, we need to strategically
assess which of the seven different models of United
Nations peacekeeping currently in place are most fit for
the purpose and ensure that we use them in the right
circumstances.
Thirdly, I am pleased to note the encouragement
for greater engagement between the African Union
Peacekeeping Support Team within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Office to the African Union. Partnerships should be
operational as well as strategic.
Finally, let me end by paying tribute to the men and
women serving under all banners on peace and security
operations. Those individuals make up the forces of
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union and other regional missions. They demonstrate
on a daily basis the importance of working in close
partnership in the maintenance of peace and security
in the most perilous of locations. The risks they take to
make our world a safer place must never be forgotten.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

his very informative briefing. We listened carefully
to the representatives of the African Union and the
European Union.
For the past few years, the Security Council has
repeatedly drawn attention to the need to step up
practical cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in the area of maintaining international
peace and security. Today’s debate is another
confirmation of the importance the Council attaches
to the task of developing collective approaches in
shaping effective strategies for preventing and settling
conflicts. Our position is that cooperation of that kind
should be based on the Charter of the United Nations,
specifically its Chapter VIII.
There is no doubt that regional and subregional
organizations have better knowledge of the situations
in their region. Their preventive and peacekeeping
mechanisms are more specifically tailored to the
realities on the ground. Those comparative advantages,
added to the universal nature of the United Nations
and its internationally recognized legitimacy, create
unique peacekeeping potential. It is also important
that partners should act in a harmonious way, without
duplicating efforts or creating unnecessary obstacles in
their work, which should be focused on coming up with
political and diplomatic approaches to the settlement of
conflicts.
Throughout the long history of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the area of peacekeeping, there
are many excellent examples of success in different
countries around the world. That success is based on
fulfilling realistic tasks with the support of sufficient
human and material resources. A very important
imperative in fulfilling those tasks is compliance
with the basic principles of peacekeeping, namely, the
consent of the host country, neutrality and the use of
force only in accordance with a mandate. Moving away
from those principles and focusing only on coercive
measures could destabilize a situation and in fact
antagonize the local population.
Partnership between the Organization and
regional organizations is based on the recognition
that the Security Council has the main responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
That means first and foremost that the Council has
to authorise and supervise regional and coalition
peacekeeping operations. We should not, however,

S/PV.7228

forget the need for the Council be accountable. Expert
assessment of the Organization could be very useful in
planning and carrying out regional operations and in
fostering an appropriate command structure.
A special role in the traditional network of partners
of the United Nations is played by the African Union.
The broad experience of and respectful cooperation
between the two organizations in different areas is an
excellent guide for other regional organizations in terms
of establishing an effective paradigm for cooperation.
We highlight the successful efforts of both organizations
in Darfur, Somalia and in the inter-Sudan conflict. It
is important to continue stepping up coordination in
South Sudan, the Central African Republic and Mali.
I recall that, during the Russian presidency of the
Security Council in June, we held a traditional and very
useful meeting in New York with our colleagues from
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
We commend the experience of the working
partnership between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States. That
organization has shown itself to be a reliable partner with
the Organization in resolving conflicts in the subregion.
We also see added value in cooperating with and
receiving financial support from the European Union.
There is also great potential in the cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
as well as good opportunities for expanding contacts
with such dynamically developing organizations as the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Union of South American Nations.
We also would not want to lose sight of the
importance of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which have
become increasingly recognized around the world in
the area of maintaining peace and security. We also see
good opportunities for cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO in peacekeeping, which has
been reflected in resolution 2167 (2014), just adopted.
In the framework of the CSTO, considerable work has
been undertaken to strengthen peacekeeping potential,
including in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the CSTO is actively cooperating in the
post-conflict reconstruction of Afghanistan and dealing
with the terrorist threat coming from that country.
We continue to favour closer cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations on the

14-4863815/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter in order to promote
the Organization’s peacekeeping objectives. We hope
that today’s debate will give additional impetus to the
process of improving the long-standing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organization
based on the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the delegation of Rwanda for the effective
coordination of the process of preparing the draft
Security Council resolution that we have adopted in the
course of today’s meeting.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation greatly appreciates the Rwandan
initiative to convene today’s open debate. I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I have
also listened carefully to the statements made by the
representatives of the European Union and the African
Union (AU).
United Nations peacekeeping operations, having
been an important tool of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security for
over six decades, have significantly contributed to the
settlement of conflicts and disputes and restoration and
building of peace. In recent years, the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations such as the
AU have increasingly strengthened their cooperation in
peacekeeping under the guidance of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and have yielded positive,
recognizable results in peacekeeping operations in the
Sudan, Darfur, Somalia, Mali, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan. That cooperation is an
important development in terms of international
collective security mechanisms in today’s world.
It is also one of the increasingly effective means for
defusing conflicts and maintaining peace and stability
in Africa and in the world at large.
At the same time, we should also recognize that
various kinds of security threats and challenges in
Africa are intertwined and that its security situation is
still very weak. The peacekeeping efforts of regional
organizations, such as the AU, are constrained by their
human, material and financial resources. The United
Nations should further strengthen its cooperation with
regional organizations, such as the AU, in the strategic
planning and deployment of peacekeeping operations
and in their communications and coordination so as to

16/65

28/07/2014

effectively support African regional organizations in
their efforts to maintain regional peace and security.
I should like to emphasize the following four points.
First, the United Nations and regional organizations
like the AU should be guided by the Charter of the
United Nations in strengthening their peacekeeping
cooperation. The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, while the AU and other regional organizations
can also play an active role in using their good offices
to mediate conflicts and in peacekeeping deployment.
The
Security
Council-mandated
peacekeeping
operations deployed by regional organizations should
fully reflect the principles and purposes of the Charter.
Their enforcement actions should abide strictly by their
Security Council mandates and adhere to the basic
principles of peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations should strengthen their coordination
so as to fully utilize their respective advantages and
thereby create synergy. Many African issues are very
complicated and require comprehensive solutions.
Regional organizations like the AU, which was
established in Africa and is led by Africans, have unique
regional, historical and cultural advantages in conflict
mediation and peacekeeping. The United Nations and
regional organizations like the AU should explore ways
of building various kinds of practical coordination
and cooperation mechanisms on the basis of equal
treatment and complementarity so as to strengthen
coordination and cooperation in strategic planning,
deployment, logistics management and support for
peacekeeping operations. The efficiency and outcomes
of peacekeeping operations can thereby be raised.
Thirdly, the strengthening of capacity-building in
peacekeeping should be a priority area for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
such as the AU. The United Nations and the international
community should actively respond to the legitimate
demands of regional organizations, such as the AU,
and provide more support to African regional and
subregional organizations in training peacekeepers,
building mechanisms, logistical assistance and resource
management. We should also explore practical modes
of financial and technical cooperation so that we can
play a significant role in mobilizing the international
community in support of AU capacity-building.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fourthly, we should constantly summarize
our experience and lessons learned and respond
appropriately to the challenges encountered in
peacekeeping transitions from regional organizations
to the United Nations. Since last year, the peacekeeping
operations in Mali and the Central African Republic
have transitioned to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Many challenges have emerged in the
transitioning of operations, communications with
troop-contributing countries, and logistical support. We
hope that the United Nations will heed the opinions and
proposals of regional organizations, such as the AU, on
matters related to transition and respond positively to
Africa’s concerns so as to create enabling conditions for
the smooth transition of peacekeeping operations from
African regional organizations to the United Nations.
China highly commends and supports regional
organizations, such as the AU, in their efforts to
play an important role in African peace and security
affairs. China has always made an active contribution
through concrete action in the maintenance of peace
and stability in Africa. China has vigorously supported
and actively participated in peacekeeping operations in
Africa. From the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
Liberia, from Mali to the Sudan, close to 2,000 Chinese
peacekeepers are involved in seven peacekeeping
operations in Africa.
During his visit to Africa last year, Chinese
President Xi Jinping put forward the concept of sincerity,
honesty, kindness and integrity in the development
of our relationship with Africa. In May, Li Keqiang,
Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic
of China, visited AU headquarters, where both parties
signed a joint statement on the further strengthening
of friendly cooperation in peace and security matters.
China attaches great importance to its relationship with
Africa and will actively support regional organizations,
such as the AU, in their efforts to maintain peace and
stability in Africa. China will follow up in depth its
China-Africa Cooperative Partnership for Peace and
Security in an effort to help the continent build its
peacekeeping capacities.
Alongside the international community, China
will play a constructive role in strengthening the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, such as the AU, in peacekeeping and in
jointly promoting peace and development in Africa.

S/PV.7228

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Like others, I thank
the Rwandan delegation for organizing this timely
debate on United Nations and regional partnerships,
with a focus on Africa. Africa’s regional and
subregional organizations have been actively involved
in seeking solutions to conflicts on the continent, and
their cooperation with the United Nations and other
regional partners, such as the European Union (EU),
has evolved significantly over the years.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the representatives of the African Union (AU) and
the European Union for their briefings. We welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2167 (2014) on
regional partnerships in peacekeeping, and appreciate
the efforts of the Rwandan presidency in leading the
negotiations.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
Whether through troop deployment, the provision
of logistical and financial support, or working side
by side in implementing multidimensional mandates,
the participation of regional and subregional actors
today is an indispensable and increasingly regular
part of modern peacekeeping. Regional peacekeeping
frequently offers faster deployment timelines and
much-needed troop numbers that can literarily make
a difference between life and death. Such involvement
strengthens regional ownership of the peace efforts and
bolsters the continued commitment of the countries
of the region, which share a strong interest in the
sustainability and success of the peacekeeping effort.
The involvement of regional or subregional actors,
as noted in the presidency’s concept paper (S/2014/478,
annex), also brings better understanding of the context
and root causes of a specific conflict, thereby enabling
us to address the situation in a more specific and
effective manner. The active engagement of the African
Union, as well as of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States with the United
Nations in bringing peace to conflict torn areas speaks
for itself.
These organizations, in close cooperation with
the United Nations and other regional actors, perform
an essential function in peacekeeping itself, as well
as in conducting critical mediation efforts in times

14-4863817/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of crisis. IGAD’s role in the case of South Sudan, one
example among many, is an excellent case in point. In
the case of Mali, again, a number of regional actors,
including the AU, ECOWAS, the EU and others, have
been continuously engaged in searching for durable
solutions.
Regional partnerships, however, are not immune
to the most critical obstacles faced by United Nations
peacekeeping operations in general, including clarity
of the mandate, capability and training gaps, logistical
hurdles, a lack of critical enablers, or insufficient
coordination among mission components. Close
cooperation, coordination and synergies between
and among regional actors and the United Nations
therefore play an essential role in ensuring mission
success. Drawing and applying lessons from such joint
undertakings for the sake of mission effectiveness and
success is therefore key. As seen from the assessment of
existing missions involving United Nations and regional
components, the experience to date, although generally
positive, definitely offers room for improvement.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is an important case
in terms of lessons learned. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur replaced the
African Union operation in 2008, with the aim of
bolstering the protection of civilians and supporting
the overall peace process by deploying additional
troops and increasing financial resources dedicated to
the task. Six years later, it is the second-largest United
Nations mission, with almost 23 ,000 personnel, and its
most expensive one, at a cost of $1.3 billion annually,
drawing criticism from various sides.
While undoubtedly UNAMID has had a positive
impact on the situation in Darfur, it has also suffered
from a number of problems, including a high number of
casualties among peacekeepers, a lack of cooperation
from the host Government, chronic shortages
of equipment and enablers, as well as capability
deficiencies and internal coordination issues.
Its record of protecting civilians has been
subject to criticism. The Office of Internal Oversight
Services described it as “highly ineffective” and
“generally passive”, while other reports highlight an
unwillingness to report human rights abuses, and the
Khartoum Government’s involvement in supporting
armed groups. That prompted some serious thinking
about the mission’s future and refocusing of its

18/65

28/07/2014

mandate, which will, hopefully, result in more effective
mandate-implementation. In that respect, this particular
mission can offer useful lessons for the future that could
enable new missions to avoid some of the difficulties
UNAMID had to go through.
The African Union Mission in Somalia, with
logistical and financial support from the United Nations,
the European Union and other partners, has been
instrumental in making considerable advances against
Al-Shabaab militants. Its transition from maintaining
an essentially defensive posture to mounting an
offensive against militants was possible largely due to
an increased number of troops and, most important, the
willingness by the main troop contributors to robustly
implement the mandate.
The sustainability of military gains against
Al-Shabaab needs to be reinforced through the
establishment of effective local governance and
addressing the security and economic needs of the
population. That enormous task will continue to be
undertaken by a number of United Nations system
entities, as well as through regional efforts such as those
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the EU mission, which provides training to the
Somali National Armed Forces, including on the
protection of civilians, international humanitarian law
and human rights.
Turning to the Central African Republic, the
stepping in of the African Union Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
prevented even greater atrocities from happening.
Its successor, the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA),
in cooperation with the French Operation Sangaris,
made a critical difference in protecting civilians and
restoring basic security. In view of the complexity of
the tasks ahead, MISCA will transition to a United
Nations operation by mid-September to benefit from
the experience of the United Nations in deploying
multidimensional operations directed at addressing the
root causes of the conflict. Joint United Nations and AU
efforts in the Central African Republic will continue to
be complemented by an EU force aimed at ensuring a
secure environment in the Bangui area.
Those are but a few examples of the ever more
complex and multidimensional peacekeeping missions
with the involvement of regional actors, each offering
specific lessons for future missions of the kind. A key

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

element is to advance cooperative planning and early
consultations on mission types, political strategic
objectives, the desired end state, tentative timelines and
exit strategies. Adequate training for troops, especially
as mandates become more robust, with the critical tasks
of the protection of civilians, is essential, as well as
on international humanitarian law and human rights
law. Targeted training on gender sensitivity, protecting
women and children in armed conflict and combating
rape as a tool of war must remain at the core of all
peacekeeping training.
To make United Nations and regional partnerships
work better, the comparative strengths and requirements
of all actors should be identified, mandates and
responsibilities clearly defined, clear command and
control structures put in place and resources ensured.
As the concept paper rightly points out, the current
planning processes of the regional partners in Africa
could benefit from improvement. To address that,
the EU, through its African Peace Facility capacitybuilding component, is working to increase the capacity
of the AU and of the regional economic communities in
the planning and conduct of peace operations.
However, we are also keenly aware that as effective
as peacekeeping cooperation may be, it can deliver only
up to a point. However effective and well-coordinated
a peacekeeping operation might be, comprehensive
efforts are required, including putting an end to
impunity, justice and reconciliation processes, the
strengthening of the rule of law, institution-building,
solid good governance and a human rights framework,
as well as creating a solid framework for long-term
economic development.
While those peacebuilding processes can be
started by the United Nations and regional actors, their
sustainability can succeed only if national capacities
are developed and national ownership of the processes
is ensured. With the aim of assisting in developing such
national capacities, the EU has established a number
of military and civilians training missions in Africa
and elsewhere, working in the areas spanning from
enhancing border security and maritime capacities to
combating terrorism and organized crime.
Lithuania is proud to contribute to those efforts — in
Mali, for example, where our military advisers are part
of the EU training mission aimed at improving the
military capacity of the Malian Armed Forces. In 2013,
Lithuania also deployed troops to the EU anti-piracy

S/PV.7228

Operation Atalanta. We now participate in the NATO
Operation Ocean Shield to combat piracy off the Horn
of Africa. In each case we are able to appreciate the
value and effectiveness of cooperation between the
United nations and regional organizations. Once again,
we thank the Rwandan presidency for giving us this
opportunity today to review the related successes as
well as the concerns, especially in view of the larger
review announced by the Secretary-General.
Let me conclude by expressing our deepest
appreciation and respect to the thousands of men
and women peacekeepers — military, police and
civilians — who dedicate themselves to the noble goal
of protecting others and who all too often sacrifice their
lives in the line of duty.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank Rwanda for organizing this important public
debate under its presidency. This initiative clearly
illustrates its commitment as a major troop contributor
to United Nations and African Union missions, as well
as its commitment to increased cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
the maintenance of peace. My thanks also go to the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
African Union and the Deputy Secretary General of
the European External Action Service for their very
informative briefings.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is essential to maintaining
international peace and security. As the examples
of Mali and the Central African Republic illustrate,
regional organizations acting under a United Nations
mandate have greater legitimacy and are able to access
support from the United Nations if necessary. In return,
the United Nations can benefit from the expertise and
operational capacity of regional organizations.
It is on the African continent that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is the most visible and most necessary. In the Sudan,
including Darfur and South Sudan, the United
Nations and the African Union are working hand in
hand. In that regard, it is important that the Security
Council continues to strongly support the work of
mediation undertaken by the African Union High-level
Implementation Task Force. We hope that this support
will be in evidence during the upcoming dialogue with
President Mbeki.

14-4863819/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In another example of partnership in South Sudan,
an agreement was reached to incorporate within the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan the force
proposed by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to support the monitoring and verification
mechanism under the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities.
To avoid the worst in Central African Republic,
the African Union and the Community of Central
African States have combined their efforts to establish
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA), with the support
of the Security Council. MISCA has saved many lives
and is preparing the ground for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). For its part,
Luxembourg has made ​​a financial contribution to the
African Union to strengthen MISCA for the transition
to MINUSCA. We also participate in the European
Force in that country, whose efforts to consolidate
security in Bangui should facilitate that transition.
As a member, Luxembourg welcomes the strong
partnership between the United Nations and the
European Union, a partnership that benefits primarily
Africa. European Union-United Nations cooperation
covers the immediate crisis response, humanitarian
efforts, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development.
As Mr. Popowski has indicated, synergies between the
United Nations and the European Union on the ground
where they work side by side are significant. That is the
case in the Central African Republic, but also in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Mali,
especially in the area of security sector reform.
Europe supports the development of African
capacities to manage crises through training and the
provision of equipment. By 2016, more than 17,000
African military personnel will have been trained with
European support, some of those in Mali and Somalia by
Luxembourg instructors. The support of the European
Union and its member States can also be seen in their
substantial contributions to the operating budgets of the
United Nations and the African missions, especially
through its African Peace Facility.
The presence of several operations in the same
theatre of operations strengthens the need for
coordination at political, operational and financial
levels. Such coordination involves constant exchanges
of information and experiences at all levels of the

20/65

28/07/2014

chain of command in order to make interventions
more effective and efficient. In that spirit, we favour
deepening the triangular cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union.
I wish to conclude by underscoring the fact that
the contribution of regional organizations is equally
important for protecting children in armed conflict,
be it through cooperating with the Office of Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and UNICEF or through
crafting guidelines on children in armed conflict,
taking into account protection of children in planning
operations, training personnel or deploying childprotection specialists on the ground. Resolution 2167
(2014), prepared by Rwanda and which we sponsored,
highlights that issue, and rightly so.
In the area of the protection of children in armed
conflicts, as in many other areas, the United Nations
and other regional organizations can make a difference
by working together and in a complementary manner.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, of
the European Union and of a number of regional
organizations on the European continent, Luxembourg
will spare no effort to contribute.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for Rwanda’s strong leadership of the Security
Council this month and for your country’s significant
contribution to peacekeeping, a task to which Rwanda’s
own history brings both deep empathy and an operational
determination. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, and Ambassador Téte António
and Mr. Maciej Popowski for their remarks. I also
want to recognize the indispensable role of the African
Union (AU) and the European Union (EU) as partners
in our collective efforts to maintain peace and security.
We were of course pleased to sponsor today’s resolution
2167 (2014).
The need for effective cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations is selfevident. No single organization alone can conduct
all the multifaceted tasks required to support and
consolidate peace around the globe.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations lies at the heart of peacekeeping.
Drawing on their unique strengths and distinct
comparative advantages, borne of their deep knowledge
of local context, cultural understanding and moral
authority, regional organizations are deploying, often
as first responders, into volatile environments to help

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

protect civilians and save lives. We have seen that
pointedly in places such as Somalia and in the Central
African Republic.
At a time when the world is torn by more
simultaneous peace and security crises than it has
for decades, when civilians in larger numbers are in
greater threat from conflict than at any time since the
Second World War, and as the demand for peacekeeping
therefore intensifies, we must accelerate our efforts to
foster predictability and trust in our partnerships. By
strengthening mechanisms for forthright dialogue at
both the strategic and operational levels, we can better
achieve unified views on key issues of mutual interest
and, importantly, translate them into tangible results on
the ground. That engagement should be anchored in the
knowledge that we cannot rely on ad hoc improvisation.
We must develop a broader strategy for anticipating and
responding to future challenges together. And we must
embed robust peacekeeping operations with protecting
civilians at their core.
As more regional organizations become involved
in peacekeeping, we must continue to strive for
greater coherence and inter-operability, as you said,
Sir, and greater structure. We need to enhance early
engagement between the United Nations and regional
organizations during the planning and transition phases
of a peacekeeping mission.
In our own region, Australia has seen the rewards
of inclusive cooperation and well-planned transition
between regional peace missions, host nations and
United Nations offices. The strong participation of
regional partner organizations in Solomon Islands, for
instance, and the transition to peace in Timor-Leste
after the drawdown of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and the International Stabilization Force,
show that such arrangements can be highly instrumental.
Above all, we need to improve our collective
capacity for rapid deployment in response to emerging
crises and, critically, those that endanger civilians. No
organization has yet developed an enduring solution to
this persistent and increasing challenge. We welcome
the AU’s progress in this area and the commitment
made by African leaders to operationalize the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises. We call
on all Member States to support the development of
policies, guidelines, doctrines and training for the
African Standby Force as part of the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

S/PV.7228

The President’s concept note (S/2014/478, annex)
for today’s debate rightfully highlights the situation in
Africa. It is where 8 out of every 10 United Nations
peacekeepers are deployed and where so much of the
Council’s attention is focused. We also acknowledge
the important role that the EU plays, having launched
some 30 peace missions and operations to contribute to
stabilization and security since 2003, including many
in Africa. Australia and the EU will soon conclude an
agreement providing the legal basis for Australia to
participate in the EU’s Common European Security and
Defence Policy missions.
As today’s resolution 2167 (2014) reminds us,
regional organizations are responsible for securing
their own human, financial and logistical resources, but
international partners must improve the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations participating in peacekeeping under a
United Nations mandate. In doing so, our focus should
be on improving the capability of regional peacekeepers
and on building a culture of efficiency, accountability
and transparency.
We must embrace cost-effective force-multiplying
technologies to strengthen the impact of peacekeeping.
By improving the technical standards of individual
units, we can improve inter-operability and boost
operational effectiveness at a relatively lower cost.
We must also invest more in our capacity to
undertake effective conflict prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding. Australia emphasizes the instrumental
role, indeed at times even decisive role, of policing
in multidimensional peacekeeping operations. We
reiterate that the role of women in peace and security
must be fully mainstreamed in all mandates. Without
the engagement of, and awareness of the effects of
conflict on, women and girls, there simply can be no
lasting solution to conflict.
In conclusion, we have witnessed a sharp increase
in demand for peacekeeping in recent years as
complex, often simultaneous, crises across the globe
have multiplied. We can expect that to increase; the
trajectory looks even worse. We must harness our
combined strengths to maximize our capacity to meet
those challenges. It is a simple truism that regional
organizations need a strong United Nations, and the
United Nations needs strong regional organizations.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the Rwandan presidency for taking

14-4863821/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the initiative of convening this open debate on “United
Nations peacekeeping operations: The United Nations
and regional partnership and its evolution”. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Mr. Popowski of the European Union and Mr. António
of the African Union for their briefings.
In my statement, I will emphasize the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
There are three main areas I would like to stress,
namely, the political, operational and financial.
In terms of the political, despite the primacy of
the Security Council, the dispositions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter set out and encourage agreements with
regional entities to maintain international peace and
security. In that regard, the United Nations should
establish and strengthen effective partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations.
We particularly welcome the partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping. We applaud
the annual meeting of the members of the Security
Council and the members of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, along with consultations
between the Secretariats of the United Nations and the
African Union Commission through their respective
offices, and we encourage exchanges of personnel and
knowledge between the United Nations and the African
Union at all levels and in all areas.
The African Union, which is the successor to
the Organization of African Unity, is a young but
committed organization. It is bold and determined,
has swift deployment capacities and increasingly
takes risks and imposes peace where it didn’t exist,
taking into account linguistic, historical, geographical
and cultural symmetries, thus arriving at a better
understanding of the realities on the ground, all of
which is undeniable. Despite weaknesses in financial,
human and logistical and material resources, the AU
has deployed a number of peacekeeping operations on
the continent, specifically the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan, the AU-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia and the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali, as well as the International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic.
Those regional operations have greatly contributed to
peace and security internationally.

22/65

28/07/2014

We must recall that Africa is prominent on the
agenda of the Security Council, with 16 United Nations
operations currently deployed on the continent. All six
countries currently on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission are also African. We should add to that
the crises in the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and North Africa, specifically Libya, as well as other
threats, such as terrorism, organized crime, trafficking
of all types in the Sahel region and maritime piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and along the Somalian coast.
Those many crises are one more reason to strengthen
the partnership. Meetings and consultations between
the the African Union and the United Nations should be
deepened and intensified, in a spirit of mutual respect,
before taking important decisions with regard to
international peace and security and on the continent.
The two organizations can and should do better
with regard to conflict prevention and mediation, as
well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding in Africa. We
ask the United Nations and the bilateral and multilateral
partners to assist the African Union to operationalize as
quickly as possible its Peace and Security Architecture,
especially the Rapid Reaction Force project and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises
team. With regard to operations, despite laudable
initiatives, good will and the work of the African
Union and other regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of Western African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of Central African States to
resolve disputes on the continent, those subregional
organizations still face major challenges with respect
to resources, equipment and logistics.
The insufficiencies of the African States and
subregional and regional organizations are usually
compensated by assistance from the United Nations and
bilateral partners, who provide the necessary support,
whether by flying in troop contingents or by donating
equipment. We can also address those gaps through
South-South cooperation and even intra-African
cooperation to strengthen our own capacities so
that we do not rely exclusively on outside support.
Likewise, coordination, the exchange of information
and collaboration have enabled the improved analysis
of situations and better planning and implementation
of peacekeeping operations. In that regard, we welcome
the joint United Nations-African Union review of
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the joint

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

evaluation missions of the United Nations-African
Union in advance of the transformation of African
peacekeeping operations to peacebuilding operations
of the United Nations.
With respect to finances, we applaud the
contributions of the United Nations, the European
Union, and the bilateral and multilateral partners
to peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
Trust Fund, the African Peace Facility and voluntary
contributions have all been very useful to the
peacekeeping operations of the African Union,
especially for the African Union Mission in Somalia.
We welcome the transformation of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali into the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and we are awaiting the transition of
the African-led Mission in the Central African Republic
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
in September.
It is important to promote capacity-building for the
stabilization of recent post-conflict areas and also to
provide for the security of maritime routes and coasts.
We therefore welcome the increase in the personnel
of the Mission and the support to the Somali army
provided through a trust fund. We would also ask the
Security Council to re-examine the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia in order to facilitate the supply of
weapons and other material to the security and defence
forces of Somalia.
Given the current economic and financial context
and the balance of power on the continent, African
efforts, supported by United Nations mandates, are
very important, because they are less costly than United
Nations operations and are increasingly effective. In
that regard, the African Union Mission in Somalia is
a good example of partnership between the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union and
other partners and might serve as a model for more
significant contributions to the budget.
We call upon Member States and partners to
provide voluntary contributions to the Peace Fund of
the African Union, and we ask the Security Council
to make available to the African Union the necessary
resources that will enable it to further contribute to
international peace and security. It is time for all of the
recommendations of the Prodi report (see S/2008/813)

S/PV.7228

designed to ensure predictable, flexible and lasting
financing to be taken into account and implemented.
Finally, we would like to pay tribute to all the
African troop contingents for their work on the ground,
despite limited means and difficulties encountered, and
we would like to express our gratitude to the United
Nations, the European Union and the multilateral and
bilateral partners. Chad continues to be committed
to contributing to international peace and security,
as reflected in its past contributions in support of
the Central African Republic in the context of the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, the Multinational Force of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community in
the Central African Republic, the Multinational Force
of Central Africa, the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic, and the Africanled International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, as well as African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, which has today become the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Rwanda for
organizing this important and timely debate and for the
concept note (S/2014/478, annex) provided to guide our
discussions. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his relentless pursuit of global peace. We
also thank the Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations and the Deputy Secretary
General of the European Union External Action Service
for their profound, thoughtful and inspiring briefings.
In recognition of the complementary role that
regional organizations can play in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, former Secretary-General
Boutros Ghali drew attention, in his 1992 report entitled
“An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111), to the promise of
Chapter VIII of the Charter through regional action,
which could foster security and contribute to a deeper
sense of participation, consensus and democratization
in internal affairs. He recommended that the Security
Council grant authority to a regional organization
during a crisis situation.
United Nations peacekeeping efforts have since
involved regional and subregional organizations in
peacekeeping operations across the globe. That is
evident in the joint efforts conducted by the United
Nations with the Association of Southeast Asian

14-4863823/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations, NATO, the Organization of American States,
the AU and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). For example, ECOWAS, through
its peacekeeping arm, the ECOWAS Cease-fire
Monitoring Group, responded effectively to situations
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau and helped
to stabilize them prior to the deployment of United
Nations missions.
The increasing demand for peacekeeping missions,
and the multidimensional nature of contemporary
peacekeeping operations, calls for a more robust
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We believe that the time is ripe for
reflecting on ways of improving the peacekeeping
capabilities of regional organizations in order to
effectively complement United Nations peacekeeping
efforts. A cursory overview of United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1948 indicates a total
of 69 operations undertaken to date, of which 54 are
past and 15 current. Of the 54 past operations, 22,
representing slightly more than 40 per cent, were in
Africa. Ten of the current 15 operations are in Africa.
Of those 10, 5 have remained either permanent or
recurrent, underscoring the critical importance of the
Security Council’s sustained engagement, together with
the African Union, in order to improve their partnership
for effective peacekeeping in the region.
This situation has led African regional and
subregional groups to take steps to enhance
peacekeeping efforts on the continent. The AU is
moving energetically towards establishing an African
Standby Force; similarly, ECOWAS is developing a
subregional standby force. Other African subregional
organizations, traditionally focused on development
and economic goals, are beginning to pay more
attention to peace and security issues. The concept
note provided for today’s debate identifies the context
of the challenge to the peacekeeping efforts of the AU
and the constraints affecting the AU-United Nations
peacekeeping partnership, which include logistical,
operational and financial issues. The strengths indicate
that significant efforts must still be made to enhance
the peacekeeping capabilities of the AU for a more
effective peacekeeping partnership with the United
Nations.
Two
reports
containing
recommendations
for improving the partnership between the two
organizations are worth noting — the Prodi report of
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities

24/65

28/07/2014

for support to African peacekeeping operations (see
S/2008/813) and the report of the Chairperson of the AU
Commission on the need for greater coherence in the
AU-United Nations partnership. They comprehensively
address the measures needed to achieve an effective
peacekeeping partnership between the United Nations
and the AU.
A major challenge limiting the peacekeeping
capabilities of the regional organizations is financial
resources. In resolution 1809 (2008), the Security
Council recognizes that and calls for enhanced
predictability, sustainability and flexibility in financing
for regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. In its
efforts to meet its financial challenges in the context of
peacekeeping missions, the AU has sought authorization
for the use of United Nations assessed contributions for
AU peace operations. That is in consonance with the
Prodi report, which also recommends establishing a
multi-donor trust fund for the purposes of supporting
African Union peacekeeping capacity. We believe that
effecting these recommendations will provide the AU
with predictable funding for its peacekeeping efforts.
The recommendations of the high-level panel chaired
by Nigeria’s former President Obasanjo on alternative
sources of financing for the AU are also relevant in that
regard. They should therefore be implemented in order
to give the AU greater access to financial resources for
funding its peacekeeping operations. It is worth noting
that the AU has recently undertaken a comprehensive
reform effort that has resulted in improved financial
management.
In terms of operational challenges, we believe that
a great deal more could be done in the areas of United
Nations-AU capacity-building programmes, joint
assessment missions and planning exercises in order to
enhance regional peacekeeping missions’ performance.
The joint adoption of measures aimed at meeting
evolving peace and security challenges is also relevant
in the context of contemporary peacekeeping.
Another critical operational challenge is logistics.
Logistical deficiencies represent a well-documented
and recurrent problem in AU peacekeeping missions
that has compelled the AU to rely almost exclusively
on assistance from outside the continent for logistics
for its missions. A long-term solution would be for the
AU to establish its own logistics base. We take positive
note of the fact that the Department of Field Support
is exploring the possibility of giving the AU access to

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations logistics facilities and to a surge capacity
for critical missions’ start-up phase, as recommended
by the Prodi report. Nevertheless, we believe that some
form of bridging mechanism will be required until the
AU logistics base becomes operational.
In terms of the political elements of peacekeeping,
we share the view that due to the factors of proximity
and first-hand contact during an outbreak of conflict,
regional organizations remain the most relevant in
initial efforts to maintain peace. In West Africa, for
example, ECOWAS has often taken the lead in peace
efforts when conflicts have erupted. The Economic
Community of Central African States has played a
very strong leadership role in conflict resolution in
the Central African subregion. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has been instrumental in
the quest for peace in South Sudan. The African Union
has also taken the lead in various conflict situations
in Africa, including Darfur, Somalia, Mali and the
Central African Republic. It is evident that regional
and subregional organizations tend to demonstrate
more political will in dealing with conflicts, especially
in their early stages. This can be attributed to the
greater sense of urgency that members of regional
organizations share when it comes to containing and
resolving conflicts, particularly when there is a risk of
mass atrocities or regional instability.
In terms of collaboration and coordination, Nigeria
fully supports the current deeper level of interaction
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, conducted through the annual joint
consultations between Addis Ababa and New York.
There is considerable merit in the close collaboration
between the AU Commission and the United Nations
Secretariat, as well as the institutional mechanisms
that have been put in place, such as the joint task
force and desk-to-desk. Such mechanisms help to
bring together the senior leadership and focal points
in both organizations for discussion of issues of
mutual interest. More attention should also be paid to
information management in order to improve synergy
in the implementation of mandates.
As the AU-United Nations peacekeeping
partnership continues to evolve, there is a need for
intensification of the current collaboration between
the two institutions in order to consolidate the gains
already achieved.

S/PV.7228

Ultimately, constructive interaction among
members of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council on substantive issues related
to peacekeeping remains relevant to creating a costeffective and mutually beneficial United Nations and
AU peacekeeping partnership. Indeed, a strategic
framework embodying a common vision for such
cooperation and a road map for its implementation can
aptly guide this kind of interaction.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We commend the Rwandan presidency for convening
this open debate and and appreciate the concept note
it has prepared (S/2014/478, annex). We would also
like to thank Secretary-General and the observers of
the African Union and the European Union for their
briefings.
As we have stated before, my country believes that
collective action is essential to addressing traditional
and emerging threats to international peace and
security. The involvement of regional and subregional
organizations is highly relevant to that end. That is how
my country interprets Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations with a view to promoting efficient
multilateralism. Resolution 2167 (2014), adopted today,
is a reflection of the recognition of this contribution
and of the need to strengthen the capacity of collective
responses, thereby renewing the commitment of this
Council to the aforementioned Chapter VIII.
The resolution adopted today takes stock of the
growing role of regional and subregional organizations
in recent years as significant actors in the international
system, especially in terms of their contribution to
maintaining international peace and security. By
fostering the participation of regional and subregional
organizations, we are also promoting the collaboration
and cooperation in peacebuilding efforts, which
represent the flipside of peacekeeping. In that regard,
cooperation between the United Nations and these
organizations promotes good governance, democracy,
respect for human rights and enhances justice,
reconciliation and development.
The decentralization and devolution of the efforts
of the international community makes it possible to
delegate certain elements of peacekeeping mandates
to regional and subregional organizations. This has the
potential to promote regional participation, but, more
importantly, it can generate consensus and deepen
trust in the management of international issues. In that

14-4863825/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

regard, and acknowleding the pre-eminence of African
issues on the agenda of the Council, we welcome the
efforts and work carried out by and with the African
Union. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular should continue to work to deepen the
strategic relationship with the African Union, in
particular with its Peace and Security Council, as well
as with other subregional organizations.
In addition to these efforts, we recognize those
carried out by our region and others in maintaining
international peace and security. In particular, we
highlight the commitment of the countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which is the only
peacekeeping mission on our continent. Through the
contribution of troops and police contingents, the
countries of the region have supported Haiti on its path
to stabilization, sustainable peace and development.
In addition to bilateral efforts, we note those of the
Organization of American States, the Union of South
American Nations and the Carribean Community,
which, guided by the principle of national ownership,
have contributed to the institutional strengthening of
the Haitian State.
My delegation wishes to highlight the preventive role
of regional and subregional organizations in identifying
and managing the escalation of local conflicts, thereby
obviating the need for the Council to be seized thereof.
To that end, it is vital to create and establish early
warning mechanisms for regional developments that
have the potential to affect international peace and
security. Their geographical proximity, as well as
better understanding of the regional situation and the
causes of armed conflicts, are a comparative advantage
that the Council and the United Nations must recognize
and exploit. This will make it possible to ensure due
complementarity and a better use of existing resources
and capabilities.
With regard to the generation of forces for
peacekeeping operations, regional and subregional
organizations should ensure that their personnel have
the necessary training and skills, in accordance with
the standards established by the United Nations.
Training and military capabilities should go hand
in hand with proper preparation and training in
human rights and international humanitarian law;
the protection of civilians, particularly women and
children; the prevention of sexual and gender violence;
the rule of law and post-conflict reconstruction, among

26/65

28/07/2014

others. In that context, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000), we appeal to the regional and subregional
organizations to pay special attention to ensuring
the full mainstreaming of women and the gender
perspective into all the activities related to peace and
security that they undertake, developing the capacities
and skills necessary for their full participation.
We acknowledge the advice and support that the
United Nations provides in developing these skills and
in conducting such training, with special emphasis on
good practices and lessons learned. However, it should
not end there. Regional and subregional organizations
should deepen cooperation with their peers, taking
advantage of South-South cooperation to make use of
available mechanisms.
Some institutions in countries of the South have
training capacity that has been recognized by the
United Nations. In 2002, for example, my country
established the Chilean Joint Peacekeeping Operations
Centre, which is in charge of preparing and training
personnel of the armed forces, police and civil forces in
planning, implementating and evaluating peacekeeping
operations. In this way, we strengthen capacities and
knowledge of civilian, military and police work in an
integrated way. The Centre currently has an exchange
of instructors from the region and Europe, thereby
strengthening its domestic and foreign contingent.
Along the same lines, we highlight the
establishment in 2006 of the Argentine-Chilean Joint
Peacekeeping Force known as Southern Cross, which
in 2012 was made available by both Governments to
the United Nations for deployment in peacekeeping
operations. Moreover, in 2013 my country signed a
crisis management framework agreement with the
European Union, which provides a legal basis for the
participation of Chile in civilian and military crisis
management operations led by the Union. Currently
Chilean forces are deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina
under this framework.
The Council has recognized that regional and
subregional organizations are in a good position to
understand the causes of armed conflicts, given their
knowledge of the region. This could help efforts to help
prevent or resolve such conflicts. That is why we firmly
appeal for a deepening of this partnership and for its
comparative advantages to be put to use with a view
to ensuring that collective action reflects an efficient

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

multilateralism, in the spirit of Chapter VIII and the
principles underlying our Organization.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate
on peacekeeping operations, the United Nations and
regional partnership and its evolution, and for your
wise stewardship of the affairs of the Council.
We also express our appreciation to Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations;
the Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service; and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations for
their participation in this meeting and for their
comprehensive briefings on the efforts made in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Jordan, like other countries working under the
auspices of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, is deploying efforts
in that respect in various regions in the world, so as
to contribute to efforts to secure peace, stability and
security. That falls within the framework of the work of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We are one of the main countries
involved in this noble United Nations mission, as we
contribute 2,729 personnel to peacekeeping forces,
which is a main task in context of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The United Nations continues to coordinate efforts
to de-escalate tensions and to mobilize support to end
long-term conflicts. Undoubtedly, the field experience
gained by the United Nations over half a century is
an indispensable tool in that respect. Peacekeeping
operations are one of the most effective tools available
to assist countries ravaged by conflict in creating
conditions conducive to the establishment of sustainable
peace.
However, we would like to stress the importance of
focusing efforts on dealing with root causes and taking
into consideration the political and peace processes in
the host countries, so that peacekeeping operations do
not become an alternative to finding a solution to such
conflicts.
Peacekeeping operations that lack resources,
mobilization and effective and adequate participation
cannot contain the armed conflicts that come in the
wake of civil wars; this also undermines the safety of
peacekeepers. Hence peacekeeping operations, once

S/PV.7228

they have undertaken their functions, are in many
cases subject to risks that could threaten them with
failure. The United Nations should therefore strengthen
the legal protection for peacekeepers in a manner that
ensures the smooth functioning of their operations,
especially in the light of cooperation with regional
organizations.
It is also important to launch a constructive dialogue
on the legal aspects of peacekeeping operations, as some
of them are under Chapter VI, some under Chapter VII
and some in conjunction with Chapter VIII, within the
framework of regional arrangements.
This calls for further discussion and for a
revitalization of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34), as well as for a dialogue between
the C-34, the Fifth and Sixth Committees, the
Security Council and other international and regional
organizations.
Peacekeeping activities have been expanded, which
leads to difficulties with respect to coordination with
the relevant stakeholders and vagueness in the mandates
of such missions. This poses additional practical
challenges for such activities. The United Nations has
been establishing entities that enable a rapid response
and make it possible to exert greater efforts with fewer
resources.
However, Jordan would like here to express its
concern at the concept of cooperation between missions
and the transfer of peacekeepers from one mission to
the other, because such utilization for long periods of
time has negative repercussions on the performance of
the missions and creates an imbalance.
The experiences of troop-contributing countries
are important to the revitalization and development
of peacekeeping operations. Such experiences give
countries the ability to take part in all phases of planning
for peacekeeping operations. Hence Jordan supports
consultation and dialogue between the Secretariat, the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries,
and we reiterate the importance of benefiting from the
experience of countries that have overcome conflict and
post-conflict stages through South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation.
We would also like to refer, with regard to
international peace and security, to the importance
of cooperation arrangements between the United
Nations and the relevant regional and international

14-4863827/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

organizations with regard to joint peacekeeping
operations, in the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, in the enhancement of collective
efforts, particularly given that the United Nations is not
capable of undertaking such tasks on its own.
There are many reasons for this, primarily the
increase in the number of conflicts as well as other
financial burdens. Hence it is important to coordinate
with regional organizations, as they have political,
military and financial resources at their disposal.
In that regard, we would like to highlight the
importance of harmonization between the United
Nations and regional organizations in joint missions, in
particular with regard to the disclosure of information
to any relevant party. In this regard, we would like
to reiterate the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly in early-warning-system
enhancement. That would contribute to predicting
conflict before it erupts and promote a quick response
thereto.
Here we would refer to the pivotal role of the
United Nations and its agencies. The role of regional
organizations, which is certainly important, should
not, however, serve as a substitute for the role played
by the United Nations, which it should complement and
support.
In that regard, it is important to enhance
coordination between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, within the United Nations, and its partners,
so that there can be an exchange of experience and avert
any duplication of effort.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to support peacekeeping operations and
to enhance the preparedness of the United Nations
to overcome obstacles to the safety and security of
peacekeepers through the provision of political support
and sound strategies for peacebuilding.
My delegation believes in a true partnership between
stakeholders with a view to enhancing peacekeeping
and will continue to mobilize support to that end.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and also to thank you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene today’s debate
between the Security Council, which is in charge
of peacekeeping for the Secretariat, and regional

28/65

28/07/2014

organizations, as well as the main troop-contributing
countries, which will speak later and which are also key
actors in peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping operations are a key tool at the
disposal of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, regional organizations
play a growing role in peacekeeping, which we must
encourage. We must therefore continue with our efforts
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations,
be it through the Security Council or the Secretariat,
and regional organizations.
The issue of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations inspires four
comments on the part of France. To start with, a
basic observation is necessary. In most of the crises
addressed by the Council, action is undertaken, for the
most part in partnership with regional organizations. It
has become a natural reflex. In that respect, the African
organizations are clearly emblematic, particularly the
African Union (AU). Accounting for nearly 70 per
cent of the Council’s action, Africa, indeed, plays a
special role in the work of the Council. In that context,
cooperation with the African Union has become part of
its daily functions.
That partnership has deepened in recent years
to include several areas of work. In the political
arena, several partnership arrangements have been
created, for example, the Council’s support in regional
mediation efforts, whether in the form of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel on the Sudan
and South Sudan or the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) mediation concerning South
Sudan. Another example of partnership is the joint
mediation conducted by the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) with the support of
the AU and the United Nations in the Central African
Republic, which, a few days ago, helped in the effort to
work out a ceasefire agreement.
Various forms of AU-United Nations partnership
can also be found in the area of operations, inter alia,
logistical support by the United Nations to support
anti-terrorism actions on the part of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, which would fall outside of classic
United Nations peacekeeping efforts. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
is also worth mentioning, as is the African Union’s
interim stay with the United Nations in Mali and later,

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in the Central African Republic. Such multifaceted
cooperation should be encouraged. Article 52 of the
Charter of the United Nations provides that
“[t]he Security Council shall encourage the
development of pacific settlement of local disputes
through such regional arrangements or by such
regional agencies”.
Generally, regional organizations are well suited to
resolving crises, whether through their knowledge of
the situation in the field, their areas of influence or their
self-interest in the stability of neighbouring countries.
A natural complementarity exists therefore between
the United Nations, which embodies peacekeeping’s
universal dimension, and regional organizations.
That cooperation also helps in promoting
regional ownership, in this case by Africans, of their
own security. United Nations support enables the
development of capacities, thereby strengthening the
actions of regional organizations. For example, the
Senegalese contingent that is taking over the new rapid
reaction force of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in Liberia
will strengthen capacities that will be used in the
peacekeeping efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States.
France and the European Union fully support
strengthening the regional organizations, particularly
in Africa. Regarding the military sector, France and the
European Union have become military partners of the
African Union. First, in Mali, and now in the Central
African Republic, French and other European soldiers
have conducted actions in support of African Union
soldiers to ensure the protection of civilians under the
mandates contained in the Council’s resolutions. In the
Central African Republic, the tripartite partnership
was clearly key to assisting the rapid intervention
before mass crimes could be committed. I would like
here to take the opportunity to salute the courage of
the soldiers of the African Union, European Union and
France, who acted in harmony to protect populations
at risk.
In the financial arena, the European Union is the
largest contributor to African Union operations and
finances 90 per cent of that organization’s programme
budget. The European Union’s African Peace Facility
is a unique tool facilitating the EU’s support of the
African Union when it deploys operations to preserve
peace on the continent. As examples we can cite the

S/PV.7228

African Union Mission in Somalia and the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, which have demonstrated the decisiveness of
such support. To preserve that tool, it is also necessary
that African organizations be able gradually to assume
an increasing share of the financial burden of their
actions and that other African partners contribute to the
financing of African peace operations.
Finally, on the diplomatic front, France is studying
its role in terms of its partnerships with African
organizations. In the spirit of close partnership, the
President of the Republic convened on 6 and 7 December
2013 an Africa-France summit on the issue of peace and
security in Africa. Its purpose was to define particular
ways to support the AU in coping with crises, whether
via the African Standby Force or the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crises.
The adoption of resolution 2167 (2014), introduced
by Rwanda, is valuable in highlighting, in terms of
policies, the importance of the link between the United
Nations and regional organizations, particularly the
African Union. We await with interest the outcome of
the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General,
in close consultation with the African Union and
the European Union, on lessons learned regarding
cooperation efforts in Mali and the Central African
Republic and with recommendations for improving
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union. That work will nourish the parallel review of
peacekeeping announced last month by the SecretaryGeneral and will enhance the Council’s efforts in
maintaining peace and security, particularly in Africa.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing today’s debate and to
thank the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing.
We also thank the briefers for their presentations, which
added the regional perspective to today’s discussion.
When the peace and security of a country is
disrupted, it affects not only the people of the country
in question, but also the neighbouring countries,
thereby inevitably creating regional implications.
Under those circumstances, regional and subregional
entities are positioned to play a pivotal role by utilizing
their deep understanding of and potential influence on
the parties in conflict. Countries in the region are often
instrumental in preparing or executing peacekeeping
activities of the United Nations. We have witnessed such
examples in Somalia, Mali, the Democratic Republic

14-4863829/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

of the Congo, the Central African Republic and South
Sudan. In that regard, I would like to underline a couple
of points on ways to enhance regional partnerships with
respect to United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
First, swift response by regional players is critical
for the early stabilization of conflicts. The coordinated
response of the United Nations, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the African Union (AU) to the situation in the Central
Africa Republic could be a useful case study for an
effective sequencing of peacekeeping activities. ECCAS
troops of the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace
in the Central African Republic were transitioned into
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic, which is now undertaking a
further transition process to become part of a United
Nations peacekeeping mission — the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. Bilateral partners and
donors have also played key roles in terms of logistics
and financing.
Secondly,
interregional
partnerships
in
peacekeeping activities between the AU and the
European Union (EU) call for our attention, as they
facilitate a swifter and more flexible response to deal
with the situation in the field. It is an evolved form
of applying Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, bridging a gap in the transition process
towards a full-fledged United Nations peacekeeping
mission under Chapter VII. In that regard, we welcome
the ongoing efforts among the regional organizations
to consolidate partnerships. We also hope that the
Secretary-General will take that aspect into account
when he reviews ways to ensure progress in partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
pursuant to resolution 2167 (2014), which was adopted
by the Council in the morning.
We need to note that international intervention
does not automatically resolve conflict. Indeed, as
we are witnessing in South Sudan, even full-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping operations and support
from donors can not prevent relapses into conflict.
Well-prepared strategies and enhanced partnerships
are needed. Regional organizations and the United
Nations need to devote a greater portion of their
partnership efforts to early warning and prevention
efforts. Preventive strategies are less costly and more
effective than peacekeeping operations. In addition,
the comparative advantage of the region of concern

30/65

28/07/2014

and the United Nations should also be fully utilized in
mediation and reconciliation efforts.
The majority of peacekeeping missions currently
in operation are engaged in intra-State conflicts,
for which the primary responsibility lies with the
Government concerned. The combined efforts of the
United Nations and the regional entities should therefore
focus on enhancing national ownership and leadership.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform are all very important elements
in that regard. We hope that the Council, building on
today’s discussion, will continue to explore ways to
strengthen the United Nations partnership with regional
and subregional organizations.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on a topic to which Argentina attaches
great importance not only as a troop-contributing
country but also because we recognize the value of
regional organizations participating in maintaining
international peace and security.
Our way of working and our requirements and
responsibilities may seem paradoxical. Yesterday
evening, we met to address an emergency or an
urgent situation, namely, the tragic situation in Gaza.
We unanimously adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/13), which you, Mr. President, issued
and in which the Council called for the immediate and
unconditional humanitarian ceasefire and for progress
towards the initiative for durable peace mentioned in
various resolutions of our Organization by countries
of the region, such as Egypt, and by various leaders
of different countries, groups of countries and the
Organization itself. Now we are undertaking a mediumand long-term consideration. That is the ethical and
strategic challenge facing the Council. Holding such
debates with the increasing participation of the entire
membership of the Organization, with less dogmatism
and more innovative ideas, would perhaps contribute
to you, Mr. President, or whoever holds the presidency,
having to convene fewer emergency meetings or
meetings on urgent situations.
Regional organizations, such as the African Union
and the European Union, as well as our Latin American
and Caribbean organizations, in particular have views
on that necessary topic of the prevention of conflicts,
not their provocation, and cooperation, not competition

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and controversies. I therefore believe that the convening
of this meeting is very timely.
The instrument that the Council adopted today
(resolution 2167 (2014)) should promote a theory and a
current way of looking at peacekeeping operations. When
it presided over the Security Council, the delegation of
Pakistan, headed by its Minister for Foreign Affairs
and its outstanding Permanent Representative, took a
forward-looking approach to the topic, assessing the
achievements of the past and, on that basis, adopting
resolution 2086 (2013). That resolution continues to
guide our debates and decisions, such as the one that
we adopted today, which clearly will further strengthen
our action. The same was achieved by the resolution
adopted under the Pakistan delegation when it held the
Security Council presidency last year.
Forgive me for introducing that issue. It was not
in my text. I did so not because I am the last member
of the Council to speak but because I have once again
been able to learn from the thinking and the similar and
differing views that each member has expressed. All
of us have clearly underscored the elements on which
we agree, namely, that the participation of regional
and subregional arrangements and organizations in
maintaining peace is not a matter of preference or
occurrence but a strategic necessity in an increasingly
interdependent and interconnected world. We face
a complex and challenging perspective, in which
the area of our activity is much closer and becomes
globalized. International problems have an impact on
our communities, neighbourhoods and homes and on
our political decisions and way of seeing the world. The
dynamics of such a scenario have undoubtedly led to
a more plural world that acknowledges diversity and
can enjoy much broader cooperation in various areas,
from the economic to the social fields. African, Latin
American, Caribbean and South-South cooperation
provide an example of that, not to mention triangular
and North-South cooperation.
However, at the same time, we see and face new
forms of conflict, transnational and international
threats, violence and atrocities. It would therefore be
inept, to say the least, if not irresponsible to overlook
or minimize the fact that the Charter of the United
Nations promotes the Security Council’s use of regional
arrangements in order to meet its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security. That is to
say that not only has the past become the present with
the resolution adopted last year, but that the present

S/PV.7228

is part of the future, in that upcoming peacekeeping
missions will be intrinsically linked to the process of
the regionalization of peacekeeping operations.
We must highlight what various colleagues have
said. The involvement of regional organizations
cooperates and complements the work of the United
Nations and the Security Council through the inclusion
of such bodies but it does not replace it. Rather, it
incorporates a knowledge of the context, including a
better and deeper understanding of the causes of the
confict. That is of vital political interest in successfully
completing missions, not to say in saving lives and in
protecting oneself from the fear of loss of life.
Geographical affinity, the experience of a similar
and related way of life and cultural expression and the
feeling of trust that local actors can usually generate
are without doubt comparative advantages. We have
found them to be empirical evidence of great value
for the implementation of peace agreements and the
monitoring of a cessation of hostilities so as to open the
way for negotiations and political and social agreements
and to help in the transition towards strengthening the
rule of law through stable and legitimate Governments
on the basis of democratic principles.
Such advantages also support humanitarian action,
promote efforts for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants and contribute to
protecting and ensuring full respect for human rights.
We must ensure in particular that the rights of women
and children are respected, as the representative of
Luxembourg mentioned earlier. We must focus on
vulnerable persons, those who are discriminated
against, marginalized or excluded who, if they were
already in that situation in times of peace, are even
more exposed in times of unrest and war.
The United Nations brings and must bring
universality and legitimacy, to which we should add
its great experience and operational capacity. The
Security Council’s monopoly on authorizing and
deploying peacekeeping operations and implementing
mandates and conditions for deployment implies that
operations led by regional or hybrid organizations
must be subject to United Nations mandates and
objectives. They must respect the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of countries in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, and they must meet
the obligation of regional organizations to keep the

14-4863831/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Security Council informed of their activities. That will
make it easier to understand how to act. It is sometimes
also necessary — clearly necessary — that there be
accountability, and not just financial accountability.
The accountability of peacekeeping operations must be
measured in terms of human lives that are protected,
saved and taken care of.
I know that there are many speakers still waiting
to take the floor and that we have many activities
scheduled for today, but I believe it is important to set
out three principles that are essential for my country.
First, in the process of outsourcing the association
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations based on non-discriminatory
and balanced cooperation, we must surely include
conditions such as the provision of technical,
specialized assistance by the United Nations in the
planning and deployment of regional peacekeeping
operations, as well as the application of its concept of
operations and the establishment of the headquarters
of a mission to strengthen the administrative command
and control arrangements, improve communications
and information technology infrastructure and provide
training in all necessary areas, including human rights.
Secondly, appropriate coordination mechanisms
between the United Nations and regional organizations
must be established.
Thirdly, financing mechanisms that will provide
appropriate levels of predictability, sustainability,
viability and dignity should be put in place, and not
just sufficient financing for equipment but also for the
living and working conditions of our peacekeepers.
Our colleague from Chile mentioned this point
so I will not repeat it, but, naturally, Latin America,
our region, is a region of peace, which is not a gift of
nature, but rather a joint decision of our societies that
is sustained by public policies that favour democracy
and human rights. All of this has made peace a value
for us, and conflict is not a value when it comes to
solving problems, disputes and controversies. Our
diverse organizations, such as the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations and the Southern Common Market,
show that, in addition to conflict prevention, we have
signed onto the democratic clause.
We await the second biannual report of the
Secretary-General on cooperation between the

32/65

28/07/2014

United Nations and regional, subregional and other
organizations, as well as recommendations on methods
to strengthen that cooperation.
We wish to thank the delegation of Rwanda.
We support resolution 2167 (2014) because of its
contribution to our current thinking about the future
needed to ensure peacekeeping operations and to create
a more consistent framework.
In the Fifth Committee, there is a debate about the
budget. There are discussions at each meeting on on
the precise meaning of the term “robust”. There are
debates about not contradicting the essential nature of
peacekeeping operations pursuant to the Charter, and
issues that seem to be distanced from those mandates.
There are debates on whether the leadership should go
to the United Nations or to the regional organization.
There are debates about how to train. There is tension
about the use of the new technologies, such as drones,
which Argentina considers fundamental, as long as
they are deployed within an ethical framework and with
reliable manuals of procedure. Given all those ongoing
debates, I believe that this one is very timely.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I give the floor to the Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs and Special Assistant to the Prime Minister of
Pakistan.
Mr. Fatemi (Pakistan): I am delighted to be here,
Mr. President, and commend your initiative to convene
this debate on United Nations peacekeeping, with a focus
on regional partnerships. As a leading troop contributor
and a key stakeholder in United Nations peacekeeping,
Pakistan is deeply committed to collective efforts to
strengthen peacekeeping and the global and regional
partnerships that underpin it.
Regional cooperation is an important dimension
of the work of the United Nations in various fields,
ranging from peace and security to development and
human rights. The Charter of the United Nations, under
Chapter VIII, provides for a direct relationship between
the Security Council and regional arrangements and
entities. That relationship also extends to peacekeeping.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Security Council has accorded high priority
to enhancing regional cooperation, as manifested in
its growing partnerships with Africa, including the
African Union Peace and Security Council, and with
subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the South African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. The European Union has
also been an important partner for peace in various
theatres.
The Non-Aligned Movement is a key player because
its members provide more than 85 per cent of United
Nations peacekeepers. Latin America has contributed
to the Council’s peace efforts, particularly in that
region. Cooperation with the League of Arab States
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is
crucial to reinforcing United Nations peacekeeping and
mediation efforts in Africa and the Middle East.
It is necessary to diversify and deepen those
partnerships to give swift responses to conflicts,
promote durable solutions, ensure long-term prevention
and prevent relapse into conflicts. In that context, I
would like to highlight the following points.
First, in exercise of its mandate, the Security
Council deals with hard-core issues of peace and
security, as well the closely related issues of stability,
peacebuilding, transitional justice and economic revival
in post-conflict situations. If we are to ensure tangible
results in those areas, we need comprehensive strategies,
to which regional and subregional organizations
bring important complementary resources, expertise
and insight. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiatives, built around regional partnerships that seek
to tap their full potential, such as in the case of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, and
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
We must continue to strengthen that trend.
Secondly, regional partnerships become more
significant as regions assume ownership of their peace
and security issues. Africa is a prime example. The
African Union and its subregional organizations are
increasingly in the lead in responding to conflicts, at
times acting independently and at others in support of
the United Nations. Often, African interventions have
initially restored stability and paved the way for United
Nations deployment. In some cases, most notably in

S/PV.7228

Somalia, Africa continues to shoulder the primary
responsibility for maintaining and keeping peace,
awaiting an eventual United Nations peacekeeping
operation. From those experiences, the importance of
realizing the full potential of regional partnerships,
based on complementarities and comparative
advantages, is evident. Partnerships must be anchored
in a clear strategic vision if they are to attain the
political and operational coherence needed for success.
They are also important to preventing fragmentation.
Thirdly, adequate capacity and resources are
essential for the effective planning and management of
any peacekeeping operation, whether regional, hybrid
or United Nations. Therefore, when authorized by
the Security Council, African peacekeeping missions
should be fully supported in various aspects, from
planning and funding to equipment, logistics and
training. Streamlined processes and a capability-driven
approach should guide the provision of such support for
enhanced efficiencies and effectiveness.
Fourthly, it is logical that the focus of this debate
is on Africa. The bulk of peacekeeping is currently
concentrated on that continent. Partnership with Africa
has also enabled the United Nations to intervene and
provide support in a variety of ways. There is a need
to take these partnerships to a higher plane. Strategic
cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council should be further enhanced on the basis of
mutual trust and confidence.
Pakistan has contributed to United Nations
peacekeeping for over five decades, having participated
in 41 United Nations missions in 23 countries from
Africa to South-East Asia to the Balkans and Central
America. Pakistan has always demonstrated a strong
commitment to peace and security in Africa. The bulk
of our troops is presently deployed there. Through our
experience from Liberia and Sierra Leone to Burundi,
the Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we have come to appreciate the value of regional
partnerships and cooperation. Pakistan is deploying
additional troops in Darfur, and we are contributing
to the mission in the Central African Republic, despite
the daunting conditions there. In the coming years, the
Security Council would benefit by associating the OIC
and the League of Arab States with its work.
Peacekeeping is a collective responsibility of
the entire United Nations membership. It is indeed a

14-4863833/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

partnership. Individual troop-contributing countries
are the building blocks of that partnership. Regional
cooperation has the potential not only to address the
resource and capacity gaps on the security side, but also
to help formulate better and integrated strategies on the
political, humanitarian and development sides. We hope
that this debate will assist the Council in consolidating
those partnerships, in the best interests of regional and
international peace and security.
Today, the United Nations is once again under the
spotlight and close scrutiny. This body, the Security
Council, has to live up to the promises of its founding
fathers and to prove to the world that it is succeeding
in its declared objectives — namely, in maintaining
international peace and security — and that the United
Nations as a whole has the political will and the
capability to prevent and resolve conflicts. The global
citizenry is demanding that this body be more assertive
and effective in addressing the issues, whether they be
in the Middle East or in Ukraine. The importance of
peacekeeping and regional cooperation will increase
manifoldly in the coming years as new and more sinister
fault lines emerge in conflict areas.
Let us work together to avert wars and conflicts,
to fight the scourge of terrorism and to steer our planet
towards peace, harmony and sustainable development.
The Security Council has to play its rightful and pivotal
role in achieving those objectives. Pakistan stands
committed to the enhancement of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening
today’s open debate on this important subject. I will
circulate my statement but, to save time, I will speak
only to the most salient points.
I believe that there is a consensus within the
Organization that peacekeeping operations constitute
the most important tool the United Nations has for
maintaining international peace and security, and that
this tool should be constantly reviewed and improved.
The challenge before us is how to make United Nations
peacekeeping operations more sustainable with respect
to both financial and human resources.
In that connection, I would like to touch upon
the latest development concerning the United Nations

34/65

28/07/2014

peacekeeping budget for 2014-2015. After lengthy
debate, the budget was finally adopted on 3 July.
For the first three days of the month, there was no
budget to pay for United Nations peacekeepers. While
acknowledging the difficulty of the negotiation and
the severe financial conditions faced by many of us,
including Japan, in coping with the ever-increasing
size of the peacekeeping operations budget, it is our
collective responsibility to ensure that such an anomaly
does not arise again.
Let me turn to the main topic of today, namely, the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
arrangements. Regional and subregional organizations
can provide vital capabilities for peacekeeping
operations. Their deep knowledge and understanding
of regional matters, as well as of local networks,
significantly improve the effectiveness of United
Nations operations in a synergetic manner within the
United Nations. Japan welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2167 (2014) and appreciates your leadership,
Sir.
Nine out of 16 current peacekeeping missions are
operating in Africa and their personnel and budget
make up more than 70 per cent of the whole. That
reflects how crucial peace and security in Africa are
for international peace and security. I would like to
highlight two points regarding the way forward on the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
arrangements, particularly in the context of Africa.
My first point concerns enhanced coordination
between the United Nations and regional arrangements.
Regional arrangements are often the first groups
to respond to regional crises. Therefore, they are
indispensable partners in helping the United Nations
to fulfil its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In Africa, we
see several key developments concerning such a
partnership: the first is the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; the second is
the re-hatting of African-led missions to the United
Nations peacekeeping missions in Mali and the Central
African Republic; and the third is the provision of
logistical support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia by the United Nations. Japan welcomes recent
efforts to coordinate partnerships, including the annual
consultative meetings between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council, and
looks forward to seeing further developments in that
regard.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

My second point is on the importance of support
for regional arrangements. In order for regional
arrangements to fulfil their role as first responders in
maintaining regional peace and security, it is essential
to strengthen support for regional capacity-building. In
that regard, Japan has been supporting Africa through
two approaches. The first is support for the activities
of the African Union in peace and security. For 17
years, Japan has been supporting the African Union in
that area through contributions to its Peace Fund. The
total contribution is approximately $12 million dollars.
The second approach is support for enhancing African
regional capacities, particularly in human resources.
Since 2008, we have provided a total of $37 million
and dispatched our trainers to 13 African peacekeeping
training institutions. Among those, I would like to
elaborate today on our support to Rwanda, the country
of the presidency.
In 2008, Japan provided $3 million to support to
the establishment of the Rwanda Peace Academy. The
Academy has conducted 25 courses and workshops
covering a wide range of issues related to peacekeeping
operations, such as the protection of civilians, security
sector reform, and peacebuilding. Since 2010, more
than 700 personnel have received training through the
Academy. They are mainly from African countries,
but also include peacekeepers from other regions.
The Rwanda Peace Academy has become one of the
regional centres of excellence for training and serves to
strengthen regional peacekeeping capabilities.
In my view, Japan’s approach, which I have outlined,
is in line with the resolution adopted today. Japan wishes
to contribute to peacekeeping operations by broadening
its involvement, in conjunction with strengthening its
cooperation with regional arrangements, under the
banner of a proactive contribution to peace.
In closing, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all peacekeepers and offer my deepest
condolences for those peacekeepers who have made the
ultimate sacrifice.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Sweden.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I thank you for providing
this opportunity to discuss how the partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
can be further developed. I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

S/PV.7228

In promoting peace and stability, enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is key, and the increased role of regional
organizations in peacekeeping contributes to the
efficient use of scarce resources. In Africa, the African
Union is shouldering a heavy burden alongside the
United Nations. We commend the progress made by
the African States within the framework of the African
peace and security architecture, bringing increased
knowledge and ownership to conflict management on
that continent. A more results-oriented cooperation
and a stronger African ability to deal with peace and
security challenges on African soil will be of benefit
to all.
The Nordic countries commend the role played
by African forces both in the framework of regional
missions, such as the African Union Mission in Somalia,
and in United Nations settings. More recently, in the
Force Intervention Brigade in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, African forces have again accepted to take
on high levels of risk, and have achieved significant
progress as a result. We also welcome the intention
of the African Union to develop its civilian conflictmanagement capacities, and stand ready to support that
endeavour.
The Nordic countries fully agree with the
conclusions of the concept note that was circulated
prior to today’s meeting (S/2014/478, annex) regarding
the complementary roles of the regional economic
communities, the African Union and the United
Nations. Alongside the United Nations, other regional
organizations such as the European Union (EU), as
well as NATO, give important logistical and financial
support and contribute to capacity-building.
The Nordic countries would also like to commend
the Latin American countries for their support to
United Nations peacekeeping, in particular through
their engagement in Haiti and their large contributions
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
Similarly, we welcome the engagement of the League
of Arab States in conflict-management efforts in the
Middle East, notably in Syria.
Over the years, we have seen that the international
community lacks the capability to react quickly to early
warning signals. South Sudan and the Central African
Republic are recent examples. The early warning
mechanisms of the African Union and regional economic
communities, such as the Economic Community of West

14-4863835/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

African States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), have the potential to improve
this situation, and we hope that they can be further
developed in collaboration with the United Nations.
Although there are unarguably clear advantages of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, and between regional and subregional
organizations, this also creates challenges, not least in
the areas of command-and-control, joint planning and
coordination. Well-structured partnerships are needed
for the smooth transfer of regional operations to United
Nations operations and vice versa.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s June 11
announcement that he will be initiating work on a
comprehensive review of United Nations peacekeeping
(see S/PV.7196). The review should closely study
how United Nations partnerships with regional
organizations can be further developed, especially
regarding their operational aspects. A ministerial event
on the challenges of United Nations peacekeeping will
be organized by Finland and Uruguay in cooperation
with the International Peace Institute during the highlevel week of the General Assembly in September.
Effective peace operations require a comprehensive
approach. The Nordic countries continue to emphasize
the importance of ensuring that the framework for
women and peace and security is reflected in all aspects
of peacekeeping and activities relating to it. The Nordic
Centre for Gender in Military Operations, located in
Sweden, is designed to support the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions.
Strengthening the rule of law has emerged as a
central objective for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and has led to the expansion and increasing
complexity of international police mandates and tasks
in peacekeeping operations. The strategic guidance
framework for international police peacekeeping
being developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in close collaboration with Member
States, is designed to provide an overarching policy
architecture. A strategic guidance framework police
command meeting, to be co-hosted in Pretoria in October
by the Institute for Security Studies, South Africa, the
Swedish Police and the United Nations Police Division,
will further the framework’s development.
The Nordic countries are strongly committed to
peaceful conflict resolution in Africa. We are jointly
engaged in several capacity-building programmes with

36/65

28/07/2014

the Eastern Africa Standby Force that include giving
financial and advisory support, and we contribute to
capacity-building within the African Union Commission
and IGAD. The Nordic countries contribute troops,
military observers and staff officers, as well as police
and corrections officers and other civilian personnel,
to both United Nations and EU peace operations across
the continent. We are already contributing to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and Sweden will soon
make a substantial contribution, with an intelligence
collection capability, in support of MINUSMA’s allsources information fusion unit. In the area of civilian
personnel, we contribute to the majority of United
Nations missions in Africa, including MINUSMA, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
For more than a decade, the European Union has
been engaged in civil and military crisis management
and capacity-building in Africa, in partnership with
the United Nations and regional partners. One of the
instruments of the European Common Security and
Defence Policy is the EU Battlegroup concept, inspired
by the successful conduct of Operation Artemis in 2003,
in support of the then United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the spring of 2015, the Nordic Battlegroup, in which
Estonia, Finland, Ireland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway
and Sweden participate, will be on standby and capable
of carrying out military crisis management operations
should the EU member States decide to launch such an
operation.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries welcome the
Security Council’s increased attention to the issue
of enhanced cooperation and partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations, and
we stand ready to contribute by supporting regional
capacity-building and through direct participation in
international and regional peacekeeping efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over this very
meaningful open debate on peacekeeping operations
and their relations with regional organizations. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Deputy Secretary General of the European External
Action Service, Mr. Maciej Popowski, speaking on
behalf of High Representative Catherine Ashton, and
Ambassador Téte António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, speaking on behalf
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
In a world order forged collectively by our own
actions, Brazil supports the creation of a multipolar
system based on cooperation, devoid of unilateralism
and exceptionalism; an order founded on the primacy of
multilateralism and aimed at seeking peaceful solutions
to the challenges faced by the Security Council.
Diplomacy and dialogue are essential to that view. As
the useful concept note (S/2014/478, annex) circulated
by the Rwandan delegation makes clear, the history
of the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations in conflict situations is not new.
In the recent past, examples of their cooperation have
taken place around the world, in varying forms and
levels of intensity. Brazil is convinced that harmonizing
the purposes and actions of regional and international
actors strengthens multilateral efforts towards peace.
In my own region, the Union of South American
Nations has in the past few years sought to build an
institutional architecture that can help to promote
peace, cooperation and stability. The South American
Defence Council has established an innovative
coordination and cooperation mechanism for South
American countries in matters of peace and security.
Greater regional integration has been instrumental in
encouraging many countries of the region to support
the efforts of the United Nations to stabilize Haiti, the
only country in the Americas where a United Nations
peacekeeping mission is currently deployed.
Today, Africa is the main locus of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. Brazil is a strong believer
in the benefits of fostering African solutions to African
problems. The same logic applies when we deal
with peacekeeping operations on that continent. We
commend the stabilization efforts that have recently
been made by the African Union, with the support
of subregional organizations, in Somalia, the Central
African Republic and West Africa.
Developing such cooperation, in Africa or
elsewhere, requires that some principles be followed.
First, United Nations collaboration with regional and
subregional organizations should enable the Security

S/PV.7228

Council to better exercise its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security across the
globe. In that process, the Council should always
respect and take into consideration the mandates and
purposes of the various regional organizations. In no
way should cooperation in peacekeeping be understood
as an outsourcing of the Council’s authority or an
endorsement of doctrines of military alliances that
define their sphere of action beyond their members’
territory.
Secondly, policy decisions should not be driven
by financial constraints. The arguments at the two
extremes — that transferring responsibilities to regional
organizations can help reduce the peacekeeping budget,
or, conversely, that their efforts should be integrally
backed by United Nations financial resources — tend
to put financial considerations before the political
and humanitarian foundations of any peacekeeping
operation. Furthermore, it is essential to support and
preserve a certain degree of diversity in terms of the
countries that contribute to those operations in order to
safeguard their legitimacy, which is why reimbursing
African Union operations at an adequate and sustainable
level is fundamental. On the other hand, regional
arrangements among developed countries should not
unnecessarily drain resources from United Nations
peacekeeping missions, which already cost less than
1 per cent of the world’s annual military budget.
Thirdly, we should be conscious that coordination
and unity of purpose are not easy to achieve when we
put two or more international entities together. While
the goal of peace and security, founded on respect for
human rights and solidarity, must be our compass,
pragmatic considerations are also important. The
interests and priorities may vary from the subregional
to the global level. The closer one is to the conflict, the
greater are the effects of its actions — unfortunately,
not always in ways conducive to ensuring lasting peace.
Lastly, maintaining international peace and
security in Africa, as anywhere in the world, is not and
cannot be limited to peacekeeping. Conflict-prevention,
post-conflict peacebuilding and strong economic
development, with social justice and the eradication
of poverty, are key to maintaining and consolidating
political stability.
Contemporary peacekeeping operations involve
multidimensional mandates and the deployment of
advanced technological assets. They face greater risks

14-4863837/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

derived from the presence on the ground of insurgent
groups not willing to recognize the United Nations
legitimacy as an impartial broker. All these tendencies
occur against the backdrop of the increased reluctance
of some Members to spend more on peacekeeping, not
to mention on post-conflict peacebuilding, even when
many of those same States are increasing their domestic
military budgets.
Peacekeeping mandates must be accompanied by
the necessary resources, and by the same token regional
actors must spare no effort to progressively bring their
troops up to United Nations standards of performance.
We encourage the African Union efforts to have its
African Standby Force ready by 2015. If we do not
invest simultaneously in better operational capabilities
for troop-contributing countries, on the one hand, and
in adequate financial means for peacekeeping, on the
other, the end result of this double dilemma could be
the erosion of peacekeeping’s credibility.
As stressed by the Fortaleza Declaration, adopted
at the sixth Summit of the Brazil, Russia, India, China
and South Africa (BRICS) association few weeks ago in
Brazil, the leaders of the BRICS countries welcomed the
decision taken at the African Union Summit in Malabo,
Equatorial Guinea, to establish an interim African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises (ACIRC)
by October to respond quickly to crisis situations as
they arise. They underscore the importance of adequate
support to ensure the timely operationalization of
ACIRC, pending the final establishment of the African
Standby Force.
Brazil wishes to stress that no administrative
arrangement between global and local institutions can
replace political consensus-building. It is precisely
the necessary convergence of views and interests, at
times very elusive and difficult to obtain, that is the
missing link in most cases of failure. The very nature of
peacekeeping — the willingness to compromise in order
to save lives and relieve suffering — is an indispensable
first step towards mustering the consensus needed
to promote stability and, in the longer term, prevent
relapse. The United Nations and regional organizations
should be partners in this endeavour, sharing the burden
according to their own capabilities in the fairest way
possible. No amount of peacekeeping resources will be
enough if diplomacy is not deployed with even greater
emphasis.

38/65

28/07/2014

As always, Brazil is ready to contribute its fair
share, not only in peacekeeping, but also in promoting
diplomacy, conflict -prevention and peaceful settlement
of disputes as the essential basis for the cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the Deputy Secretary General for
the European External Action Service, Mr. Popowski,
on behalf of the European Union (EU). I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Threats and challenges to international peace and
security require a coherent, coordinated approach
on the part of the international community. That is
why the United Nations is consolidating partnerships
with Member States and regional and subregional
organizations. Many regional and subregional
organizations have long histories of cooperation with the
United Nations in conflict-prevention and mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Cooperation between
the United Nations and European Union in conflict
prevention and management has become a major
component of global security governance today.
The EU-United Nations partnership is today heavily
operations-driven. A recent, pragmatic example is the
EU Mission to the Central African Republic, which is
preparing the ground for a United Nations mission that
will take over in September.
But there are many other important examples of close
EU-United Nations cooperation in crisis management.
These include, inter alia, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and the European Union Integrated
Border Assistance Mission in Libya, under the Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) — and I take this
opportunity to stress the gravity of the current situation
in Libya and its capital, Tripoli, to which my country
attaches great importance; the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo; the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and the European Union
Training Mission in Somalia, under the command of
Italy, which also provides its main contingent; and
the European Union Training Mission in Mali, the
European Union CSDP Mission in Niger and the United
Nations Multidimentional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The principles underpinning our action are those
of the African Peace and Security Architecture, which
proposes to increase the capacity of both the African
Union and the regional economic communities in
planning and conducting peace-support operations.
We should aim at building on their best practices and
creating synergies among these groups. To that end, my
country has consistently provided financial support to
implement a project, which has different modules in
different countries, in order to promote knowledge and
skills for rendering operative the civilian component of
the African Standby Force.
In the Horn of Africa, many of our interventions
in the field of peace and security have been conducted
in cooperation with the African Union, whose role we
praise. We have also provided political and financial
support to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the regional organization for the
Horn of Africa. We have backed IGAD’s endeavours for
peace in South Sudan and Somalia, always encouraging
close cooperation with the United Nations and the
African Union. The project we have developed with
IGAD’s Somalia Office for the resolution of outstanding
issues between the Somali Federal Government and the
Juba Administration is particularly meaningful. That
initiative and others have addressed centre-periphery
relations, which, we believe, remain one of the key
issues of the Somali stabilization process. Our support
has always been transparent and in keeping with the
New Deal for Somalia and with the United Nations’
lines of action.
Italy is the top contributor of Blue Helmets among
the members of the Group of Western European and
Other States and the seventh top contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget. It is in this same spirit that
my country also strongly supports EU-United Nations
cooperation. Under Italy’s presidency of the European
Union Council in 2003, renewed United Nations
cooperation in crisis management began through the
adoption of the joint declaration on EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management. Many significant
achievements have followed since then.
The current Italian presidency of the European
Union Council would like to take stock of the best
practices and lessons learned in this cooperation and
further build on this partnership. This is why we are
pleased to host, on this topic — with Germany and
with the help of some well-known think-tanks — two
high-level regional seminars whose programmes were

S/PV.7228

presented during the 17 July event in New York, in the
presence of Under-Secretary-General Ladsous. The
seminars will take place this coming fall in Rome and
Berlin, followed by a final conference in Brussels.
In a 2010 statement to the Security Council, the EU
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Lady Ashton said:
“The reasons behind the creation of the United
Nations were similar to those that originally
drove European integration: ‘to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war’. Today, the
United Nations and the EU need to promote the
ideals that inspired earlier generations... in a new
world.” (S/PV.6306, p. 2)
As a founding member of the EU, Italy firmly
believes in the vision of the united States of Europe and
in a unique European foreign and defense policy. Italy
has always embraced the vision and the values of the
United Nations Charter. The United Nations and the EU
are two sides of the same coin, two paths leading to the
same goal — a peaceful world. To achieve this goal,
we need more Europe in United Nations peacekeeping,
and my country is proud to be on the front line of this
commitment.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Rwanda for organizing this open
debate and for the concept note (S/2014/478, annex) it
has prepared on this important topic. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his observations.
As a troop-contributing country, we deem it
indispensable to hold a debate on all issues related to
the maintenance of peace under the United Nations
flag, especially given the rapidly changing conditions
facing such operations.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and would like to make some observations from our
national perspective.
First, peacekeeping operations must have clear,
achievable and verifiable mandates, tailored to each
particular situation and taking into account the
requirements and circumstances of each case. In order
to successfully implement the mandates of the Security
Council, it is necessary to address the issue of the major

14-4863839/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

gaps in the areas of skills, resources and training through
greater coordination between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop-contributing countries. In that
regard, we believe that regional organizations can play
a key role, especially given their strategic position and
proximity to the field.
Secondly, the growth and expansion of
United Nations peacekeeping operations has led
to increasingly complex mandates. This makes it
necessary to strengthen the capacity to assess conflict
situations; carry out effective planning based on
accurate information; strengthen measures aimed
at the protection and safety of forces; and devise a
rapid-response strategy for emergency situations. The
participation of and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations from the planning
stage of peacekeeping operations can help to ensure the
provision of more complete and detailed information,
thus leading to the establishment of better mandates,
concepts of operations and rules of engagement. This
will require the promotion and development of clear
policies for better cooperation in all areas with such
regional entities.
Thirdly, the Charter gives the United the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that context, we must recognize
the contribution that regional arrangements and
agencies can make to peacekeeping, in keeping with
the provisions of Chapter VIII. Regional arrangements
and agencies have supported and contributed to the
activities of United Nations peacekeeping; these efforts
must continue. It is therefore necessary to support
regional peacekeeping operations, ensuring predictable
and sustainable mechanisms for their funding.
Fourthly, the relationship between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding must improve. Efforts made towards
the maintenance of peace must be accompanied by
equal efforts towards economic recovery and capacitybuilding. In this regard, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund play a critical role in
enhancing States’ potential and preventing a return
to conflict. We must promote the involvement and
cooperation of regional organizations in such processes.
Finally, I should like to touch on a specific issue
that concerns the credibility of the United Nations
and peacekeeping operations. I refer here to a point
made in the nineteenth report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to

40/65

28/07/2014

the Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We are
deeply concerned about this observation. We call on the
Secretary-General to address, as a matter of priority,
the Prosecutor’s request that a full, independent
and transparent investigation be conducted into
allegations that serious crimes against civilians and
troop contributors are being covered up in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We also call on the Council to support the
call made by the Prosecutor in the interests of effective
accountability.
I shall conclude by reiterating Guatemala’s
commitment to provide troops with the highest
standards of efficiency, competence, discipline and
integrity to United Nations peacekeeping operations. I
also wish to pay tribute to all those working in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, especially those who
have made the supreme sacrifice for this noble cause.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): I wish first to express the gratitude of
the Spanish delegation to the Rwandan presidency for
having convened this open debate, which allows us to
address an issue of increasing importance, that is, the
cooperation of regional and subregional organizations
in the crucial work that peacekeeping operations are
currently carrying out.
Spain welcomes the growing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
field of peace and security under Chapter VIII of the
Charter. We believe that this cooperation strengthens
the collective efforts of the international community to
keep and build the peace. These efforts form the basis
of such operations, which always operate according to
the mandate given them by the Security Council.
Spain stresses the need for mechanisms that
ensure greater efficiency of peacekeeping operations,
with robust, clear and appropriate mandates, and, of
course, sufficient resources for their discharge. We also
deem it important to devote attention to the changing
circumstances, needs and challenges faced daily by
peacekeeping operations on the ground. In order to
achieve this, we support the active participation of the
countries and regional and subregional organizations
concerned in the debates and decision-making processes
on such missions that take place in the Security Council.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The work of regional and subregional organizations
has become indispensable to ensuring a rapid response
to difficult situations, so as to meet new challenges and
to strengthen local and regional ownership, which is
essential to the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
We must continue working to deepen and strengthen
mechanisms aimed at improving the coordination and
complementarity of our actions, with the ultimate
aim of increasing their effectiveness and coherence.
Dialogue with regional and subregional organizations
should be ongoing.
Spain is very pleased at the level of cooperation
achieved between the European Union and the United
Nations, at both the institutional and operational
levels, which has produced very positive results on
the ground in countries such as Mali and the Central
African Republic. We will continue to work with other
European Union partners to deepen this collaboration.
The regional approach enriches our understanding
of local challenges and brings us closer to the concerns
and needs of the countries and peoples most directly
affected by conflict, thus facilitating the adoption
and implementation of effective, comprehensive and
sustainable solutions.
We wish here to express our deep appreciation
for the commitment, effort and dynamism shown by
regional and subregional African organizations in
response to the continent’s peace and security-related
challenges. Spain favours African ownership and
African-owned solutions through the strengthening of
African mechanisms and capacities for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts. We
acknowledge and welcome African political, military
and financial efforts for the resolution of crises on
the continent, including those initiatives taken by the
African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States.
We support the African Union’s resolve to obtain
the means and resources necessary to ensure peace
and security in Africa through the African Peace and
Security Architecture. That determination to assume
greater responsibilities must be translated into a greater
role for Africa in all decision-making centres.
Spain is firmly and actively committed to peace
and security in Africa, as this issue affects us directly.

S/PV.7228

Since my country first participated, in 1989, in a
peacekeeping mission in Africa, we have been present
in more than 20 African countries. This commitment
is currently reflected in our active participation in
European Union missions in Mali, Somalia and, more
recently, the Central African Republic. Furthermore,
Spain has supported the African Union and ECOWAS,
both financially and politically, in order to promote the
development of their responsibilities in that area.
Spain is firmly committed to the essential endeavour
of peacekeeping operations, to which regional and
subregional organizations contribute effectively. We
shall continue working with other Member States and
regional and subregional organizations in strengthening
and improving such cooperation, which has already
generated many positive results and which we hope will
continue to do so in future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): The conditions in which
peacekeepers operate today have changed dramatically.
Unfortunately, the number of conflicts is on the rise
and they are increasingly of an intra-State nature.
Asymmetric threats are emerging more frequently.
Furthermore, United Nations peacekeeping has become
a multidimensional establishment, with significant
post-conflict peacebuilding activities in various areas.
No single organization can cope with the
requirements and challenges of a peacekeeping
initiative. Due to that fact, partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, have become indispensable. We
believe that such partnerships should be established and
strengthened with a strategic, long-term and mutually
beneficial perspective.
As the majority of the Council’s agenda is
occupied by peace and security challenges in Africa,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) regarding peacekeeping issues
draws the most attention. A welcome observation is that
the partnership between the two organizations has been
strengthened, enhanced and deepened significantly,
especially in the past decade. We also welcome the
increasing coordination and coherence efforts between
the African Union and subregional organizations in
the continent which will further consolidate African

14-4863841/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

28/07/2014

leadership and ownership in overcoming challenges
faced by the continent.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

The United Nations-AU partnership can be further
intensified by strengthening the institutionalization of
their relations. In addition, despite the enormous efforts
and leadership of the AU in addressing threats to peace
and security in Africa, the organization still requires
logistical, financial and capacity-building support in
dealing with regional instabilities. Efforts to establish
the African Standby Force should be redoubled. Last
but not least, the United Nations and the AU can
jointly undertake an exercise to draw lessons from past
experiences.

Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open
debate on peacekeeping operations and for preparing
the concept note (S/2014/478, annex) that forms the
basis of today’s debate. I wish to also express my
delegation’s appreciation to the Secretary-General and
the observers of the African Union and the European
Union for their respective briefings earlier today.

Turkey fully supports the leading role of the United
Nations in peacekeeping missions and is committed to
expanding United Nations partnerships with regional
organizations in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
peacemaking efforts. In line with that thinking, let
me on this occasion point out that Turkey, Finland and
the members of the Group of Friends of Mediation
have presented their third draft resolution focusing on
the role of regional and subregional organizations in
mediation.
We believe that, besides the African Union,
organizations including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia, NATO, the
League of Arab States, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation, the Pacific Islands Forum, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Union of
South American Nations, the Organization of American
States and many other regional and subregional
organizations have important roles to play in ensuring
peace and stability together with the United Nations.
Intraregional cooperation, such as that between the
European Union and the AU, can also significantly
contribute to common efforts to maintain peace and
security and to building on the lessons learned from
different cases.
In conclusion, we would like to seize this
opportunity to pay homage to the women and men
serving as peacekeepers, and express our condolences
for those who have sacrificed their lives in the line of
duty.

42/65

Malaysia would like to associate itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representative of
Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
It is worth recalling that under the Charter of the
United Nations, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, while regional organizations
have the responsibility to work towards the peaceful
settlement of issues and conflicts within their
respective regions. We are encouraged to note that, thus
far, various international organizations — including
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the European Union (EU), NATO and our very own
ASEAN — have been playing active roles in the
peaceful settlement of disputes at the regional level.
Malaysia believes that regional organizations should
continue to play a leading role in efforts to resolve
conflicts within their regions.
We all agree that partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations involving
peacekeeping operations offer unique comparative
advantages. Apart from commanding legitimacy
and affinity in their respective regions, regional
organizations can provide useful information that
could contribute, in turn, to enhancing the overall
effectiveness of United Nations efforts in managing
conflicts, as well as in addressing the root causes
of conflicts. Some regional organizations may
demonstrate even greater flexibility in the allocation
of resources. Coupled with geographical proximity,
regional organizations can deploy assets, including
troops, more rapidly than the United Nations, which is
often crucial in saving more lives. Now the question is:

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7228

How can we further enhance the effectiveness of such
cooperation in order to maximize the benefits?

To date, the Centre has trained 1,931 local officers and
612 international participants from 52 countries.

Malaysia firmly believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations should
be an ongoing and dynamic process. Given the
increasingly complex and multidimensional nature
of today’s peacekeeping operations, it is vital that
policy development at the intergovernmental level be
undertaken by consensus. The policymaking process
must also be based on the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and guided by the basic
principles of peacekeeping. Malaysia reaffirms that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
is the appropriate body in charge of policymaking in
peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping operations depend to a great extent
on both financial and personnel resources. Malaysia is
all too aware that resources in a time of great economic
challenge are scarce. The discussion of the new troop
reimbursement rate at the most recent session of the
Fifth Committee only further attested to that challenge.
It is imperative for Member States to remain committed
to supporting United Nations peacekeeping missions. In
that regard, Malaysia is of the view that both the United
Nations and the respective regional organizations must
strive to adopt a more effective approach to generate
sufficient resources for peacekeeping operations.

A capability-driven approach should be one of the
key strategies to address the evolving nature of present
and future peacekeeping. It should focus on developing
capability standards, as well as on comprehensive and
effective training and preparation. It is essential that
the United Nations and regional organizations use the
same peacekeeping terminology and have a common
understanding of the basic doctrine and operational
rules of engagement that could be practically applied
under various circumstances.
In addition, it is vital for peacekeeping personnel
to be provided with clear operational tasks, appropriate
guidance and training, and the necessary tools and
equipment to enable them to carry out their duties
effectively. Peacekeepers must also be constantly aware
of the cultural sensitivities and local peculiarities of
the areas where they serve. That could be achieved
through joint training workshops and awareness-raising
programmes conducted by the United Nations in troopcontributing countries and in the respective national
peacekeeping centres.
For our part, in June 1995 we established the
Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre, which is tasked with
training and providing armed forces officers, the Royal
Malaysian Police and non-governmental organizations
with appropriate knowledge of peacekeeping prior to
assignment with the United Nations. Over the years, the
Centre has collaborated with various United Nations
agencies, including the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme, as well as with training centres of partner
countries in conducting various training programmes.

Another key issue that the United Nations
and regional organizations must emphasize is the
importance of effective and efficient logistical support,
which has often been stretched too thin. It is of the
utmost importance to provide logistical support at the
right time, in the right place and in the right quantity to
meet the demands on the ground. Acknowledging that
there is no single solution that will be able to satisfy
the varying needs of different missions, the United
Nations, regional organizations and other partners must
cooperate so as to enhance their logistical capabilities.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the men and women of the United Nations,
particularly those who have sacrificed their lives while
serving in peacekeeping missions. The Council may
rest assured that, for its part, Malaysia will continue to
work together with all partners and stakeholders in our
collective efforts to advance the cause of international
peace and security through the United Nations
peacekeeping agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this timely debate and congratulate
you on having convened it. Allow me to briefly touch
upon the topic from our national perspective besides
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, with which Romania fully aligns
itself.
Against the backdrop of the ever-growing United
Nations peacekeeping operations with increasingly
complex multidimensional mandates, while also
bearing in mind the decrease in human resources and

14-4863843/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

financial sustainability, the United Nations has the
difficult task of ensuring that its operations remain
viable and efficient. It therefore constantly seeks new
partnerships in maintaining peace and security. In that
regard, the strengthened United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations is unquestionably, in our
view, a positive trend and an increasing necessity. That
is why I wanted to emphasize from the start that your
idea, Mr. President, of holding this discussion is very
welcome.
In numerous situations, characterized by difficult
and violent environments where peace is almost
inexistent and where non-State actors and transnational
armed groups, foreign fighters, mercenaries or
organized criminal networks are increasingly active,
regional and subregional organizations are often in a
better position to operate than United Nations troops
either in a stabilizing intervention or in taking over
from the United Nations at a certain point.
As a security provider, Romania attaches great
importance to the effectiveness of the United Nations in
its pursuit of global peace and security. As a contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, my country
is an active promoter of redefining how the United
Nations and regional organizations cooperate. In that
context, allow me to recall that, during its most recent
mandate on the Security Council as a non-permanent
member in 2004-2005, one of my country’s key
achievements was the successful promotion of resolution
1631 (2005) pertaining to United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations in the maintainance of
international peace and security. Besides being the first
Romanian resolution adopted by the Security Council,
that document represents the first resolution in the
history of the United Nations to deal with cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Further to resolution 1631 (2005), regional
organizations have become significant contributors to
international efforts to support States in transition from
conflict and from political instability to sustainable
peace, as highlighted, for instance, in the report of
the Secretary-General on the relationship between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security (S/2008/186). As a
member of the European Union since 2007, Romania
has been an ongoing and consistent supporter of the
European Security Strategy, including its priority of
strengthening cooperation with the United Nations. At

44/65

28/07/2014

the same time, Romania is one of the States members of
NATO that have firmly supported the need to create a
United Nations-NATO cooperation framework.
On those grounds, as an important contributor
to EU and NATO missions with a multidimensional
involvement, from military and police components
to civilian elements, most notably in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iraq, Afghanistan and Georgia, Romania
has continuously been involved in the efforts of the
international community on crisis management.
Having always called for regional and global actors to
have complementary roles, Romania has also started
to work on new concepts and to identify new actions
in the area of stabilization and post-conflict recovery.
That is why we established the Training Centre for
Post-Conflict Reconstruction in Bucharest. Such
topics are relevant to complex situations, such as that
in Afghanistan or the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where the cooperation and coordination of all
field actors — international organizations, States and
non-governmental organizations — is highly necessary.
Our presence in other regional cooperation
formats, such as the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Regional Cooperation Council and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization, seeks
to consolidate and diversify Romania’s contribution
to and role in security matters at the regional and
subregional levels.
Allow me to conclude with Romania’s conviction
that strengthening United Nations partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations is key to
improving the capacity for facing and overcoming an
ever-growing set of challenges, as the world seems
to be in turmoil these days. We see room for better
communication between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, including
through consultations at all appropriate levels. We
also need better integration between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as it is a fact that peacekeeping
operations alone cannot solve conflicts and must be
complemented by carefully crafted peacebuilding
mechanisms. I congratulate all those who think and act
in that way. My country will always share that vision
and gladly help with its implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s important debate and for your

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

detailed and helpful concept note (S/2014/478, annex).
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General of the European External
Action Service and the Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations for their respective
briefings.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement and the representative of
Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
The increased complexity of ongoing conflicts
clearly underscores the need for a multidimensional and
integrated response. It is therefore understandable that
regional and subregional actors have an increasingly
important role in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding. As an avid supporter of today’s topic,
during its most recent presidency of the Council,
Indonesia held an open debate on United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security (see
S/PV.5776). Presidential statement S/PRST/2007/42
underscored, among other issues, United Nations
political support for such organizations. That
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is well recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations, which emphasizes that such regional
arrangements should make every effort to achieve the
pacific settlement of local disputes before referring
them to the Security Council.
However, there remains a gap in more systematically
and effectively harnessing the role of key regional actors.
While regional entities can be vital partners in fostering
peace, including through their peacekeepers, mediators
and provision of civilian capacity enhancement, the
United Nations and the international community also
need to step up their political and technical support
to the relevant regional entities in strengthening their
capacities.
Indeed, with regional organizations’ geographical,
cultural and historical proximity to conflicts in their
regions whose causes they deeply understand, they have
distinct advantages and are able to take approaches
that can contribute to the prevention and resolution
of conflicts in a unique manner. Furthermore, as we
have seen in some situations in Africa, troops can
quickly be readied and supplied. While stressing the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the

S/PV.7228

three basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping,
we also emphasize an improvement in peacekeeping
mechanisms to ensure adequate and timely financial
and logistical resources for the missions.
Numerous cases show that without predictable and
sustained financing and support, regional operations
can experience setbacks in their missions, thereby also
impacting support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Crucially, the United Nations and regional
organizations must enhance their mutual trust and
confidence so that they are better prepared to swiftly
and flexibly draw on their respective comparative
advantages for the cause of peace. In that regard,
Indonesia welcomes the continued effort of the
Security Council to deepen the relationship between
peacekeeping and relevant regional organizations,
including the African Union Peace and Security
Council, on matters of mutual interest.
The wider, the more inclusive and more transparent
the dialogue is among peacekeeping stakeholders, the
more effective the outcomes will be. Given that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
is the most widely represented intergovernmental
forum to comprehensively consider United Nations
peacekeeping, my delegation also looks forward to the
enhanced proposals from the Special Committee on
today’s theme.
In our own region of South-East Asia, ASEAN,
under the ASEAN-United Nations Comprehensive
Partnership, stands ready to support the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also believe that it is important to share experiences
and best practices with other regions, including on
improving ways to enhance relevant capacities for
addressing the whole spectrum of conflict from
initial occurrence to its aftermath. The inputs and
recommendations by regional organizations and troopcontributing countries need to be appropriately taken
into account by the Council in its decision-making
process at the earliest stage so that a multidimensional
and integrated approach can be adopted.
In conclusion, Indonesia reiterates its support
for greater and systematic cooperation among all
peacekeeping stakeholders in concert by the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and the C-34. We
are confident that today’s debate and the resolution
adopted this morning (resolution 2167 (2014)) will
advance the work of the Council and other relevant

14-4863845/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

actors to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which comprises Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam.
Allow me to express ASEAN’s appreciation to the
Rwandan presidency for organizing today’s open debate
and for its excellent concept note (S/2014/478, annex).
I also thank the Secretary-General, the representatives
of the European Union and the African Union for their
respective briefings.
In its open debate last month, the Council examined
new trends in United Nations peacekeeping (S/PV.7196).
As many speakers pointed out, partnership between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping is undoubtedly one
of the most discernible trends of modern day United
Nations peacekeeping. The participation of regional
and subregional organizations in United Nations
peacekeeping operations offers unique comparative
advantages. At the operational level, geographical
proximity means that regional partners can respond
faster than the United Nations. Quicker deployment of
peacekeepers often means more civilian lives caught in
an unfolding crisis can be saved.
In addition, the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations have become increasingly
multidimensional. In order to ensure a durable peace,
peacekeepers are now required to carry out early
peacebuilding tasks such as providing support for
national dialogue and reconciliation and national
institution-building.
Regional
engagement
in
peacekeeping can bring in relevant experiences and
collaborations needed to address the root causes of
conflict, the solution to which is often a regional one.
Regional partnership in peacekeeping plays out
most prominently on the African continent. ASEAN
commends the invaluable contribution of the regional
and subregional organizations in Africa, inter alia,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Intergovernmental Authority

46/65

28/07/2014

on Development. We also acknowledge the role of the
European Union in providing financial resources to a
number of peacekeeping missions in Africa.
For our part, almost 4,000 troops and police officers
from the States members of ASEAN are currently
serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions
around the world. Under the framework of the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations, we are constantly
looking for ways and means to foster closer cooperation
between ASEAN and the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping. We also reiterate the need to implement
the Joint Declaration in a comprehensive manner.
In taking the discussion on this issue forward,
ASEAN wishes to highlight the following. First,
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
actors must be based on the relevant provisions of
the United Nations Charter, namely, Chapter VIII on
regional arrangements. Partnerships must also be guided
by the basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping,
that is, consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use
of force except in self-defence and defence of the
mandate.
It must also be reiterated that important policy
discussions and decisions on this issue should be
conducted in a consensual manner. ASEAN stresses that
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C34), which includes the troop- and police-contributing
countries, host countries, Council members and other
interested countries, is the appropriate forum for those
discussions and decisions. ASEAN draws attention to
the policy decisions made by the C-34 in its report for
the 2014 substantive session (A/68/19).
Secondly, while rapid deployment may be one of their
key strengths, regional and subregional organizations
taking part in a peacekeeping operation authorized by
the United Nations are frequently faced with a challenge
of securing adequate financial resources and logistical
support to maintain their participation in the long run.
Therefore, establishing a financing mechanism that can
provide predictable and flexible funding is crucial for
sustaining the partnership. In addition, ASEAN also
recommends that the United Nations and other partners
cooperate with regional and subregional organizations,
particularly in Africa, where most of the peacekeeping
operations are deployed, to enhance their logistical
capabilities.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Thirdly, modern peacekeeping is a complex
enterprise. Partnership in peacekeeping should thus be
comprehensive and responsive. Yet it has been observed
that there are gaps in mission planning and insufficient
information sharing between the United Nations and
regional partners. Therefore, ASEAN supports the idea
of further enhancing the information sharing and formal
consultation processes among the Security Council, the
regional partners, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat at every stage of a peacekeeping operation,
especially at the mission planning and mandate review
stages.
In closing, on behalf of ASEAN member States,
I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
men and women who have perished while serving in
peacekeeping missions. We acknowledge with immense
gratitude their sacrifice for the noble cause of peace.
The President: I give the floor to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Estonia.
Mr. Paet (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Rwandan presidency of the Council for its
initiative to convene this open debate. I highly value
open debates as a measure of greater transparency and
inclusion of the wider United Nations membership in
the issues discussed by the Council. I recommend that
every presidency follow suit.
I congratulate the Council on its adoption of
resolution 2167 (2014) today. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. Estonia also fully
aligns itself with the statement made by the Deputy
Secretary General of the European External Action
Service.
United Nations peacekeeping provides essential
security and humanitarian support to millions of people
in conflict zones and supports fragile institutions in
countries emerging from conflict. United Nations
peacekeeping and peacebuilding help societies in
desperate need of stability to return to the path of
peace and development. United Nations peacekeeping
facilitates the protection of human rights and
strengthens democracy, which I believe is the best way
to ensure one’s stability and well-being.
Estonia has actively contributed to international
peacekeeping since 1995. During that time, there has
not been a single day when an Estonian peace soldier,
policeman or expert has not been on a peace mission.
This spring, Estonian soldiers began their first mission

S/PV.7228

on the African continent, namely, in the Central African
Republic, where our infantry platoon is deployed as a
part of the European Union (EU) mission. We realize
the importance of cooperation and mutual support in
solving problems in the international arena.
By taking part in peace operations, Estonia first
aims to protect civilians and achieve a peaceful outcome
in situations with escalating tensions. But we also
understand that all tensions, instabilities and conflicts,
close or distant, will sooner or later have an effect on
us. There is therefore a link between peacekeeping
and our own security. Based on our own experience,
I should like to elaborate on some elements of the
President’s concept note (S/2014/478, annex), which I
find comprehensive and forward-looking.
Both politically and operationally, we agree that
there are comparative advantages to regional action.
That applies not only to Africa but also to other regions
where we have witnessed some positive results of joint
regional action. Let us recall operations and missions
in the former Yugoslavia or in Afghanistan, where the
European Union, NATO, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations
have worked together and shared the burden. Regional
and subregional organizations sometimes have more
knowledge and experience to handle local affairs,
and they might also have better suited capabilities for
regional action. Therefore, the complementary roles of,
for example, regional economic communities such as
the Economic Community of West African States or
the African Union — speaking of Africa — should be
reinforced in the future.
In that respect, the experience gained by the
European Union or NATO in peace operations could
be used. Their increased cooperation with the United
Nations, the African Union and regional economic
communities could improve their overall capacity
for carrying out the missions. Over the years, some
progress has been made, but ongoing crises demonstrate
that it is not enough. Conflicts continue to erupt and
instabilities to arise. Our response to them is still very
often too slow or cautious.
It is understandable that even the United Nations
has its operational limits, and its capabilities have
to be used first of all to counter the most serious
crises. With regional organizations taking more
responsibility, the excessive burden facing the United
Nations can be relieved. Regional organizations are

14-4863847/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

very often better suited to taking preventive action
because they can detect rising tensions more quickly
and accordingly respond sooner, using their good
offices and mediation tools. Political will is the first
and foremost prerequisite for more regional actions,
as are the existing decision-making framework and
operational capabilities. In that regard, joint planning
and information-collection capabilities, as well as the
pooling of troops and necessary expertise, are of great
importance.
During the past decade, in the light of the growing
necessity for raising readiness and enhancing the
capacity to counter crises and take timely action, both
the European Union and NATO have worked to improve
their toolbox in order to streamline their operational
and planning capabilities, as well as their readiness
for prompt action. The EU concept of battlegroups
and the NATO Response Force could be used as good
examples for other regions to follow. The battlegroups,
for example, are based on contributions from member
States and are staffed and equipped in a rotational
manner. It is a battalion-size force reinforced with a
combat support element. There are 18 such groups,
and they undertake military tasks of a humanitarian,
peacekeeping and peacemaking nature. Even more
importantly, the groups are prepared in a unified
planning and training framework.
Speaking of peacekeeping, we should not overlook
what happens in a conflict zone after peace has
been restored. The international community should
keep looking for ways to facilitate the return of the
country concerned to a peaceful and sustainable path
of development. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration should be an integral part of the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and for post-conflict peace
consolidation. Comprehensive security sector reform is
vital to ensuring the development of effective, efficient,
affordable and accountable security institutions. In
that regard, Estonia commends the work of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
I would like to touch upon one important feature
of peacekeeping, namely, financing. We have seen the
United Nations peacekeeping budget increase year
by year. Exceeding $8 billion, it places an enormous
burden on Member States, but especially on the
countries that contribute financially. Estonia welcomes
the very last-minute agreement of the Fifth Committee
on the peacekeeping budget for 2014-2015, but allow
me to remind the Council that the agreement was a hard

48/65

28/07/2014

compromise and was hindered, surprisingly, by the
strong unwillingness of many countries.
Estonia has always taken its responsibilities for
the United Nations peacekeeping budget seriously. In
1999, Estonia made a unilateral voluntary decision to
contribute to the peacekeeping budget on level B and
has continued to follow that pattern since then. I would
like to call upon Member States to follow suit, especially
those that have enjoyed considerable economic growth
during the past 10 to 15 years and that today have a
greater capacity to pay than in the past.
I also have to emphasize that the peacekeeping
budget is not the only resource we allocate to peace and
stability. Estonia has contributed to the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund this year. Funds are also allocated
to conflict-torn countries through different United
Nations bodies, such as UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to
name only a few.
Peace on the African continent is a prerequisite
for a better future for the whole world, and Estonia
is therefore ready to take on more international
responsibilities and is willing to contribute increasingly
to African stability. To bolster African countries’
peacekeeping capacities, Estonia supported the
European Union decision to commit to double spending
on the African Peace Facility, a joint EU-African
Union fund supporting African-run peacekeeping and
conflict-resolution missions. The European Union will
give €800 million to the Fund over the next three years.
We highly value the role of international actors and
international law in safeguarding peace and security.
But there is also a need for stronger national and
regional ownership on the part of the Governments of
countries struggling for peace and stability. Societies
must demand more from their elected leadership, and
we remain a devoted supporter of that principle.
Here I come back to prevention and its importance.
One effective measure of prevention, among others, is
the general understanding that perpetrators must be
held accountable. Atrocity crimes have no justification,
and those who commit them must be brought before to
justice and subjected to trial. Therefore, we must all
treat the international tribunals and the International
Criminal Court with respect and dignity and help and
support them in carrying out their tasks. Otherwise, we
will lose an important element of international justice

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and law, and already complicated peace efforts will
become even more complicated.
To conclude, allow me to stress that these issues
should be brought to wider international attention. We
should ask for more international reaction, including
on the part of the Security Council. But at the same
time, there is no real alternative to increasing the
local, national and regional comprehensive approach to
tackling protracted and violent crises. We stand ready to
contribute and assist. The more we invest in prevention,
the less we will have to deal with consequences. But
prevention can be successful only if we strive for it
together. I am convinced that we will be successful in
that endeavour. We shall commit ourselves here today
to act together for a better, safer and more prosperous
future for our children.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand joins
those who have paid tribute to all United Nations
peacekeepers. We particulary mourn those who have
died in the course of their duty.
I also acknowledge Rwanda’s very considerable
contribution to peacekeeping. It is a tribute that
Rwanda is now the sixth largest United Nations
troop contributor, which is yet another example of
the meaningful contribution made by small States to
the United Nations. We also acknowledge, with real
appreciation, the burden carried by Rwanda and many
other African countries in their support for United
Nations, hybrid and regional peacekeeping operations
in Africa, including in Somalia, South Sudan, Darfur,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and the
Central African Republic .
New Zealand is concerned that, despite the efforts
of all troop-contributing countries, the system of
peacekeeping is still dangerously exposed. United
Nations peacekeeping is overstretched. The deployment
of missions is too slow and uncertain. And, as we have
seen recently in South Sudan, even existing missions are
being taken by surprise by the re-emergence of conflict.
The adoption of resolution 2167 (2014) is therefore very
timely. We congratulate you, Mr. President — and
indeed, the whole Council — on raising the level of
decision-making on peacekeeping to that of a formal
resolution.

S/PV.7228

But New Zealand is still concerned that so much
of the initial work on halting conflict and restoring
peace is too dependent on peacekeeping by regional
organizations, which are often poorly equipped to
undertake those tasks. Of even greater concern is the fact
that regional peacekeeping still lacks predictable and
sustainable financing. We are therefore disappointed
by the failure of resolution 2167 (2014) to resolve the
funding and capacity issue. We recall that, 11 months ago
in S/PRST/2013/12 of 6 August 2013, Council members
agreed that it was time to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
a United Nations mandate.
It is a serious matter that, almost a year later,
the Council as a whole has still failed to resolve that
issue. The issue must not be put in the “too hard”
basket for another 11 months. New Zealand believes
that, if the recommendations in the Prodi report (see
S/2008/813)) cannot be adopted in their entirety, then it
is incumbent on the Council to agree variations of those
recommendations that meet the needs of all parties and
ensure systematic and reliable United Nations support
for regional peacekeeping initiatives.
Today’s debate is not just about financing.
Regional and subregional organizations have important
functions across the full spectrum of the Council’s
mandate, from early warning, conflict prevention and
conflict management to conflict resolution to tackling
root causes, as well as oversight of developments
in peacekeeping operations. With the trend towards
deploying peacekeeping operations to deal with
asymmetric challenges where there is no real peace to
keep, interested and invested regional partners can play
even more important roles.
New Zealand’s experience with its own regional
organizations dealing with such problems is very
much in line with that outlined to us a moment ago by
Mr. Paet. They usually have a better understanding of
the issues; they often know the players, maybe even
personally; they can generate a force rapidly; and they
can use all those attributes to set and implement robust
mandates that complement regional political efforts.
Too often, the Council and United Nations
peacekeeping have come too late in support of regional
efforts, as we have seen recently in Mali and again in the
Central African Republic. We must therefore improve
the partnership with those regional organizations

14-4863849/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

across the whole spectrum of the Council’s agenda.
New Zealand is unequivocal in its support for such
partnerships. The annual consultations with the African
Union Peace and Security Council are useful, but
they do not offer the kind of opportunity for detailed
discussion that is necessary when a crisis situation is
emerging, and they do not allow for ongoing followup. Genuine engagement requires commitment, both
from the Council collectively and from its individual
members.
There is much that has been left undone on those
issues, as the Rwanden presidency knew when it
insisted that the Council debate this topic. We therefore
thank you, Sir, and your delegation for the efforts you
have made here today. You have helped lay a solid
foundation for the next very necessary steps. You have,
in the words of your Ambassador, indeed saved the best
until last.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): Armenia joins
all others in welcoming the present debate as an
important contribution to advancing the capacity and
effectiveness of peacekeeping. We therefore add our
voice in thanking the presidency for its initiative to
focus on specific aspects of partnerships in the context
of the regionalization of crisis management.
Coherence in constructing peacekeeping operations
remains an overriding objective. To achieve that,
we underline the centrality of the role of the United
Nations as the clearinghouse for generated experience,
standard-setting and coordination. The capacity of
the Secretary-General and the respective departments
should therefore be continuously strengthened. The
legitimacy of peacekeeping continues to rest with a
mandate from the Security Council, while the actual
implementation of operations relies on the engagement
of Member States, including by means of regional
arrangements. We therefore underline the continued
need to improve modalities for increased interaction,
consultation and coordination among all stakeholders,
including the mandating body — the Security
Council — the Secretary-General, troop-contributing
States and the respective regional organizations. Such a
need is particularly prominent in light of the increasing
experience of setting up hybrid peacekeeping
operations..

50/65

28/07/2014

We strongly share the view about the significant
role of regional organizations in maintaining peace
and security. Indeed, regional organizations may hold
mandates to provide regional security or economic
and social cooperation, as well as to protect human
rights. The effectiveness of action at the regional level,
however, relies primarily on the strength of institutions
for regional cooperation. It should be admitted in that
respect that the levels of institutionalized cooperation
differ among regions. As a global Organization, the
United Nations is well placed to facilitate cross-regional
cooperation in order to complement regional capacities
and employ their comparative advantages.
It could be reasonably argued that proximity to
conflict implies a greater incentive for States adjacent
to conflict zones to seek resolution in the interests of
lasting regional peace and security. However, it would
also be realistic to expect neighbouring States to see
contrasting interests in conflict situations, to the extent
that they may favour one party to a conflict at the
expense of the other. In that regard, the effectiveness
of operations depends greatly on the explicit consent of
all the parties directly concerned in the conflict. The
specific nature of an operation, as well as the strength
and composition of a peacekeeping force and the
rules of its engagement, should be based on a political
agreement between all the parties to the conflict.
In dealing with considerable direct threats to its own
security over the past 23 years, Armenia has acquired
an acute understanding of the value of peacekeeping.
We have developed a firm foundation of self-defence
coupled with a solid peacekeeping component. The
peacekeeping brigade of the Armenian armed forces is
the main professional capacity-building framework for
that purpose. As a troop-contributing State, Armenia
has gained significant experience in peacekeeping
operations. We participate in NATO-led operations in
Kosovo and Afghanistan. In October, Armenia will
contribute a platoon to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, a demonstration of our intention to
gradually increase our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping.
As a member of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Armenia recognizes that the
Organization may have a possible role in peacekeeping,
decided on a case-by-case basis. Together with other
members of the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
Armenia has also been working on improving its
preparedness for peacekeeping. Both organizations

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

have been strengthening their institutional interactions
with the United Nations, which should eventually
enable them to perform shared peacekeeping tasks as
well.
In conclusion, I reiterate Armenia’s strong
commitment to continued operational engagement in
promoting peace all over the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): We warmly welcome your
initiative in scheduling today’s debate, Mr. President.
It provides a timely opportunity for considering the
evolution of regional partnerships in support of United
Nations peacekeeping. My remarks will focus on two
main areas — cooperation between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU), and United NationsAfrican cooperation.
At the outset, I should say that Ireland aligns itself
with the statement made by Mr. Popowski on behalf of
the EU and its member States
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous recently described
peacekeeping as being in a time of partnerships.
Certainly, the collective enterprise that is peacekeeping
involves the cultivation of a network of different
partnerships — partnerships between Member States,
the United Nations system, host Governments and,
increasingly, regional organizations. The growing
participation of regional and subregional organizations
is a significant development, and was the theme of
a successful seminar hosted by Ireland during our
presidency of the EU last year.
In our eyes, greater regional participation is a
very welcome development. It is a concrete expression
of the sharing of a collective security burden. More
regional involvement can mean that more local and
regional expertise and understanding can be made
available. It can mean greater regional ownership,
responsibility and commitment to addressing security
challenges. Some regional organizations offer the
potential for responding rapidly; others provide critical
niche capabilities, and through its participation in EUand NATO-led missions, Ireland has seen first-hand
the success of regional partnerships in peacekeeping
from both perspectives. But it is essential that a
commensurate capacity exist or be created to ensure
that mandates delivered by regional organizations are
delivered effectively. That is why, to give just one

S/PV.7228

example, predictable and sustainable financing is so
crucial to ensuring the success of African Union (AU)
peace operations. The real challenge in nurturing
strategic partnerships remains the delivery of political
and operational results.
Ireland is a long-time and prominent supporter
of closer EU-United Nations cooperation in peace
operations. In terms of international peace and security,
for us that is the paramount strategic partnership. The
exit of many European States from the International
Security Assistance Force offers the prospect of a broader
European return to United Nations peacekeeping. As a
Member State that has maintained a consistent presence
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, we are
pleased to encourage and facilitate this development
in any way we can. That is one reason why, this
month, my delegation convened a panel discussion
on command-and-control arrangements in United
Nations peacekeeping. It was designed to showcase
the improvements that have been made in recent years,
while also exploring ways to address some outstanding
challenges, including ensuring high-quality leadership,
improving mission planning, ensuring accountability
and minimizing national caveats. And so we could not
agree more with the message of the President’s concept
note (S/2014/478, annex) for today’s debate, to the
effect that effective command and control of operations
underpins both their success and their credibility.
Turning to Africa, today there are many ways in
which African organizations, regional and subregional,
can contribute to peace operations. Two notable ones are
through high-intensity operations and surge capacity.
African willingness to pursue high-intensity operations
in Africa is incontrovertible. We have seen the
commitment of South African, Tanzanian and Malawian
troops in the decisive Force Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And we readily
acknowledge the sacrifice of the soldiers of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), including troops
from Uganda, Burundi, Kenya, Djibouti and Ethiopia.
AMISOM has stayed the course when a force from
outside the region might well not have done so. It also
undertakes tasks, such as offensive and counter-terrorist
operations, that the United Nations does not do. But we
also acknowledge that AMISOM, as a contingent-led
mission, poses particular coordination challenges, and
that the presence of the two missions, United Nations

14-4863851/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and AU, demands heightened coordination if political
and strategic coherence is to be achieved.
Given the evident political commitment, African
rapid-response or surge capacity also clearly holds
promise. The development of African regional standby
brigades is a welcome initiative, particularly in a
frustrating context in which others have proved very
reluctant to use their own rapid-reaction capabilities.
But we must also be honest enough to recognize some
important general constraints. While missions from
the region offer the promise of greater acceptance,
they can also pose a risk of partisanship. Regional and
subregional organizations, either because of a lack of
resources or the absence of collective will, have also at
times shown themselves unable to act decisively.
We strongly support all efforts to enhance
cooperation between the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations. Effective AU-EUUnited Nations triangular cooperation will be critical
to successful peacekeeping operations in future years
in Africa. On the specific issue of planning, we also
agree strongly on the need to improve joint planning.
We welcome the progress made in this area between
the AU and the United Nations in Somalia; the joint
planning between the Economic Community of West
African States and the AU on Mali; and the current
coordination between the AU and the United Nations on
the transfer of authority in the Central African Republic
between the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.
Nationally, Ireland makes a significant contribution
to the training of African security forces, both through
participation in EU missions in Somalia and Mali and
on a bilateral basis, in which we have helped to train
Ugandan police in community policing and the South
Sudanese police in conventional munitions disposal,
landmine clearance and specialist search awareness.
We also provide training for modest numbers of African
military and police personnel at our United Nations
training school in Ireland. And we are pleased to
support the elaboration of United Nations standards for
peacekeeping operations as part of the United Nations
military units manuals project, and to provide expertise
for the Working Groups on military police and special
forces.

52/65

28/07/2014

We are certainly in a time of partnerships; indeed,
we have been for quite some time now. We can expect
that partnerships will feature as a prominent theme
in the review of peacekeeping announced by the
Secretary-General on 11 June. Ireland looks forward
greatly to making a positive, meaningful contribution
to the review, be it in support to a particular area of
policy development or in some other way. And we look
forward to continuing to make our contribution to
various peacekeeping partnerships.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malawi.
Mr. Msosa (Malawi): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 15 States members of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). SADC
wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Observer of the African Union on behalf
of the African Group.
Today Africa is home to nine of the 16 active United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Nowhere is the
growing importance for United Nations peacekeeping
of partnership with regional organizations more
visible than on the African continent. Partnership
with the United Nations has long been a hallmark of
peacekeeping operations in Africa. The foundation of
that cooperation lies in Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which attests to the role and scope of
regional actors in furthering the Organization’s ideals.
This partnership was born out of recognition that the
United Nations and regional organizations have unique
and complementary capacities that can contribute to
conflict prevention and resolution. Clear testament to
that partnership are the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali.
In this context, we welcome the peace agreement
reached in the Central African Republic on 25 July.
We also emphasize the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union through the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau and the Economic Community of West African
States, which led to the recent general elections and
the restoration of constitutional order in that country.
These missions, together with the African Union
Mission in Somalia, attest to the continued partnership

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and mutual commitment of both the United Nations and
the African Union. It is a partnership that will certain
characterize the future of peacekeeping in the African
continent.
The cooperation and operations underpinning
the relationship have served to advance the goals of
the United Nations, and particularly of the Security
Council, in the maintenance of international peace
and security. They have also provided the framework
for a stronger cooperation with Africa that has also
advanced the objectives of the African Union Charter
in promoting peace, security and stability on the
continent. This partnership has not been static. It has
evolved, widened and strengthened. It has encompassed
mediation, peacemaking and humanitarian support.
As a result, one of the contemporary realities is that
peacekeeping in Africa is no longer the sole prerogative
and responsibilty of the United Nations.
This evaluation has taken place in a challenging
environment. Its roots go back to 1990 when the
Economic Community of West African States first
intervened in Liberia. It crystallized with the formation
of the African Union Standby Force and was further
consolidated by the adoption of specific subregional
arrangements, such as the SADC Mutual Defence
Pact. The Mutual Defence Pact, which was developed
in 2003 to operationalize the SADC mechanisms and
for mutual cooperation in defence and security matters,
has contributed to peacekeeping and the stabilization of
the region, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, as well as to the training of defence forces and
security in that country.
It is in this regard that SADC welcomes this open
debate, for we attach great importance to the issue of
peacekeeping. We also see the evolving relationship
as key to building a more meaningful and sustainable
framework for peacekeeping. We believe that the future
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations depends on
the ability to harness national and regional capacities
in affected countries to strengthen coordination and
build mutual understanding of operational imperatives
for regional commitments. Therefore, it is desirable and
necessary that respective regions have a greater voice
in the formulation of peacekeeping mandates impacting
their regions because, as recognized by this body in its
previous resolutions, regional organizations are well
placed to understand the root causes of armed conflict
and well positioned to influence their prevention and
resolution.

S/PV.7228

The nature and complexity of contemporary
conflicts suggest, in certain instances, another
approach. In that sense, the structure and scope of
peacekeeping must necessarily respond to the reality
on the ground. The Council should be flexible in
meeting this challenge and correct past failures. The
Council should intervene when serious crimes, such as
atrocities against civilians, are being committed. The
Council should also be ready to reach out to partners
willing and able to take responsibility to restore and
maintain peace in conflict-affected countries.
Peacekeepers need a greater readiness to cooperate
with other actors that may be introduced in the field.
This collaboration is particularly necessary with the
increase of interfaces and synergies between United
Nations peacekeeping and regional organizations. This
would not only deepen the partnership but also enhance
the possibilities for a successful mission. Therefore, it
is critical that the mandate be clear. This approach will
reduce enduring uncertainties and occasional tensions
between the United Nations mandate responsible
for international peace and security and regional
organizations, such as the African Union, which plays
a supporting role.
Acting in accordance with the African Union
Protocol on Peace and Security, SADC has established
a standby brigade whose mandate includes, among
other things, undertaking interventions for peace and
security restoration in a conflict situation, at the request
of a member State. We are grateful that the Council has
shown willingness to work with the bloc to address the
instability in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
through the Force Intervention Brigade.
SADC also welcomes the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, signed on 24 February 2013
and supported by resolution 2098 (2013), whose goal is
not only to address the instability in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also to create enabling
conditions for political dialogue and peacebuilding.
Had the Council ignored our calls, the situation might
have deteriorated further, with dire consequences for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and beyond.
In conclusion, we wish to underscore the
significance of close consultations and cooperation.
This alliance should also manifest itself in improving
mutual understanding of each other’s structure
and organization, and in improving channels of

14-4863853/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

communications. SADC also wishes to stress the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate.
We call on the United Nations and regional
organizations to continue investing in conflictprevention, including through mediation, which is less
costly than peacekeeping. Efforts already undertaken
to assist the African Union, including in the context
of its Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme, and
subregional blocs in building subregional blocs to
build capacity to deal with security challenges are
appreciated and encouraged.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like first to wish a
happy Eid for those who celebrate it. Today is a holy
feast for all Muslims and we hope that at the next Eid
the Muslim world and Palestine will be in better shape.
I am speaking on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I would like to start by thanking Rwanda
for convening today’s meeting on this important
topic. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive statement this morning and for his
clear assessment of the progress made in peacekeeping
activities in terms of concepts and operations, as
well as his efforts to strengthen the United Nations
peacekeeping operations as an important tool in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
helping peoples emerging from conflict to achieve
stability. I also wish to commend Under-SecretaryGeneral Amira Haq, whose extensive personal expertise
and commitment were clearly reflected in her work over
the past couple of years. The Non-Aligned Movement
wishes her all the best in her future endeavours.
United Nations peacekeeping is at a crucial
juncture as a result of increased demand and of the
expansion and complexity of its tasks and mandates
in assuming responsibilities that are outside the scope
of its traditional political and military roles and its
capacity to implement them. All these factors place
additional burdens on the capacity of the Organization
and the countries contributing uniformed personnel to
achieve their desired objectives.
The continuous increase in the activities of United
Nations peacekeeping operations requires, inter alia,

54/65

28/07/2014

improved capacity to assess conflict situations, effective
planning based on accurate information, enhanced
measures for the safety and security of peacekeepers,
and rapid response to emergencies in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Non-Aligned Movement re-emphasizes its commitment
to supporting all efforts aimed at achieving the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, and reiterates
the following five points.
First, it is important to reach a consensus among
Member States on the development of policies and
to ensure that only ideas and approaches adopted
collectively by Member States are implemented. We call
on the Secretariat to refrain from working on policies
that have not been agreed in an intergovernmental
process. The Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations is and should remain the sole body in charge
of policymaking in peacekeeping.
Secondly, all necessary support should be provided,
including financial, human resources and military
and civilian capabilities, to peacekeeping missions in
order to achieve their tasks within the framework of
full respect for the host country’s sovereignty, laws and
regulations. In that context, it is also necessary to avoid
changing the mandated tasks of peacekeeping missions
without prior consultations with troop-contributing
countries. Troops on the ground are the guarantors of
the successful implementation of mandates. Seeking
their advice should be a prerequisite for any change in
mandates.
Thirdly, we would stress the need for a strong and
clear Security Council commitment to drafting clear and
achievable mandates, based on an objective assessment,
without rushing into the adoption of mandates that
lack a political basis or sufficient resources or are not
practically achievable. The development of integrated
planning and consistent approaches to achieve the link
between policy formulation and implementation on the
ground are paramount to achieving success.
Fourthly, it is very important to enhance the
integration of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, so that
peacekeeping efforts are accompanied by economic
recovery and capacity-building efforts, on the basis of
national ownership. The Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund have a significant role to play in
that regard. The objective should not be peacekeeping
cost-cutting, but enhancing States’ potential in order to
avoid their relapse into conflict.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fifthly, the Movement strongly believes that
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations and that the role of regional arrangements should
be in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
Non-Aligned Movement calls for intensified support on
the part of the United Nations for the African Union’s
operations through the ensuring of predictable and
sustainable funding for its missions.
The Non-Aligned Movement, as the one group that
comprises most, if not all, of the top military and police
troop-contributing countries, continues to support
peacekeeping operations. Its member States keep
increasing their contributions in terms of military and
police, as well as in civilian experts, to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. That represents clear evidence
of our commitment to efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to the
men and women of the United Nations who are carrying
out their tasks in the implementation of peacekeeping
activities, and in particular to those peacekeepers who
have lost their lives in the field defending the flag of
the United Nations and contributing to upholding the
positive image of the Organization and its peacekeeping
operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Ms. Khatri (Fiji): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to thank you for having convened this open
debate on regional partnerships in peacekeeping.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General and
the representatives of the African Union and the
European Union for framing the debate through their
presentations.
Fiji aligns itself with the statement just delivered by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The examination of this theme is timely, as the
United Nations peacekeeping community applies itself
to the rehatting of large regional peacekeeping missions
such as the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia, whose
experiences will provide valuable lessons for the future.
In previous United Nations debates on
peacekeeping, including here in the Council in August
2013 (see S/PV.7015), my delegation has made two

S/PV.7228

points that are pertinent to the issue at hand and which
I wish to reiterate and expand upon.
First, regional organizations of which the concerned
country is a member are often likely to have a better
understanding of the local situation and culture, thereby
allowing a better focus on people-oriented responses
tailored to the local situation and the needs of the
host country. A linked potential advantage is that the
institutional systems of regional neighbours are likely
to be similar, rather than a multiplicity of global troopcontributing countries, which would first have to learn
the host country’s institutional setup before being able
to contribute to durable peace impacts.
The logical corollary is that the response times of
regional initiatives tend to be faster than the logistics of
launching a global force-generation effort, and a rapid
response in conflict situations can save many lives and
arrest conflict before it escalates to scales requiring
proportionally larger responses.
Secondly, and this point is related to that made by
many other delegations in today’s debate, is the need
for adequate resourcing and the means to achieve this.
Although regional organizations have the know-how
and the personnel to assist neighbouring countries in
conflict situations, they do not always have the resources
to support such actions. Regional organizations and
their members that are able to provide troops, all of
which make large sacrifices in the service of humanity,
must not be made to feel that their contribution is
somehow inadequate because of the lack of enablers
such as armoured personnel carriers, helicopters or new
technologies, or, indeed, because of a lack of financing.
If we are truly to benefit from the comparative
advantage that regional and subregional organizations
can provide, we must, as a United Nations peacekeeping
community, ensure that partnerships are created for
the long term rather than only in crisis situations,
for the proper resourcing of efforts by regional
and subregional organizations. As this affects the
durability of peacekeeping efforts, the onus should be
on the Secretariat to actively facilitate cooperation of
the nature envisaged in the successive reports of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
on triangular cooperation in peacekeeping.
The United Nations peacekeeping community must
also examine how best to support regional peacekeeping
initiatives in the medium term. If the best solution
for the resourcing shortfalls is to rehat a mission as a

14-4863855/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

United Nations mission, methodical planning through
use of best practices is essential, as is the need for a
detailed mandate that does not overburden a mission
and provides for clear exit strategies. Consultation with
troop-contributing countries in this process, again as
called for by the C-34, is essential.
Greater support should also be provided for regional
peacekeeping training initiatives to be conducted in
regions to build up their peacekeeping capacities. The
United Nations already has institutionalized relations
with various regional organizations and should look to
develop such relations with other regional organizations,
and support the establishment of peacekeeping training
institutes with United Nations accreditation, through
which bilateral support to address the resourcing
problems of potential troop-contributing countries
could also be addressed.
In my own delegation’s region, the Melanesian
Spearhead Group, composed of Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, the Front de libération
nationale kanak socialiste (FLNKS) of New Caledonia
and Fiji, is examining collective peacekeeping
capability in the area of police peacekeeping, and we
look forward to working with the United Nations to
establish capability in this regard, building on Fiji’s
proud record and established tradition of peacekeeping.
Fiji itself is in the process of establishing an integrated
peacekeeping training institute, whose services Fiji will
extend to regional partners once it is established. We
look forward to getting United Nations accreditation
for this institute to strengthen the contribution that
we are steadfastly committed to providing to United
Nations peacekeeping.
Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all
the peacekeepers, from United Nations and regional
missions, who have lost their lives in the service of
humanity, as well as to all victims of past and current
conflicts, including in the Middle East. To do anything
other than our very best for them would be a disservice
to us all.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. LemosManiati.
Ms. Lemos-Maniati: At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council in this open debate and
to make a few comments on this important aspect of
peacekeeping operations.

56/65

28/07/2014

Allow me also to welcome the resolution adopted
today (resolution 2167 (2014)). This is yet another
significant resolution on peacekeeping that highlights
the role of effective partnership and cooperation in
enabling an early response to emerging crises.
In recent years, there has been a growing demand
for peacekeeping operations in increasingly challenging
circumstances. In that context, the Security Council
has asked for more prompt action to preserve peace and
protect civilians, with mandates that have become more
substantial and complex, all this against the backdrop
of serious resource constraints.
The United Nations is to be commended for seeking
to strengthen its central role in peacekeeping and to
ensure the effective functioning of collective security.
But, as the United Nations itself has recognized over
the years, enhancing global security and stability is a
task that no single organization can manage on its own.
It has to be done through a concerted effort based on
shared goals and common values, and partnerships are
critical in this endeavour.
NATO has been a long-standing partner to the
United Nations. We are committed to supporting
the United Nations and its ideals, a principle that is
enshrined in our founding Treaty of 1949. Our new
strategic concept, which we agreed in 2010, commits
the Alliance to helping prevent and manage conflicts
and to stabilizing post-conflict situations, including by
working more closely with the United Nations.
Over the past two decades, NATO has repeatedly
demonstrated a clear ability to plan, initiate and
conduct multinational operations of varying scale and
complexity, including upon short notice, at strategic
distance and over an extended period of time. The
operations have involved various combinations of skills,
assets and capabilities, and they have covered the entire
spectrum from peace enforcement to multifaceted
security assistance and from maritime embargo to
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
We have also provided logistical assistance
to the African Union’s United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping operations in Darfur and in Somalia,
and we have escorted merchant ships carrying World
Food Programme humanitarian supplies off the coast
of Somalia. Some of those operations have been carried
out in a relatively benign environment; others in a
decidedly hostile one. But all have been characterized by
tight political control, strict adherence to the mandate,

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mission and rules of engagement, and a strong concern
for the protection of human life and the avoidance of
civilian casualties.
Over the years, NATO-United Nations cooperation
has extended to include cooperation on issues that are
at the very heart of operations, including mine action,
children and armed conflict and the role of women
in peace and security. We fully support a further
strengthening of United Nations ability to conduct
peacekeeping operations, and we fully agree that this
requires efforts on several fronts, including closer
cooperation with partners, greater sharing of experience
and expertise, and better training and education.
Partnerships have been essential to NATO. Over the
past 25 years, we have built a network of partnerships
that now includes more than 40 countries from all over
the world. Each has different backgrounds, tools and
expertise, but together, we have helped to preserve
peace, reinforce stability and promote progress across
and well beyond the Euro-Atlantic area.
Partnership with other international organizations
has been equally critical to our work. By working more
closely not only with the United Nations, but also with
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and, increasingly, the African
Union, we seek to contribute to efforts aimed at
preventing crises, managing conflicts and stabilizing
post-conflict situations. And we very much feel that
this has to be based on a shared sense of responsibility,
openness and determination.
It is obvious that better preparedness is a powerful
resource of conflict management. In the context of
NATO-United Nations cooperation, we continually look
at ways to make our pragmatic cooperation even more
effective. We are encouraged by the growing practical
cooperation between the staffs of our organizations,
including exchanges of best practices and lessons
learned in operations, training and exercises and
sharing of expertise.
As the United Nations assesses the respective
strengths and roles of its partners, NATO’s intention
would be to continue to support United Nations efforts
in peacekeeping by deepening what has been done so
far through the provision of enablers such as logistical
support, medical support or strategic airlifts, or the
sharing of expertise, such as lessons learned and
best practices on asymmetrical threat, countering

S/PV.7228

improvised explosive devices, planning, training and
aspects of standardization.
In just over a month, NATO Heads of State and
Government will hold a Summit meeting in Wales.
Partnership will be a key item on the agenda. We will
look to strengthen the interoperability between our
NATO forces and those of our partners so we can be
more effective in tackling security challenges together.
We will also look at how we can help partners and others
in need with defence and related security capacitybuilding so as to help them to project stability in their
own regions. And of course, we will pursue that effort
in mutual complementarity with other international
organizations, including the United Nations.
When it comes to managing crises and building
security and stability, NATO has unique assets and
expertise to bring to bear. As the United Nations
continues to assess the respective roles and strengths of
its partners, the Alliance will continue to explore ways
to deepen our cooperation and reinforce our support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Peacekeeping is a vital
instrument of the United Nations in containing conflict
and helping countries emerging from crisis to pave
the way to long-term stability and sustainability
development. The complex and changing problems
that peacekeeping faces requires concerted action by
all stakeholders. We reiterate the critical importance of
regional organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding,
recovery, reconstruction and development, and the value
of better interaction between regional organizations
and various United Nations agencies.
Beginning in 1993, the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) played a crucial role
in contributing to peace and stability in my country
by providing humanitarian response and mediation
strategies. Unfortunately, the Mission came to an end in
June 2009. Regrettably, that action created a dangerous
precedent in United Nations history. The forcible
termination of the UNNOMIG mandate, preceded by the
end of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) mission, created a total vacuum of
an international presence in the occupied regions of
Georgia and turned them into black holes and “one of
the most inaccessible places on Earth”, as observed by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Today, the
European Union Monitoring Mission (EUMM) is the

14-4863857/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

only international mechanism maintaining security and
stability on the ground.
Despite the repeated efforts of Georgia and the
European Union (EU), the EUMM continues to be
denied access to the occupied regions and is thus unable
to fully exercise its mandate throughout the territory of
Georgia. Nonetheless, we deem the Monitoring Mission
to be an essential guarantor of Georgia’s security,
with a key role to play in averting a deterioration of
the situation on the ground. It also serves as a primary
source of first-hand, unbiased information on the
ongoing developments. The role of the EUMM is
increasing in view of the continuing process of the
installation of barbed-wire fences and other artificial
obstacles along the occupation line and other alarming
developments. Therefore, it is of crucial importance to
preserve and extend the Mission in future, as well as
to ensure its access to occupied territories of Georgia.
While a recipient of international support,
Georgia also has extensive experience as a contributor
to international security and stability. Georgia
remains committed to assuming an active part in the
strengthening of international security in the region
and worldwide through its contribution to peacekeeping
operations. Georgia continues to further develop and
upgrade its armed forces to ensure their full-fledged
and more effective participation in peacekeeping and
assistance missions, including those led by the United
Nations.
Our active participation in international peacekeeping
operations in the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan dates
back to 1999. In 2005 and 2007, a Georgian battalion
was included in the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq, where almost 600 Georgian soldiers defended
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad. Today,
Georgia is the largest non-NATO and per capita troop
contributor to the International Security Assistance
Force in Afghanistan. We are maintaining 1,600 strong
personnel and remain committed to Afghanistan’s post2014 peaceful development.
We believe that partnerships are increasingly
important in peacekeeping. With that in mind, a
framework agreement on Georgia’s involvement in
crisis-management operations under the EU’s Common
Security and Defence Policy was concluded in Vilnius
in November 2013. The agreement was put to good use
only a few months after its signing; by contributing
one light infantry company, Georgia has become the

58/65

28/07/2014

second largest contributor to the European Union-led
peacekeeping force in the Central African Republic.
Georgia has also applied and secured positions in
another EU-led military operation in Africa. Following
the force generation conference on the EU Training
Mission in Mali, two posts on a rotational basis with
Montenegro and Portugal were attributed to Georgia.
Georgia continues to explore other opportunities
to participate in other missions, such as the European
Union Mission on Regional Maritime CapacityBuilding in the Horn of Africa. We hope that our efforts
will be particularly beneficial to the EU-led operations
and mission. At this stage, Georgia continues to look
for ways to enhance its support to United Nations
peacekeeping. Consultations are under way to identify
relevant fields of Georgia’s involvement in other United
Nations operations.
Current developments in our region, including the
tragic events in Ukraine, illustrate the importance of
enhanced regional cooperation and mutual endeavours
in ensuring security and preventing the escalation of
tensions. In that context, we welcome the deployment
of the OSCE special monitoring mission and the EU
advisory mission for civilian security sector reform
in Ukraine. We call for greater cooperation with the
United Nations and regional organizations to ensure
sustainable peace, justice, respect for human rights and
development. We believe that regular consultations and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
organizations are indispensable in view of common
development strategies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Zimbabwe.
Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): I wish to express
my appreciation to Rwanda for having convened this
important open debate on the very important and timely
topic of the United Nations and regional partnerships in
peacekeeping. Let me also thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing on peacekeeping
activities and the representatives of the African Union
and the European Union for their statements.
Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representatives of Malawi on behalf of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and of the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The debate today provides us with an opportunity
to take stock of the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations. It also gives us a platform to explore ways
in which the partnership can be strengthened so as to
make peacekeeping more effective through lessons
learned from previous successes, as well as failures.
Peacekeeping operations have expanded and
become more complex due to the changing nature
of conflicts facing the world today. Unlike in the
past, the vast majority of crises that necessitate the
deployment of peacekeepers are often intra-State
conflicts or unconventional threats caused by acts
of terrorism, organized criminal gangs, piracy and
extremism. The causes and dynamics of those threats
often spread beyond the affected countries into regions
and subregions, impacting negatively on international
peace and security.
A broad discussion is therefore needed on how
peacekeeping should adapt to the new demands and
what capabilities and resources it needs in order to
adapt. The expansion and complexity of peacekeeping
tasks beyond the scope of traditional and military
roles require a collective responsibility and the greater
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security. The need
to maintain a well-structured strategic partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
therefore cannot be overemphasized.
In Africa today, where nine of the 16 United
Nations peacekeeping missions are operational, that
notion has been tested with the development of regional
standby brigades and the deployment of regional and
joint peacekeeping operations, in particular the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Those missions
attest to the partnership and mutual commitment of
both the United Nations and the African Union to the
resolution of conflicts and the maintenance of peace
and security.
It is worth noting that in Darfur, the African Union
acted proactively in pressing for peace. In the Central
African Republic, the swift deployment of the Africanled International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic (MISCA) and the French Operation

S/PV.7228

Sangaris forces proved critical in saving civilian lives
and in preventing an even greater tragedy. MISCA has
now been mandated to establish a suitable environment
for a deployment before the transfer of the mandate
to MINUSCA. In accordance with the African Union
Protocol on Peace and Security, SADC has established a
standby brigade, whose mandate includes, among other
tasks, intervening in order to restore peace and security
in a conflict situation at the request of a member State.
As members of SADC, we are grateful for the Council’s
cooperation with the regional economic community
in strengthening the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo through the integration of the Force Intervention
Brigade.
The foundation of Africa’s partnership with
the United Nations, which is based on Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, provides for
the participation of regional arrangements in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly as first responders to ensure the pacific
settlement of local disputes before referring such
disputes to the Security Council. The cooperation
underpinning that relationship has served to advance
the goals of the United Nations.
While the progress made through our collective
efforts in peacekeeping is commendable, we need to
draw appropriate lessons from our past experiences.
Zimbabwe believes that the future effectiveness
of the partnership between the United Nations and
regional partnerships depends on strengthening
strategic cooperation on the basis of comparative
advantages, complementary mandates and the optimal
use of resources and capabilities. The participation of
regional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security clearly has added value. Their increasing
role therefore requires less of an ad hoc coordination
process and more of a streamlined framework that
adequately deals with the inherent challenges related
to resources, preparedness and the operational aspects
of cooperation.
There is a need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
a Security Council mandate. Currently, the African
Union missions in the Central African Republic and
in Somalia are struggling to obtain the equipment
needed to build capacity in order to effectively carry
out their mandates. Those are operational weaknesses

14-4863859/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that should be avoided when undertaking peacekeeping
operations.
If peacekeeping operations are to remain truly
relevant, the mandates given to peacekeeping missions
must be clear about what they are envisaged to achieve.
Mandates should be based on an objective assessment
to avoid overexpectations as to what the mission can
achieve. In that regard, it is necessary that respective
regions should have a greater voice in the drafting
of peacekeeping mandates that have an impact on
their regions. Regional organizations are well placed
to understand the root causes of armed conflicts
and are well positioned to influence their prevention
and resolution to ensure that they do not undermine
development opportunities.
The effective command and control of operations
underpin success and credibility. Yet that is an area
where gaps still exist. The United Nations could assist
further by standardizing the training of peacekeepers
and by offering guidance to regional institutions.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute to all those
peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the course
of duty, defending the flag of the United Nations and
contributing to upholding the image of the Organization
and its peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): I would like to join other
speakers in thanking the Government of Rwanda for
organizing this timely open debate.
The regional dimension of peacekeeping is indeed
a key aspect of effective international peace and
stability. The sequential or parallel deployment of
peace operations by the United Nations and regional
organizations, especially the European Union (EU) and
the African Union (AU), has become the norm rather
than an exception. That is particularly the case in
Africa, where operations by the AU, African regional
organizations and the EU, for example, in Mali, the
Central African Republic and Somalia, come to mind
in addition to the long-standing missions deployed
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. They all
demonstrate that the European Union has become a
key partner of the United Nations in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.
Germany is honoured to contribute to that joint
endeavour with personnel, capabilities and financial

60/65

28/07/2014

resources both to the United Nations and within the
European framework. That is in addition to German
support provided to our African partners and the
African Union in strengthening their peacekeeping
capabilities. It is in our common interest to further
improve our cooperation with the AU and African
subregional organizations in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions.
Today’s debate comes at a particularly opportune
time. There is a growing sense that peacekeeping
needs to be made more effective to meet the multiple
challenges it faces. In that context, we welcome the
review of United Nations peacekeeping efforts recently
announced by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We
stand ready to contribute to the findings and look
forward to the Secretary-General’s recommendations.
One of the critical aspects that the review should
address is the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations. With more parallel
deployments on the ground, more lessons can be learned
on what works in that partnership and what needs to
be improved. It is clear that improved synergies are
required, not least given the increasingly strained
resources.
Against that background, Germany is delighted to
collaborate with the Italian presidency of the European
Union in a project aimed at improving cooperation
on the ground between peace operations deployed by
the European Union and the United Nations. As part
of the project, we will organize a seminar in Berlin
in November 2014 which will concentrate on how to
improve coherence in mandates, mission planning and
coordination on the ground, as well as how to improve
EU-United Nations cooperation in policing, security
sector reform and judicial reform.
Many of the questions we seek to address at
that seminar mirror those raised in the concept note
prepared by the Rwandan delegation for today’s debate
(S/2014/478, annex), namely, what are the comparative
advantages of both organizations and how can we
capitalize on them to achieve our common goal? How
can we ensure that efforts by both the United Nations
and the European Union complement one another
rather than develop in parallel? How do we make sure
not to overstretch the absorption capacities of host
countries? And what are the requirements for improved
cooperation, including operational, legal and resource
aspects?

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We look forward to sharing the findings of the
seminar with all interested parties and we will feed the
outcome into the review process not only here in New
York, but also into policy discussions in Brussels and
Addis Ababa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I thank the
presidency of Rwanda for convening today’s open
debate on the theme “United Nations peacekeeping
operations: the United Nations and regional partnership
and its evolution”. It is an issue that is most relevant to
the work of the Organization and the Security Council.
The Philippines aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of Egypt, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and the representative
of Thailand, on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The briefings of the Secretary-General, the
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU)
and the Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service show the value of partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in peacekeeping operations. While there has been
progress, challenges remain that need to be addressed
to fully harness the partnerships’ potentials to keep the
peace throughout the world.
Any debate on peacekeeping operations must be
firmly grounded on the premise that all stakeholders
must exert all efforts to peacefully settle disputes,
acting in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. We must do everything that we can
to prevent conflict from arising. That is a paramount
obligation for all States Members of the United Nations
and a principled position that the Philippines will never
tire of articulating.
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
comprehensively provides the many ways to reach the
pacific settlement of disputes. While we affirm our
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflicts regrettably continue to arise. Conflicts now
involve not only States but also non-State actors and
result in the more complex and complicated milieux that
United Nations peacekeeping efforts need to address
and operate in. Operational demands and realities
including the finite resources of the United Nations and
the troop- and police-contributing countries require the

S/PV.7228

maximizing, multiplying and coordinating efforts. In
that regard, the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations provides distinct lessons
and practices that we can learn from and build upon.
The Philippines wishes to highlight the following
points and observations. First, the Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, clear
and achievable mandates emanating from the Security
Council are crucial to their being successfully
implemented.
Secondly, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and where the mandate
and the capacity of regional arrangements or agencies
allow it, regional arrangements and agencies can and do
provide important contributions to peacekeeping.
Thirdly, the operational partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations must be
based on comparative advantages, complementarity
and the optimal use of resources and capacities, inter
alia.
Fourthly, there is a need for effective communication
and coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations and agencies. The strategic
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council is showing
the way towards enhanced interaction and cooperation.
Such a relationship is vital to ensuring rapid and
appropriate responses to emerging situations and to
developing effective strategies for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding on the
continent. The establishment of the United Nations
Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa is also a
concrete step in the strengthening of the relationship
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission.
Fifthly, there is value in providing capacitybuilding support for peacekeeping operations to
regional organizations and their members. In that
regard, cooperation between stakeholders can help
identify ways to further strengthen the capabilities
and comparative advantages of regional organizations
and their members. Avenues to explore such
cooperative opportunities can be greatly enhanced
through agreements, including, for example, the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations.

14-4863861/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Sixthly, there are key ongoing peacekeeping
projects and programmes by regional organizations that
deserve support. The potential contribution to peace
and security in Africa by the African Standby Force
is one such endeavour, and support is crucial for AU
efforts to fully operationalize the Force by 2015. On the
other hand, ASEAN has developed a concept paper on
the establishment of the ASEAN Peacekeeping Centres
Network whose implementation is currently under way.
Seventhly, strengthening the safety and security of
peacekeepers should continue to be a priority area of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The experience in missions such as the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the
Golan Heights should remind the United Nations and
regional organizations to urge actors and stakeholders
to respect the neutrality and freedom of movement of
peacekeeping missions whose mandates are set forth by
the Security Council. The key in that regard is to ensure
that commands and instructions from the Council reach
the front line commanders of United Nations missions
in countries in conflict.
Finally, the Philippines wishes to underscore
that any discussion on the work of peacekeeping
must involve the participation of key stakeholders.
We reiterate NAM’s and ASEAN’s position that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
is the sole body responsible for policymaking in
peacekeeping. We call the Council’s attention to the
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) on its 2014 substantive session
(A/68/19), containing recommendations and decisions
on such issues as enhanced safety and security for
peacekeepers, cooperation with regional arrangements,
and enhancement of African peacekeeping capacities.
My delegation joins others in efforts to ensure that the
decisions and recommendations contained in the C-34
report are implemented satisfactorily.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s debate on the theme “United
Nations peacekeeping operations: The United Nations
and regional partnership and its evolution”. This
a subject dear to our two countries and to the entire
African continent. I take this opportunity to warmly
commend Rwanda for its ongoing commitment to peace

62/65

28/07/2014

and security in Africa and its excellent work not only
during its presidency but also since its membership
of the Security Council, particularly on peacekeeping
issues.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed briefing, which confirms the central role of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in promoting
world security.
While Morocco aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, my delegation wishes to share
several additional elements on the subject of this debate.
We have recently had the opportunity in the
Security Council and before other bodies to underscore
the dynamic nature of peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, the debate held in June under the Russian
Federation’s presidency of the Council on new trends
(see S/PV.7196) was extremely instructive. Today, we
have an opportunity to discuss another very important
aspect — the relationship between the United Nations
and regional partnerships. We have recently seen that
almost all current conflicts are strongly regional in
nature. While not new, this aspect is constantly evolving,
and we need to adapt to new trends in peacekeeping
through multidimensional missions with increasingly
complex mandates.
Regional and subregional organizations are
increasingly involved in resolving conflicts, particularly
in their initial phases, both as first responders
and in terms of peacebuilding and in post-conflict
phases. We endorse the principle that regional and
subregional organizations or even groups of countries
enjoy a comparative advantage because of their close
geographical, historical or linguistic proximity to the
country in conflict.
There are many examples, as detailed in the
concept note (S/2014/478, annex) for this debate. Let me
echo some of the examples. The Economic Community
of West African States has played a key role in Mali
and Guinea-Bissau, where it deployed a force that
clearly made a valuable contribution to the restoration
of constitutional order in that brother country. The
Economic Community of Central African States was
present in the Central African Republic for many years
through its Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic. The Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has sent a force to protect
civilians and observers to the Sudan and South Sudan.

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In Mali and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the magnitude of the task and complexity of the situation
have precipitated the involvement of the Africa Union
(AU), which, in both cases, has laid the groundwork for
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The decisive
action undertaken by the subregion and the AU have
averted the worst-case scenario.
The emergence of regional groups and subregional
organizations such as the Mano River Union or the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, whose members
decided to create a common armed force to fight Boko
Haram, should be supported technically, financially
and logistically, like all regional arrangements. There
are many other cases of international cooperation that
merit our attention, in particular the European Union,
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and NATO, to cite just a few. Given the
time constraints, we shall limit ourselves to mentioning
those engaged on our African continent.
The commitment of the Kingdom of Morocco
to peacekeeping operations dates back to 1960. It is
reflected today in the deployment of more than 2,000
Moroccan soldiers on the African continent — in CÔte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic. Our presence will soon be
bolstered by the deployment of a military component
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
on 15 September.
Our ongoing commitment reflects our unflagging
desire to strengthen and make permanent the concept of
collective security that is at the heart of the mandates of
our Organization, and our devotion to the fundamental
principles that govern it, including the consent of parties
to the conflict, in the light of those parties’ accession
to a political process and their agreement to the
deployment of a peacekeeping operation, the presence
of which is to support the process. These principles also
include impartiality, which is not to be confused with
neutrality or inaction, and which requires peacekeeping
personnel to remain impartial in their relationship with
the parties to the conflict; the non-use of force, except
for legitimate defence or defence of the mandate; and
respect for the mandate of the peacekeeping operation.
Beyond these principles, States must contribute
to peacekeeping operations in accordance with the
following criteria: participation within the mission
framework, as authorized and approved by the

S/PV.7228

United Nations; respect for the founding principles
of peacekeeping, including respect for the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and consent of the States involved;
and the tailoring of the peacekeeping mandate to the
specific characteristics of the conflict.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my country’s
commitment to international peace and security, and
our belief that the international community would
clearly benefit by strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Such cooperation should transcend
political support based on the universal principles
that are the raisons d’être of the United Nations, to
include predictable and appropriate logistical support.
While regional and subregional organizations may be
armed with firm resolve, they often lack the technical,
financial and logistical support to carry out their longterm stabilization efforts. Better adapted and more
predictable support would ultimately benefit the entire
international community.
It is also important to underscore that the United
Nations, through the Security Council, remains
the principal guarantor of international peace and
security in the world, and that the role of regional and
subregional organizations must remain in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and be guided by the desire to
ensure coordination.
Lastly, we pay tribute to the men and women who
continue to carry out their peacekeeping missions
in often very difficult conditions. We convey our
condolences to the families and relatives of the Blue
Helmets who have lost their lives in the line of duty,
defending the universal values of the Organization. The
Kingdom of Morocco is resolved to remain committed,
under United Nations auspices, to the promotion and
consolidation of peace worldwide.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, Mr. President,
let me thank you for organizing today’s debate on
the theme “United Nations peacekeeping operations:
The United Nations and regional partnerships and its
evolution”. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service and the Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations for their
briefings on this important topic. I would also like

14-4863863/65

S/PV.7228

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to thank you, Mr. President, and your delegation for
circulating a comprehensive concept note (S/2014/478,
annex) in the context of this debate.
As the largest overall contributor of troops to
the United Nations peacekeeping operations, having
sent more than 170,000 Indian troops to 43 of the
69 peacekeeping operations mandated so far, India
speaks with considerable experience in this field. With
the changing nature of conflict, we have witnessed
that there are new demands that have been placed on
peacekeeping operations. Those new trends can be seen
most in the African continent, where we have the bulk
of our peacekeepers.
Africa has seen several peacekeeping operations
that have involved the collaboration of non-United
Nations third parties and regional organizations,
including the African Union, the European Union,
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community. Through this debate,
we are endeavouring to undertake a much-needed
stocktaking of the partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations.
As mentioned in the concept note, we would
concentrate on the following three aspects of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. These are the political, operational and
financial aspects.

28/07/2014

structured mechanism of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, it would
be useful to strengthen it and to focus on replacing ad
hoc mechanisms with tested permanent mechanisms
that would be more predictable. We believe that
regional organizations, which are composed of States
Members of the United Nations, must advocate and
apply the same principles of the United Nations Charter
for peacekeeping that currently apply to mainstream
peacekeeping operations.
The second aspect of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations pertains to
the operational dimension. It has been our experience
that investment in equipment, logistics and training goes
a long way towards making peacekeeping operations
more viable and sustainable. It would go a long way
towards strengthening peacekeeping operations with
more than one contributor if we were able to improve
logistical support to the mission. We agree that proper
planning holds the key to the successful implementation
of the mandates of joint operations, which would require
greater coordination of the efforts of two organizations
working for a common objective. It is also important
to place the right emphasis on the capacity-building
aspect of regional organizations, which would be
useful in tackling conflicts in their region. In addition,
it is also important to have a clear-cut exit strategy for
peacekeeping operations so that reference to the time
frame is clear to all.

On the important political dimension, we have
consistently emphasized that the new trend of
peacekeeping operations, wherein there is a mixing of
mandates, directly affects the operational effectiveness
of the peacekeeping operation and exposes
traditional-mandate peacekeepers to unnecessary
threats from armed internal conflicts that the United
Nations has not itself instigated. We would like to point
out the dangers of using United Nations peacekeepers to
tackle what are essentially internal political conflicts.
In doing so, the Council is effectively endorsing
an unsustainable approach to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The final aspect mentioned in the concept note
pertains to the financial dimension, which in our view
is one of the critical factors of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we note the cases of transition from a
regional organization-led peacekeeping operation to
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. The most
recent of those is the case of the Central African
Republic, where, through the adoption of resolution
2149 (2014), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic was created, effective as of 15 September.
Such transitions require careful financial planning. The
importance of having concrete views on the issue of
financial collaboration cannot be overstated.

The concept note mentions greater strategic
guidance and support from Headquarters to provide
effective command-and-control structure. However,
those would be short-term remedies to essentially longterm, unresolved political issues that peacekeepers
are unable to resolve. We agree that once there is a

With the emergence of multidimensional mandates,
we have a situation of new peacekeeping mandates
without providing for matching financial resources.
In that regard, we would like to bring to attention of
the Council the fact that, after intense negotiations
between the troop-contributing countries, on the one

64/65

14-48638

28/07/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations

hand, and the finance-contributing countries, on the
other, the General Assembly recently decided a new
rate of $1,322 per peacekeeper per month starting 1 July
2014, as against the recommendation put forward by the
Senior Advisory Group of $1,762.55 per peacekeeper
per month. The larger issue of financial imbalance
must be taken into account when we look at the issue of
providing sustainable and predictable financial support
to joint peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, we call on the Council to engage
with troop-contributing countries under Article 44
while drafting new multidimensional mandates for

S/PV.7228

peacekeeping operations. In addition, we would like
to reiterate that in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, we must make sure that all attempts at
the pacific settlement of disputes set out in Article 52
have been exhausted by the member States belonging
to regional arrangements or regional agencies before
the Council is asked to approve new peacekeeping
operations by regional organizations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

14-4863865/65
