S/PV.9203

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9203

rd meeting
Monday, 28 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-71114 (E)
*2271114*

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

process and entrenched occupation, and amid mounting
economic and institutional challenges faced by the
Palestinian Authority. Global trends and declining
donor support have compounded those challenges,
alongside an absence of democratic renewal for the
Palestinian people.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

28/11/2022

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: Each month, I brief the Security
Council in detail on the latest developments on the
ground relevant to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Today, however, I wish to provide a broader perspective
on the challenges we are facing, while highlighting
some potential ways forward for the parties and the
international community. A detailed update on recent
incidents and developments will be provided in the
forthcoming report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), to be issued
in December.

In Gaza, the fragile calm was recently interrupted
by the launching of four rockets towards Israel by
Palestinian militants and subsequent air strikes by
Israeli Defense Forces against what it said were
Hamas targets. Once again, we are reminded that
the mix of militant activity, debilitating closures, the
absence of a legitimate Palestinian Government and
hopelessness create an ever-present risk of escalation.
I remain focused on addressing the immediate
threats both to stability and the longer-term objectives
of my mandate. In recent weeks my team and I have
visited areas in the occupied West Bank where there has
been severe violence, and I continue to hold discussions
with a range of Palestinian and Israeli officials, as well
as international and regional actors, to address the
dangerous dynamics.

Let me reiterate that the targeting of civilians can
never be justified, and the violence must stop.

In Gaza, the United Nations worked closely, again
alongside regional and international partners, to mediate
and support the ceasefires in May 2021 and in August
this year. The United Nations leads the humanitarian
response and has helped put in place measures to
support Gaza’s economy, including improvements to
movement and access in and out of Gaza for people
and goods. Critical projects, such as providing fuel to
the Gaza power plant and cash assistance to more than
100,000 needy families, are ongoing and will continue
in 2023. In that regard, progress has been made.
Israel has approved the highest number of permits
for Palestinians from Gaza to work in Israel since
2007 and the entry of a number of dual-use materials
from Israel for the first time in more than a decade.
Nevertheless, restrictions and delays continue to have
a negative impact on humanitarian and development
efforts, as well as important sectors of the economy,
and much more remains to be done. Those preventive
and de-escalating measures and diplomatic engagement
have helped maintain calm on the ground and provide
some space for progress, but if there is no tangible
movement on the political track their benefits are likely
to be short-lived.

This surge in violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory is taking place in the context of a stalled peace

While it may seem that the events on the ground are
stuck in a never-ending cycle, the truth is that nothing

After decades of persistent violence, illegal
settlement expansion, dormant negotiations and
deepening occupation, the conflict is again reaching a
boiling point. High levels of violence in the occupied
West Bank and Israel in recent months, including
attacks against Israeli and Palestinian civilians, and the
increased use of arms and settler-related violence have
caused grave human suffering. I condemn last week’s
bombings in Jerusalem, which killed two Israelis,
including a 16-year-old, and injured over a dozen more
civilians. Such acts of terrorism must be clearly rejected
and condemned by all. Days before, I condemned the
violent attack by Israeli settlers against Palestinians
in Hebron, which risks aggravating an already tense
situation. We all have a responsibility to take action
against extremists and to speak out against such acts of
violence and incitement.

2/15

22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in this conflict is static. Freezing the conflict or
managing it permanently are not viable options. As the
violence mounts, settlement expansion and restrictions
continue to squeeze the economic and physical space
for developing a viable Palestinian State. Meanwhile,
demography is moving faster than politics. In a few
years, the exponential population growth in the West
Bank and Gaza will it make it increasingly difficult, if
not impossible, to manage the economic, political and
security situation. The Palestinian Authority is already
facing significant institutional and financial challenges.
Palestinians have not voted in general elections since
2006. More than 50 per cent of the electorate — those
aged between 18 and 35 — have never had a chance to
make their voices heard through a ballot. That is taking
place against a backdrop of changing dynamics in the
region, along with shifting international priorities and,
more recently, fallout from the conflict in Ukraine,
which has significantly reduced the attention paid to
this conflict.
The optimism, hope, and vocal support for a
negotiated political resolution that were so palpable
when the peace process began have now dimmed,
especially given the lack of political progress since
the unsuccessful rounds of talks in 2007 and 2014.
The principles that underpin the Oslo Accords are
slipping away. Political leadership is required to reset
a trajectory towards a two-State solution. Failure to
address the underlying causes of conflict and the trends
I have mentioned and to pave a clear political path
forward will only escalate the conflict, causing more
bloodshed and misery and resulting in a definitively
destabilizing effect on the entire region. The current
trends are bringing neither stability nor security to
anyone. For those reasons, it is urgent that steps be
taken towards a two-State solution, which still garners
considerable support among Palestinians and Israelis.
Through incremental but tangible steps, we can build
a bridge between where we are now and the conditions
necessary for a peaceful resolution of the conflict based
on the resolutions of the United Nations, international
law and previous agreements.
First, we must continue to engage with the parties
to reduce tensions and counter negative trends,
particularly those that affect final-status issues. That
will involve reining in the violence and incitements and
holding the perpetrators accountable. It means seeing
both sides stop taking unilateral steps that undermine
peace, including settlement expansion or legalization,

S/PV.9203

demolitions and displacement, and it means upholding
the status quo for the holy sites, in accordance with
Jordan’s special and historic role.
Secondly, we must continue to improve access,
movement and trade in order to create room for the
Palestinian economy to grow. Specifically, steps should
be taken to increase access for Palestinians to land and
resources in Area C of the West Bank, enabling crucial
Palestinian development, as well as to increase permits
for Palestinians to work in Israel. In Gaza, a further and
more comprehensive approach to easing restrictions on
the movement of people and goods is needed. Relinking
the Gaza economy to the West Bank should be a related
critical objective. Ultimately, ending the debilitating
closures and addressing Gaza’s challenges require
political solutions in line with resolution 1860 (2009).
Thirdly, we need efforts by all the parties and the
international community to strengthen Palestinian
institutions, improve governance and shore up the fiscal
health of the Palestinian Authority, whose political
legitimacy and accountability must also be strengthened
through democratic reforms and the opening of the civic
space, holding elections across the occupied Palestinian
territory and ensuring the effectiveness and credibility
of the Palestinian security forces. And that will not be
possible without the implementation of my first and
second points. Those steps seek to enable the parties
to move past ad-hoc efforts focused on security and
economic matters and towards meaningful engagement
on more fundamental political issues. While they
are intended to have immediate concrete benefits for
Palestinians and Israelis, the priorities are anchored in
a broader political framework that advances us towards
achieving a reality of two States.
I recognize that in the current circumstances,
advancing such steps will be a formidable task.
Fundamental issues have to be addressed by the parties.
A common approach, with a two-State solution as the
guiding political direction, is essential to halting the
current negative trajectory. Also required is a redoubled
commitment from the international community,
encompassing both resources and engagement
with the parties, despite the global challenges. The
circumstances have clearly changed in the three
decades since Israelis and Palestinians first embarked
on the peace process. Neither side can turn away from
the realities of geography and demography that are
reshaping the landscape, which, combined with the fast-

22-711143/15

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

expanding settlements east of the 1967 borders, reflects
an increase in friction points and a deepening conflict.
Such a direction has full support from the
international community. In that regard, the United
Nations plays a critical role in anchoring and affirming
the international consensus on how the conflict will
ultimately be resolved — the establishment of two
States, living side by side in peace and security, on
the basis of the 1967 lines, in line with United Nations
resolutions, international law and previous agreements.
That consensus is based on the recognition that both
Palestinians and Israelis have deep national, religious,
cultural and historic ties to their homeland and that
both have a right to self-determination in the form of
a viable, contiguous, independent State of their own.
Ultimately, only Palestinians and Israelis can
together determine their future. But the United Nations
and the international community, including through
regional and international frameworks, must support
the parties in moving towards a political horizon that
is aligned with the core principles I outlined. Despite
the bleakness of the moment, and fact because of it, I
encourage all of us to recommit to that ambitious, but
achievable, goal.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
I want to start by condemning in the strongest
possible terms the terrorist attacks that occurred in
Jerusalem last week. I echo Secretary Blinken in
expressing our condolences to the families of the men
who were killed and wish all those injured a speedy
recovery. We stand with the Israeli people in the face of
those heinous attacks.
Let me be clear: there is no justification for
violence that is directed at civilians. That includes the
15 November terrorist attack in a settlement that killed
three Israelis and the violence committed by settlers
in Hebron on 19 November. Anyone who commits
a violent act, Israeli or Palestinian, must face equal
justice. It must be clear that no individual or group is
above the law.
4/15

28/11/2022

The United States is deeply concerned about the
sharp escalation in violence and tension between Israelis
and Palestinians. This has been the deadliest year in
the West Bank since 2004. Nearly 150 Palestinians and
28 Israelis have been killed. Amid those heightened
tensions, it is all the more critical that Israelis and
Palestinians refrain from unilateral actions, including
settlement activity, evictions and the demolition of
Palestinian homes and incitement to violence, such as
payments to the families of terrorists, and the disruption
of the historic status quo of holy sites. Those actions
serve only to take us further away from a negotiated
two-State solution, which remains the best way to
ensure Israel’s future security and prosperity and fulfil
Palestinians’ desire for a State of their own.
Israelis and Palestinians equally deserve to live
safely and securely and enjoy equal measures of
freedom, justice, dignity and prosperity. We have said
many times that there is no shortcut to the vision of
two States. That can be achieved only through direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. It is
incumbent on both parties to work in good faith towards
that goal.
While the international community cannot impose
peace on the parties, it has an important role to play in
improving the well-being of Palestinians, the security
of Israelis and the stability of the wider region. Those
efforts can help create the conditions for meaningful
negotiations aimed at resolving the conflict.
Unfortunately, most United Nations actions related to
Israelis and Palestinians are not designed to advance
direct negotiations, let alone achieve peace. They are
intended only to denigrate Israel.
Indeed, the United Nations system is replete with
anti-Israel actions and bodies, including biased and
disproportionate resolutions against Israel, across
the United Nations system. The lopsided focus on
Israel at the United Nations, including the open-ended
Commission of Inquiry and the recent requests for an
advisory opinion at the International Court of Justice,
has brought Israelis and Palestinians no closer to peace.
Instead of grandstanding and pursuing unproductive
measures, we hope that the United Nations will start
focusing on the kinds of concrete steps that can improve
the lives of Palestinians and Israelis and preserve the
viability of two States, living side by side in peace
and security.
22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
thoughtful briefing.
The United Kingdom is gravely concerned about the
increasing instability in the West Bank and Jerusalem.
Since 14 November, four Israelis have lost their lives in
terrorist attacks in the city of Ariel and in Jerusalem,
including a 16-year-old. There is no justification
for such violence. During that time, two Palestinian
minors were also killed in the West Bank, including
a 15-year-old. One hundred and forty-two Palestinians
have now been killed by Israeli security forces since
1 January — the most in a single year since United
Nations records began in 2005. In the same period, 30
Israelis also lost their lives. Each life lost is a tragedy
for all communities, particularly the families affected.
The ongoing conflict needs to be resolved, for the sake
of all Israelis and Palestinians alike.
The United Kingdom stands ready to support
the new Israeli Administration and the Palestinian
Authority (PA) in de-escalation efforts and in
addressing the drivers of the conflict. The United
Kingdom remains fully supportive of Israel’s right to
self-defence, but Israeli security forces should show
maximum restraint in the use of force and investigate
all Palestinian deaths. We urge both parties to engage
in meaningful dialogue, refrain from escalatory actions
and work to restore trust and a pathway towards peace
and a resolution of the conflict.
The United Kingdom shares the concern of
others about the scenes of settler violence perpetrated
against Palestinians in Hebron in recent days. Settler
violence must end, and we call upon Israel to hold those
responsible to account.
We condemn the demolition by Israel of a primary
school in Masafer Yatta. All children have a basic right
to access education safely. We call on the Government
of Israel to uphold those rights.
Finally, I urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority
to accelerate efforts to improve the economic and
humanitarian conditions in the West Bank and Gaza.
I welcome ongoing dialogue to address PA clearance
revenues and call on the parties to honour their recent
commitments in the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians.

S/PV.9203

The United Kingdom remains a firm supporter
of the two-State solution, based on 1967 lines, with
Jerusalem as a shared capital, as the only way to ensure
lasting peace between the parties.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland for his briefing.
My delegation follows with concern the recent
developments in Israel and Palestine. The analysis
provided by Special Coordinator Wennesland confirms
that we are faced with a very fragile situation that could
escalate further. The recent incidents are reminiscent
of the waves of violence seen in the last few years, so it
is necessary to support everything that has a preventive
or deterrent character.
Mexico condemns the attacks perpetrated on
23 November in Jerusalem, where a young Israeli
was killed and more than 20 people were injured. At
the same time, my country deplores any threat posed
to Israeli territory and its population, including the
launching of rockets from Gaza. We recognize Israel’s
legitimate security concerns. But, at the same time, we
reiterate that Israeli security agencies must observe the
principles of necessity, proportionality and distinction,
in accordance with international humanitarian law.
The recurrent use of lethal munitions against civilians
contravenes these principles.
The withholding of the mortal remains of any
person is also unacceptable, as it is a form of collective
punishment that prevents families from honouring the
memory of those who have died. We commend the efforts
of authorities and social leaders in Jenin to return the
body of the young Druze man stolen last week and urge
the immediate release of all remains still being held.
We also condemn the recurrent attacks perpetrated by
Israeli settlers, such as those that took place in Hebron
on 19 November. We echo the Special Coordinator’s
call and urge political and social leaders to refrain from
inciting violence and inflammatory rhetoric.
Settlement
construction
is
illegal
under
international law. We therefore call for a halt to
settlement construction and expansion, as well as
evictions and displacements of residents, and seizures
and demolitions of Palestinian structures. School
demolitions, such as the one that occurred in Masafer
Yatta, violate the Palestinian population’s right to
education and increase the grievances that hinder a
return to dialogue.

22-711145/15

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) will undoubtedly provide
certainty in planning the Agency’s work. We stress that
UNRWA requires predictable funding to enable it to
consistently provide humanitarian assistance and basic
services to more than 5 million Palestinian refugees in
Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Palestine.
On the political front, we urge the incoming Israeli
Government to maintain and deepen civil, fiscal and
security cooperation with the Palestinian Authority.
Similarly, we reiterate our call for the Palestinian
Authority to convene presidential and legislative
elections in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, in line with the Algiers declaration.
In conclusion, I stress that only a negotiated solution
can put an end to the recurring cycles of violence that
affect the stability of the entire region. The parties
to the conflict have a responsibility to return to the
political process to address the structural causes of
violence and move towards reconciliation. For its part,
the international community has the obligation to
promote and support this process.
In view of the foregoing, Mexico reiterates its
support for any initiative that contributes to a twoState solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both
States, in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. Only in this way will it be possible to lay the
foundations for reconciliation and ensure sustainable
peace in the Middle East.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank United Nations
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
India condemns the twin terror attacks that took
place in Jerusalem on 23 November. We offer our
condolences to the victim’s family and wish the injured
a speedy recovery. We reiterate that terrorism is a
global threat and that only a unified and zero-tolerance
approach to terrorism can eventually defeat it.
India has emphasized that only a negotiated
two-State solution leading to the establishment of a
sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine,
with Israel’s legitimate security concerns being taken
into consideration, can deliver lasting peace. In this
regard, India continues to reiterate the need for an
early resumption of direct peace negotiations between
the parties on all final-status issues. The absence
of such negotiations and the lack of a clear political
6/15

28/11/2022

horizon for the peaceful resolution of the conflict has
consequences for both Israel and Palestine. It risks the
recurrence of the cycle of violence, which will only
increase the number of civilian casualties on both sides.
All parties must protect civilians, especially women
and children. We urge the parties to cease violence and
avoid unilateral actions on the ground, as they undercut
the viability of the two-State solution. This will help to
bridge the trust deficit between the parties.
For its part, India remains committed to supporting
all efforts aimed at bringing about the resumption
of direct negotiations between the Israelis and the
Palestinians in order to achieve a two-State solution.
On the occasion of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, the Prime Minister of
India, Shri Narendra Modi, has extended his best
wishes to the people of Palestine in their endeavour
for Statehood, peace and prosperity. In his message,
Prime Minister Modi has also reaffirmed India’s longstanding relationship with the Palestinian people, based
on deep-rooted historical and people-to-people ties.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
China is deeply concerned about the continuous
deterioration of the security situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Israeli security forces have
recently been conducting increasingly frequent searchand-arrest operations, and the violent conflict in the
West Bank has continued to spread, with the number of
civilian casualties rising. According to United Nations
statistics, this year has seen the highest number of
Palestinian deaths in the West Bank since 2005 as a
result of the conflict. Many Palestinian children are
dying before they can blossom, for example, Fulla,
who was shot dead on the day before her sixteenth
birthday. The civilian casualties in Israel are equally
heartbreaking. China condemns all indiscriminate
attacks on civilians in the occupied territories, deplores
the grave violations against children, opposes the
excessive use of force by security forces and calls for
investigations into the violence and for accountability.
Israel and Palestine are inseparable neighbours,
whose respective security is interdependent and
indivisible. If one party’s security depends on the other’s
insecurity, the cycle of violence will not be broken,
and the security dilemma will not be overcome. The
international community should pay equal attention to
22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian and Israeli security concerns and encourage
both sides to find the greatest common ground through
dialogue and cooperation so as to achieve common
security. At the same time, the occupying Power
should also effectively fulfil its obligations under
international law to protect the security of the people in
the occupied territories.
Improving the humanitarian and economic
situation in Palestine is urgently needed. This month,
a serious fire in the Jabalia refugee camp in the Gaza
Strip claimed the lives of more than 20 people. Under
Israel’s 15-year blockade, Gaza suffers from poor
infrastructure, electricity and energy shortages and a
lack of medical resources, leaving more than 2 million
people in Gaza living in poverty. In the West Bank,
large areas of land have been designated by Israel as
military training areas or for other purposes, thereby
excluding Palestinian construction, economic and
development activities.
We call on Israel to ease restrictions on the entry
and exit of people and humanitarian and reconstruction
materials in the Gaza Strip, lift the blockade on Gaza as
soon as possible and create conditions conducive to the
development of Palestinian communities in the West
Bank. The international community should provide
assistance to Palestine through multiple channels to
help the Palestinian people to alleviate the financial
crisis, ensure public services, develop the economy
and improve people’s livelihoods. China welcomes the
draft resolution adopted by the Fourth Committee to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(A/C.4/77/L.9). We support the Agency’s ongoing relief
and assistance to Palestinian refugees.
The continued expansion of settlement activities,
which encroach on Palestinian land, embezzle
Palestinian resources and violate the Palestinians’
right to self-determination, have made an independent,
sovereign and contiguous Palestinian State even more
elusive. We urge Israel to cease all settlement activities,
in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), including the
demolition of Palestinian homes and the threat to evict
people from areas such as Masafer Yatta, and return to
the right track of the two-State solution.
In November 1947, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (II), which provided for the establishment
of a Jewish State and an Arab State in Palestine.
Seventy-five years later, the question of Palestine

S/PV.9203

remains unresolved, and the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, independence
and statehood remain unfulfilled. The reasons for
that require in-depth reflection. The most essential
support to the Palestinian people is to give them longoverdue justice.
The international community should always put
the question of Palestine at the top of the international
agenda, continue to adhere to the two-State solution and
provide more support for the resumption of dialogue
between Palestine and Israel on an equal footing.
China supports the United Nations, the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
countries with influence in playing a more active role
and undertaking broader and more effective efforts to
promote peace. The Security Council must urgently
take substantive steps to advance the two-State solution
and support the Palestinian people in restoring and
exercising their inalienable rights. No one has the right
of veto in matters that affect the future destiny of the
Palestinian people.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate China’s
support for the establishment of a fully sovereign
and independent Palestine State on the basis of the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, the
peaceful coexistence of Palestine and Israel, and
the common development of the Arab and Jewish
peoples. China is ready to work with the international
community to practise genuine multilateralism,
promote a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to
the Palestinian question, and achieve security, stability,
development and prosperity in the Middle East as soon
as possible.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process for his briefing.
As the Special Coordinator said, the risk of escalation
on the ground is real, and France calls on the parties to
exercise restraint. We condemn in the strongest terms
the two attacks that struck Jerusalem on 23 November.
We reiterate our continued support for Israel’s security
and our determination to remain committed to the fight
against terrorism. We also condemn the deaths of many
Palestinian civilians this year, including the journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh and several children. We recall that
the protection of civilians during military operations
is an obligation under international humanitarian law.

22-711147/15

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The unacceptable continuation of unilateral
measures is making the prospect of a two-State solution
more remote every day. France condemns the Israeli
settlement policy, including the ongoing demolitions
and evictions of Palestinian families, despite the
repeated appeals by members of the Security Council.
We condemn Israel’s destruction of a school in Masafer
Yatta last week. Palestinian children have a right
to education.
As the new Israeli Government is being formed,
France calls on it not to relaunch plans to expand or create
settlements, particularly in and around East Jerusalem,
and not to proceed with the legalization of unauthorized
settlements. In 2020, France and its European partners
repeatedly warned against the annexation of parts of the
West Bank and the settlements. Our position remains
unchanged. France recalls that the settlements are
illegal and that they undermine the two-State solution,
for which both parties reaffirmed their support before
the General Assembly last September (see A/77/PV.8
and A/77/PV.10).
In order to emerge from this situation, we must
recreate a political horizon in order to give new hope
to Israelis and Palestinians, who aspire to live in peace
and security. We know that only a two-State solution,
in which both States live side by side in peace and
security and have Jerusalem as their capital, will make
it possible to bring about a just and lasting peace for the
Israelis, the Palestinians and the entire region. France
recalls its commitment to the historic status quo of the
holy sites in Jerusalem.
We therefore call on the Security Council to
work towards the launching of peace talks as soon
as possible. The Israeli elections took place. Direct
negotiations between the parties must now be rapidly
relaunched. France is determined to act in that
direction. As President Emmanuel Macron said, we
have no alternative but to relaunch the peace efforts.
France will support any initiative aimed at bringing the
parties back to the negotiating table.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
including the occupied Palestinian territories. It is
fitting that our discussion today is taking place on
the eve of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People.
8/15

28/11/2022

Another escalation of violence in the PalestinianIsraeli conflict area shows that the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories will remain volatile
until the parties find mutually acceptable solutions to
all final-status issues on the basis of the universally
recognized international legal framework of the Middle
East peace process, including the two-State solution.
Against the background of the relative stabilization
of the situation in the Gaza Strip after the Israeli
military operation in August this year, which killed at
least 49 Palestinians, including 17 children, the unrest
in the West Bank has not abated. Following the Israeli
blockade and military raids in Jenin, the cleansing of
Nablus and the Shu’fat refugee camp in East Jerusalem
began. According to reports, more than 130 people have
already died as a result of Israeli military action in the
West Bank this year, making it the bloodiest since 2005.
Amid that disproportionate use of force in
the occupied Palestinian territories, unilateral
actions continue to create irreversible facts on
the ground — the construction of settlements, the
expropriation of Palestinian property, the demolition of
homes, arbitrary arrests and the disruption of the status
quo of Jerusalem’s holy sites.
At the same time, Israel’s arbitrary illegal actions
have extended beyond the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip and have affected neighbouring Arab countries,
with many incidents involving the violation of their
sovereignty, including strikes against Syria and
Lebanon. We oppose the defence of national security
at the cost of creating threats to other countries and
turning the Middle East region into an arena for proxy
confrontation with Iran. We also strongly condemn the
attacks on Israeli civilians in Jerusalem last week.
Neither do we see any prospects for revitalizing
the peace process, which has been at a standstill since
2015. The Palestinian issue has become a bargaining
chip in a long series of election campaigns in Israel,
as it has actively been pushed to the bottom of the
international agenda by the United States, which has
blocked the efforts of the Middle East Quartet and the
Security Council’s adoption of any substantive decision.
Furthermore, as we heard today from the Special
Coordinator, a Middle East settlement is also suffering
from the United States and its allies prioritizing the
Ukrainian crisis. The continuing rift between Fatah and
Hamas allows for exploiting the idea that Israel lacks a
distinct partner capable of representing the Palestinian
22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

side. In that regard, we welcome the signing of the
Algiers declaration, under which Palestinian factions
jointly decided to continue on the path of national
unity. We believe that it is an important step towards
confirming the Palestinians’ intention to launch
negotiations based on a common position.
Despite Israel’s stated intention to promote the
improvement of the economic situation of Palestinians,
the overall socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
in the Palestinian territories continues to deteriorate. In
that regard, we attach great importance to the provision
of comprehensive humanitarian assistance to those in
need in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as
to Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab countries.
We are dismayed by the lack of an adequate response
on the part of United Nations specialized agencies, first
and foremost among them the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which must cope with a paralysing
financial shortfall. The Agency’s activities have not
only a humanitarian, but also a political, dimension,
while playing an important stabilizing role in the
Palestinian territories and Middle East countries. We
unrelentingly continue to provide the Agency with our
support in the renewal of its mandate in the General
Assembly and reaffirm our readiness to continue our
voluntary one-time contributions. Unfortunately,
owing to unilateral anti-Russian sanctions, we have as
yet been unable to make a financial contribution to the
UNRWA budget. Nevertheless, Russia will continue to
support the Agency, and we call on the international
community to do the same.

S/PV.9203

geared towards ensuring that such acts of terror come
to a stop.
Reports, including those from the United Nations
Office for the Coordination for Humanitarian
Affairs, are clear that, beyond security concerns, the
current situation continues to have implications on
the economy and humanitarian aid in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. As
such, it is critical that the evolving situation be urgently
addressed, including the underlying issues fuelling
the instability, before it reverberates to other areas.
Kenya calls for enhanced analysis and contextualized
reports to emanate from the good offices of the
Secretary-General to enable a better appreciation of the
implications of such incidents in the maintenance of
peace and security in the region in the immediate and
long term. That would assist the Security Council in
formulating a concrete and practical political pathway
to end the protracted conflict.

Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing on the recent
developments on the ground.

As we look towards commemorating the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, the Council needs to urgently work on the
needed building blocks to actualize the long-held goal
of a region where two democratic States — Israel and
Palestine — live side by side in peace, within secure
and recognized borders, based on the 1967 lines.
The objective of a two-State solution will require of
both parties a meaningful commitment to the peace
process under international law, the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council’s resolutions and regional
peace initiatives and frameworks. It also requires a
willingness to compromise, a step-by-step approach that
ensures real gains for both Israelis and Palestinians and
a commitment to confidence-building measures that
create the space to tackle the harder final-status issues.

The trajectory of events, including the heightened
tensions and escalating violence, leading to fatalities
among both Israeli and Palestinian civilians, including
children, is deeply concerning. In particular, the
deteriorating security situation in Nablus, Jenin, the
West Bank in general and Jerusalem is alarming.
Kenya strongly condemns the 23 November two-bomb
terrorist attacks in Jerusalem. Such acts, including the
rocket launches from Gaza early this month, further
reinforce the fact that the pursuit of armed and militia
groups, including Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad
and their affiliates, fall outside the path and principles
of peace. We reiterate that no cause can justify the
deliberate targeting of civilians. All efforts must be

Despite years of an elusive peace process, years
of on-again/off-gain negotiation efforts and real and
formidable obstacles, my delegation believes that
there is still a chance to make real progress. Kenya has
regularly taken note of and welcomed the efforts to
lower tensions, end provocations and restore calm at the
grass-roots, official and regional levels. Such efforts
must be reinforced by the cessation of Israeli settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as demanded by the comprehensive
pillars of resolution 2334 (2016) and the provisions
of resolution 1860 (2009). The mediation efforts of
the countries of the region will remain critical. The
Council should remain seized of the implementation

22-711149/15

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the 13 October 2022 Algiers declaration, signed by
14 Palestinian factions, and support its translation into
actual reconciliation that paves the way for elections to
establish a national unity Government.
As I conclude, Kenya once again urges both parties
to avoid unilateral steps that stand in the way of a
resumption of a political process, as well as peace and
stability in the region.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
We are concerned about the persistent insecurity
vis-à-vis Israel and Palestine. I would like to focus on
the following three aspects: the security, humanitarian
and political dimensions.
With regard to the security situation, violence
has intensified in recent months in the occupied West
Bank and Israel. Tensions and stresses are mounting in
Jerusalem, and the positions of the parties are becoming
more extreme. Children and women are paying a heavy
price in terms of the indiscriminate violence affecting
civilian populations. A 15-year-old Palestinian was
killed on 9 November during an Israeli army operation
to secure a visit by Israeli politicians to a religious
site in the occupied West Bank. On 14 November,
a young Palestinian woman near Ramallah, in the
occupied West Bank, also lost her life. More recently,
an elementary school was demolished by Israeli forces
in Masafer Yatta.
Those are real tragedies that should not be trivialized.
Refusing to trivialize the cycles of violence also applies
to attacks suffered by Israelis, such as that which
resulted in the death of three Israelis on 15 November
in the industrial area of the Ariel settlement, as well as
the two bombing attacks in Jerusalem on 23 November.
We condemn all such attacks and acts of violence. The
cycle of violence and bloodshed is unsustainable, and
the perpetrators must be held accountable before the
law. We call on all the parties to exercise restraint and
refrain from bellicose rhetoric that impedes the quest
for peace. The settlement activities, evictions and
demolitions of Palestinian homes must stop.
On the thorny issue of the return of human remains
to their families, we call on the parties to prioritize a
solution that can create a climate of confidence for a
lasting peace.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
remain concerned about the risk of disruption to aid
10/15

28/11/2022

from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
as civilian populations remain highly dependent on
it, particularly in the Gaza Strip, due to the blockade.
In that regard we urge that the blockade be lifted, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009), and that
the international community continue its efforts to
fund UNRWA.
On the political front, Gabon reaffirms its
commitment to a two-State solution whereby Palestine
can live in peace and security along secure and
recognized borders, based on the 1967 lines, and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We call on the parties
to resume negotiations in good faith with a view to
restoring confidence and giving the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples a chance in their aspirations to live
in peace.
We recall the crucial role of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan as the official custodian of the Muslim holy
sites in Jerusalem and reiterate our support for the King
of Morocco, as Chair of the Al-Quds Committee of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, in preserving the
special status of the holy city as a symbol of the common
heritage of humankind and the three monotheistic
religions, as well as a place of dialogue and mutual
respect. Respect for the status quo of the holy sites is
also a requirement for the peaceful coexistence of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
Finally, we commend the efforts of Mr. Tor
Wennesland, the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. The diplomatic efforts to revive a
sustainable peace process in the region must continue.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his thought-provoking briefing today
and especially for being here with us in person, as I
know he has a very hectic schedule on the ground.
Norway is concerned about the continuing violence
in Israel and Palestine. The ongoing tensions are
having major consequences. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 2022
has been the deadliest year since 2005 for Palestinians
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. We are
particularly concerned about the increasing numbers of
settler attacks, most recently in Hebron. Such violent
attacks are unacceptable and fuel tensions. Daily life
has become unbearable for many Palestinians, who
no longer dare to access their land. Over time, that
coercive environment may force the local population to
22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

leave. We urge the Israeli authorities to take stronger
measures to prevent settler violence and bring those
responsible to account. Norway condemns all violence
against civilians, including acts of terrorism. The recent
terror attacks in Jerusalem are indefensible. We call on
both Israeli and Palestinian political leaders to take the
necessary steps to protect civilians and de-escalate the
situation. It is also essential to ensure that the historic
status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem is upheld
and respected.
Let me reiterate our concern regarding the situation
in Masafer Yatta. The restrictions on movement are
having severe consequences for residents in the area.
Just last week the Israeli authorities demolished a
school, seriously undermining Palestinian children’s
access to education. We once again urge Israel to revoke
all eviction and demolition orders and to comply with
its obligations under international humanitarian law.
We were encouraged by the Palestinian factions’
commitment to reconciliation, expressed once again in
the agreement reached in Algiers last month. Palestinian
reconciliation and unification are essential to stability
and to advancing a two-State solution. The legitimacy
of the Palestinian Authority and its institutions must
be ensured. We therefore urge all actors to continue
with concrete steps to enable Palestinian unity and the
holding of elections.
In conclusion, let me remind the Council that many of
the negative developments on the ground are symptoms
of a lack of political solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. As we heard from the Special Coordinator, the
status quo is not an option. There is a pressing need for
a political horizon and a restart of the peace process.
We urge the incoming Israeli Government to contribute
to creating a horizon for peace and to engage with the
Palestinian leadership. Norway continues to support
the Palestinian State-building effort and a two-State
solution, and we will continue to work for that goal. We
are convinced that a two-State solution, based on the
1967 borders, is the best way to ensure the rights and
safety of both Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing.
Let me start by expressing Albania’s firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks that occurred on
Wednesday against Israeli civilians in Jerusalem. Those
coordinated and sophisticated attacks take us back to
darker times and are yet another troubling reminder that

S/PV.9203

terrorists never change, but are ready to use all available
means to sow terror. Their despicable acts should be
met with strong resolve. Albania stands with Israel and
its legitimate right to self-defence to protect its own
people and country from all who have chosen death
over life. We further condemn the rockets launched
from the Gaza Strip towards Israel at the beginning
of November. Everyone must understand that the fight
against terror is not a choice, but a right and a necessity
for any country so that it can provide its own people
with safety and security. The international community
must be united in condemning terrorist attacks.
We remain deeply worried about the escalation
of violence on the ground, especially the heightened
situation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We
reiterate our call on the parties to de-escalate and
refrain from unilateral steps and actions that as we
know only fuel tensions further in an already hostile
context. We know where tensions lead — we have seen
it many times. We are well aware of the deplorable
consequences. The lives of Israelis and Palestinians,
including young civilians and children, must be
preserved, and both sides must do their utmost to
prevent any further escalation. What is needed and what
we would like to see is therefore concrete engagement,
aimed at lowering tensions through tangible steps that
lead to understanding and dialogue. Immediate and full
investigations are needed to hold those responsible for
the deaths of innocent victims to account.
Albania believes that in any conflict the
implementation of international law and international
humanitarian law must be fully observed. The
protection of civilians is an obligation at all times.
We believe that the full implementation of resolution
2601 (2021), on safeguarding the right to education in
conflicts, is an obligation of all the parties to a conflict.
Children everywhere have a right to tuition. Attacks
on schools, children and teachers are deplorable. We
are concerned about the fact that increased demolitions
and evictions, as well as the expansion of settlements,
do not comply with international law or contribute to a
peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Neither do incitements to violence, inflammatory
rhetoric against Israelis, hate speech and anti-Semitism.
For a political horizon to be restored — and which is
so desperately needed for the security of the people on
both sides — the parties should fully withdraw from
counterproductive unilateral actions.

22-7111411/15

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In conclusion, let me reiterate Albania’s full
support for a just and negotiated two-State solution,
with a safe Israel, where the security of its own people
is fully guaranteed, and with a viable, independent and
democratic Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security and mutual recognition, with Jerusalem as
their future shared capital. It is our understanding and
belief that this is the only way forward. Anything else
is a path to insecurity, violence and conflict, something
we have been witnessing for more than seven decades.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): We have been
following with distress the recent escalation of violence
in the region. Brazil strongly condemns the most recent
terrorist attack, on 23 November, on bus stops in
Jerusalem and expresses its solidarity with the families
of the victims. We are alarmed at the high number
of civilians killed and injured in the region in 2022,
including many Israeli and Palestinian children.
Mounting violence continues to be exacerbated by
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. Brazil
urges all parties to maintain the ceasefire and to exercise
maximum restraint. We renew our call on all parties to
protect civilians and civilian infrastructure and to abide
by all legal and moral obligations to spare children
from the consequences of hostilities. Acts of terrorism
are never justifiable and must halt immediately.
Brazil also remains very concerned that places
of worship have, on repeated occasions, turned into
battlegrounds. We stress that the safety and security of
religious sites is an essential component of freedom of
religion or belief and should be preserved and respected.
Brazil thanks the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process for his comprehensive
briefing. We agree that the fragility of the situation
underscores the urgency of changing dynamics on the
ground while addressing the underlying security and
political issues that are fuelling the current instability.
Concerted efforts are needed to restore a political
horizon and resume meaningful negotiations.
Brazil remains convinced that a two-State solution,
within the framework of international law and the
resolutions of the Council, is still the only way to meet
the aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians, ensuring the
security of all. But we need to work together towards
that goal, instead of moving away from it. All actions
that reduce the possibility of achieving that objective
must be rethought.
12/15

28/11/2022

The Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Philippe Lazzarini,
recently recalled that desperation mounts when people,
especially young people, are confronted with poverty,
unemployment and a general lack of prospects, which
could bring serious destabilizing effects to the region.
The recent outbreaks of cholera in camps are just
another consequence of the deteriorating conditions on
the ground. In Gaza, Lebanon and Syria, over 80 per
cent live below the poverty line. Brazil echoes the calls
for renewed efforts to restore UNRWA’s capabilities so
that it can continue to deliver assistance and services in
this moment of crisis. The Agency’s stabilization role
in the region should not be undermined.
We also stress the importance of international
cooperation in assisting Palestinian authorities in
their efforts to build stronger institutions and to foster
economic growth. That will not only improve people’s
lives, but may also contribute to intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, which is a crucial step towards
stabilization and the resumption of a genuine dialogue.
In conclusion, Brazil once more thanks
Mr. Wennesland for his continued efforts to de-escalate
tensions throughout repeated cycles of violence in 2022.
We urgently need to find ways to break those terrible
cycles and promote an effective political process
towards sustainable peace in the region.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
invaluable briefing.
We meet today at a time when the Middle East
peace process is going through a delicate phase that
requires special attention from the international
community. While a sharp rise in violence and tensions
is being witnessed in the occupied Palestinian territory,
there are also increasing concerns at the local and
international level about the future of the two-State
solution, especially in the light of current events and
the absence of serious negotiations among the parties.
In the context of heightened tensions in the political
and security situations, which we are following closely,
I would like to emphasize the following issues.
First, there is an urgent need to de-escalate and
prevent tensions from reaching a point of no return.
Inciting extremism and violence will never be in the
interest of any party. Diplomacy and dialogue remain
22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the only ways to end the conflict. That primarily means
refraining from rhetoric or provocations that may fuel
tensions in an already fragile situation. We remind
all parties to abide by their responsibilities under
international law and international humanitarian law,
especially regarding the protection of civilians.
In that context, there is a need to stop settlers’
repeated incursions into holy sites and residential
areas, as well as the accompanying acts of violence,
such as those seen in conjunction with the incursion of
tens of thousands of settlers into the old city of Hebron
this month. We also reiterate our condemnation of the
terrorist attacks that took place in Jerusalem last week.
Secondly, the upcoming period requires wise
leadership that sees the path of peace and the twoState solution as an indispensable strategic option to
end the violence and ensure a future based on security
and prosperity for both peoples. Accordingly, we urge
both sides to intensify constructive communication and
cooperation. We affirm that creating an environment
conducive to peace requires reversing the negative
trends on the ground, foremost of which is stopping the
construction and expansion of settlements that violate
international law and the Council’s resolutions.
Thirdly, the Security Council must send a clear
message that we remain committed to the agreed-upon
international terms of reference to end the conflict. That
includes the need for the parties to return to serious
negotiations that lead to a two-State solution, in which a
Palestinian State lives side by side with Israel in peace,
security and mutual recognition. That solution remains
one of the demands of the Arab States, as reaffirmed
at the Arab Summit held earlier this month in Algeria,
along with adherence to the Arab Peace Initiative.
The difficult humanitarian conditions in the
occupied Palestinian territory, especially in Gaza
Strip, require constant international attention and
support. That is critical, as the level of unemployment
is approaching nearly 40 per cent. We stress the
importance of providing economic and educational
opportunities for Palestinian youth in order to enable
them to build and develop their societies. We also
welcome the recent agreement to bring dual-use
materials to repair fishing boats into the Gaza Strip for
the first time since 2007. We appreciate the efforts of
the United Nations in facilitating that important step,
which we hope to build upon.

S/PV.9203

In conclusion, and as we mark the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People tomorrow,
His Highness Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan,
President of the United Arab Emirates, emphasized in
his statement on that occasion the firm and historic
commitment of the United Arab Emirates to support
the brotherly Palestinian people and their aspiration
to establish an independent and sovereign Palestinian
State based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing, which, as he said, sets out a very bleak
picture of the situation on the ground. Last month
(see S/PV.9174), he warned that 2022 was on course
to become the deadliest year for Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territory since the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) began
documenting in 2005. Unfortunately, as the situation
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
continues to deteriorate, we are moving quickly and
closer to that sobering reality.
We are deeply disturbed by the continued reports
of the use of excessive force by Israeli security forces.
OCHA has reported that, between 25 October and
7 November alone, 15 Palestinians, including three
children, were killed by Israeli forces in the occupied
West Bank. The continued killing of children is
reprehensible. Ireland deplores all attacks against
civilians, both in Israel and in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We condemn in the strongest terms the
attacks on civilians with explosive devices in Jerusalem
last week, in which two people were killed, as well as
the recent stabbings in which three Israeli citizens
were killed near the settlement of Ariel. Terrorism and
violence are never justified and serve only to increase
tensions at a time when urgent de-escalation should be
the priority.
Every month for the past two years in this
Chamber, Ireland has reiterated the urgent need for
a just, inclusive and lasting solution to the conflict.
Regrettably, the prospects for meaningful negotiations
between the parties on realizing a two-State solution are
as remote today as when we joined the Security Council
two years ago. It is equally clear that the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory is unsustainable and
is likely to deteriorate further if we do not establish a
genuine political horizon. I would like to emphasize a
number of issues that undermine prospects for resumed
negotiations that would enable the realization of a

22-7111413/15

S/PV.9203

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

two-State solution and the right of Palestinians to selfdetermination.
In particular, today we wish to stress the urgent
need for accountability in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Accountability is a cornerstone of a political
horizon and a meaningful peace process. The pervasive
culture of impunity in response to the excessive use of
force by Israeli security forces, as well as to incidents
of settler violence, is deeply concerning. As long as
that culture of impunity persists and the root causes of
conflict remain unaddressed, conflict and violence will
continue throughout the occupied Palestinian territory
and Israel.
Ireland calls for accountability in respect of all
civilian deaths. We reiterate our call for an independent
investigation into the killing of Palestinian-American
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh. We note the decision by
the United States to conduct its own investigation into
Abu Akleh’s death and that it has been welcomed by
the Palestinian Authority and by her family. We also
underline the need for a full, independent investigation
into the death of Palestinian human rights defender and
activist Nizar Banat, following his arrest by Palestinian
Authority security forces.
Moreover, against the backdrop of the deteriorating
situation on the ground, it is important that the
international community support Palestinian efforts
in seeking legal responses to the occupation. In that
regard, Ireland welcomed the adoption by the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly of draft resolution
A/C.4/77/L.12/Rev.1, which included a request for an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
The issue of Israeli settlements is also a fundamental
concern, and I know that we will have the opportunity
to address it in more detail next month. Ireland remains
deeply concerned about the developments in Masafer
Yatta, including the recent demolition by Israeli security
forces of a donor-funded school. Let me reiterate that
Ireland urges Israel to cease evictions and demolitions,
including of donor-funded structures, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law.
The ongoing Israeli blockade continues to
exacerbate the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip.
UNICEF has reported that more than 1 million children
in Gaza today have constrained access to essential
services, including food, water, education and health
care. We renew our call on Israel to lift the blockade
of Gaza.
14/15

28/11/2022

We deplore Israel’s continued refusal to grant visas
for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other United Nations staff, which
further restricts vital human rights and humanitarian
engagement. We also remain alarmed by the reduced
space for civil society and non-governmental
organizations in the occupied Palestinian territory.
We commend the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for
its vital support to Palestine refugees throughout the
region and strongly welcome the recent renewal of its
mandate for three years, until 30 June 2026.
Finally, let me reiterate that — for the rest of its
Council term and beyond — Ireland will continue to
call for accountability for all civilian deaths. Ireland
stands ready to support all efforts to achieve a just
and lasting two-State solution based on international
law. That represents the only sustainable prospect for
enabling Palestinians and Israelis to live in peace — a
peace that is both urgent and very long overdue.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for
his briefing on the situation in the Middle East relating
to the question of Palestine and commend him for his
efforts in fulfilling his mandate.
It is regrettable that, after many decades of the
Security Council’s engagement on this question,
today’s briefing continues to show that we are far
from meeting our aspirations. Ghana remains deeply
concerned about the lack of progress in finding a just
and lasting solution to the protracted conflict and the
deteriorating security situation in the West Bank and
other towns in the occupied Palestinian territories,
caused by communal violence, arbitrary arrests and
detentions — mostly of young Palestinians — as well
as demolitions and the building of new settlements
by Israeli settlers, and political and social unrest in
the occupied Palestinian territory. We are equally
concerned about the sharp increase in violent attacks
on unarmed Israeli civilians, which has resulted in
fatalities and the kidnapping of innocent Israelis in
Jerusalem and other Israeli settlements.
The current situation in the region negatively
affects not only the lives of Israelis and Palestinians,
but also millions of people in the Middle East region
and many others all over the world who are denied the
22-71114

28/11/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

benefits of the natural and human resources the region
is blessed with.
Ghana remains concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation faced by Palestinian refugees
across the occupied Palestinian territory, especially
in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem. It is
regrettable that children, women and the aged continue
to suffer the most devastating impact of protracted
conflicts. We join others in condemning the recent
increase in the spate of violent clashes across the
Middle East region, which, according to UNICEF, has
caused untold suffering and fatalities of children in the
region. We emphasize the need to ease humanitarian
access in order to enable inhabitants in the occupied
Palestinian territories to access basic supplies and a
dignified life, as a shared international responsibility,
pending a just and durable solution in accordance with
international law, including the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.
We commend the efforts of all the humanitarian
agencies on the ground, particularly the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and its staff, for working under difficult
circumstances to provide critical assistance to the
Palestinian refugees, especially the elderly, women and
children, who constitute those most vulnerable in the
Agency’s area of operations.

S/PV.9203

We express our solidarity with the families of at
least 21 persons who were killed and injured when a
fire tore through an apartment complex in the crowded
Jabaliya refugee camp in the Gaza Strip. In that regard,
we welcome the Israeli authorities’ offer, in response to
a request from the Palestinian Authority, to lift Gaza’s
normal travel restrictions in order to allow survivors to
seek medical treatment in Israel.
We call on the leadership of Israel and of Palestine
and on all stakeholders in the region to work towards
good-neighbourliness and to continue to engage in a
meaningful and transparent manner for significant
policy changes on both sides.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ghana’s
commitment to the Council’s collective aspiration for
Israel and Palestine to live peacefully, side by side
and as two sovereign States, with East Jerusalem as
the shared capital. We look forward to renewed and
constructive dialogue on a political horizon that can
ultimately lead to the two-State solution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I now invite the Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

22-7111415/15
