S/PV.9096

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9096th meeting

Tuesday, 19 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Simas Magalhães . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493)
Letter dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/540)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43072 (E)
*2243072*

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2022/493)
Letter dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2022/540)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Czechia, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco,
Myanmar, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
the Sudan, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine, Uruguay and Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting — and I want
to thank them in particular for having accepted the
invitation to take part in our debate — Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Ms. Catherine Russell, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children’s Fund; and Mr. Patrick Kumi, Founder
and Executive Director of the non-governmental
organization Similar Ground.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Thibault
Camelli, Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
2/34

19/07/2022

with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/540, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent Representative
of Brazil to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I also wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2022/493, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on Children and
armed conflict.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter.
Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter: I thank His Excellency
the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil,
Ambassador Fernando Simas Magalhães, for convening
this debate on the Secretary-General’s annual report on
children and armed conflict (S/2022/493), which covers
grave violations suffered by children during 2021.
This open debate is an important opportunity for
all of us to remind ourselves of the reality faced by
children in conflict and of our responsibility to stand
by them. The debate also permits us to act on behalf of
conflict-affected children by publicly highlighting the
current trends and patterns of grave violations against
them and allowing Security Council members to hear
about existing and emerging challenges, as well as
successful measures taken to better protect children.
Finally, this open debate is an opportunity to think
forward while reaffirming our commitment to the
protection of children used and abused by, in and for
armed conflict.
The abuses that children were subjected to last year
were as grievous as they were many. In South Sudan,
for example, children played with what they thought
was a toy but that turned out to be a piece of unexploded
ordnance. The device detonated, killing three children
and wounding another three. In the Philippines, an
11-year-old boy and a 17-year-old girl were recruited
and used by the New People’s Army. During a military
operation, both were arrested together with other
members of the group, but due to a lack of available
facilities, they could not be immediately reintegrated.
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

In Somalia, four children travelled to visit family. On
the way they were stopped by Al-Shabaab, accused
of association with Government forces and abducted.
In Afghanistan, as girls’ classes were dismissed, a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated
outside a Kabul high school. Three boys and 42 girls
died that day. Another 20 boys and 106 girls were
injured in the blast. In Burkina Faso, two girls were
abducted and each raped by two armed men. One of
the survivors was too scared to accept medical or
psychosocial support out of fear of being stigmatized.
The examples are endless.
In 2021, in the 21 country situations and one
regional monitoring arrangement covered by my
mandate, the United Nations verified a total of 23,982
grave violations, with more than 19,165 child victims.
Of those children, 1,600 were victims of two or more
violations, illustrating how such violations are often
interlinked. To put it in perspective, that represents
an average of 65 grave violations committed against
children every single day of every week of every month
of the year. During 2021, 8,000 children were either
killed or maimed, making these the most prevalent of
all grave violations. The use of explosive remnants of
war, improvised explosive devices and landmines had
a particularly devastating impact and caused a quarter
of those child casualties. The use of explosive weapons
in populated areas also critically endangered children.
The recruitment and use of children for, in and by
parties to armed conflict, with more than 6,300 verified
as recruited and used, was the second most prevalent
violation, followed by the denial of humanitarian access
to children, with more than 3,900 incidents.
Worryingly, both abduction, rape and other forms
of sexual violence increased by 20 per cent last year in
the various situations covered by the report. We also
saw a general rise in attacks on schools and hospitals.
Of particular concern is the steady increase in violations
against girls, especially through killing and maiming
and sexual violence and abduction. Last year, one in
three child victims was a girl — barely a year earlier,
the proportions were one in four — while 98 per cent of
all survivors of rape and other forms of sexual violence
were girls.
The high numbers of children deprived of their
liberty for alleged association with parties to a conflict
continued to be a matter of concern last year, when we saw
2,864 children detained or deprived of their liberty and

S/PV.9096

thereby doubly punished by conflicts that I must stress
they were and are not responsible for. We also verified an
increase in the military use of schools, denying children
the safe spaces they need to learn, receive life-saving
assistance and develop. As a result, thousands of children
have experienced long-term negative consequences for
their development and well-being.
Various peace and security challenges put children
at risk during 2021, from the devastating impact of
violent extremism in the central Sahel and Lake Chad
basin regions to the dire security situation in the
Horn of Africa. Those challenges include everything
from escalating humanitarian crises and disregard
for international humanitarian and human rights law
to the climate emergency, and from a series of coups
to the continued negative impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic on conflict-affected children. We
must not forget that the pandemic is still ongoing and
that the United Nations continues to see challenges to
and delays in its monitoring and reporting of grave
violations. Compared to previous years, that has
resulted in higher numbers than usual of late-verified
violations in this year’s report. It has also slowed the
implementation of agreed joint action plans and other
measures put in place in a number of situations to
improve the protection of children. Additionally, the
severity of the armed violence, conflict and war in
places such as Ethiopia, Mozambique and Ukraine has
led the Secretary-General to include those situations on
the agenda for children and armed conflict, prompting
the immediate commencement of monitoring to report
on those situations by 2023.
Although the tragic circumstances for children that
I have just described are very serious, we should not
be discouraged. Hand in hand with tragedy, we also
witnessed signs of hope and recovery in 2021. In that
regard, I hope Council members will join me in saluting
the unwavering dedication of the child-protection
actors and partners on the ground, who often work in
extremely challenging and dangerous circumstances
and whose numbers are constantly being depleted.
They do it because they know that sometimes they are
the only champions whom children have on the ground.
We should also recognize those parties to conflict that
have paused to reflect on ways in which children can
be better protected by working closely with the United
Nations to that end. They too are recognized in this
year’s report.

22-430723/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

Hope came in many forms during 2021, and I
will highlight only some of those positive actions. For
example, 17 joint action plans with parties to conflict
are currently being implemented, including three that
were signed in 2021, two in Mali with platform groups
and one in Yemen with the Houthis. Together, my
Office and the child-protection teams on the ground are
also successfully engaging with other listed parties to
adopt action plans in situations such as Iraq and Syria.
Altogether, 40 new commitments and agreed measures
were put in place by parties to conflicts last year alone.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for example, six commanders signed unilateral
commitments to protecting children following United
Nations advocacy. In Syria, accountability measures
against Syrian Democratic Forces personnel for
violating commitments under their action plan were
adopted. In the Philippines, the armed forces signed a
strategic plan to prevent and respond to grave violations
of children’s rights. Iraq has facilitated the repatriation
of some 223 children to their countries of origin at
their request. In South Sudan, a national conference
on children and armed conflict was held in May. I
attended the event in Juba and was able to engage with
Government partners and a diverse group of partners
who all committed to launching a push to improve the
protection of children.

19/07/2022

Yesterday, for example, I also launched a guidance
note on the violation of abduction, which is particularly
relevant, considering the increase in the number of
those violations and the need expressed by monitors to
better understand how to implement their monitoring
and reporting obligations.
Last year, we also researched and published
studies on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
grave violations against children in armed conflict, as
well as a report consolidating the results of the four
regional consultations, which were conducted with
United Nations country task forces on monitoring
and reporting, their equivalents in non-Monitor and
Reporting Mechanism situations and regional offices
of United Nations entities, as well as UNICEF, to
identify challenges and collect lessons learned to better
strengthen the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
of grave violations against children and engagement
with parties to conflict.
Our efforts during 2021 also continued to ensure
that child protection remain central to peace processes.
To that end, we have trained mediators and diplomats,
including for the League of Arab States, using the
Practical Guidance for Mediators to Protect Children
in Situations of Armed Conflict, which the SecretaryGeneral launched in 2020.

The release and reintegration of children is one of
the most concrete outcomes of our shared work. More
than 12,200 children were released from armed groups
and forces last year, often in the wake of United Nations
advocacy. That number has remained steady over the
past five years, which is a great accomplishment. In
addition, progress has been made regarding analysis,
policy development and partnerships, as well as on
prevention mechanisms, as highlighted in resolution
2427 (2018). In India, for example, prevention has led to
a deepening of our already fruitful cooperation with the
Government on enhancing child-protection systems.
We have also increased our cooperation with regional
organizations, including the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the European Union.

The report outlines a series of recommendations by
the Secretary-General, which I encourage all members
to consult in depth. Allow me to highlight a few of
them today.

Regarding the pursuit of a better understanding of
the problems children face, we also identified the need
to further examine the gender dimensions of violations
against children, leading to the publication of a study
by my Office in May, The Gender Dimensions of Grave
Violations against Children in Armed Conflict, which I
invite the Council to consult.

Secondly, humanitarian spaces must always be
safeguarded, and parties to conflict must allow safe,
timely and unimpeded humanitarian access to all
children, while also ensuring the safety of humanitarian
personnel and assets. Of critical importance, hospitals
and schools must always remain safe spaces, and they
should always be protected.

4/34

First, it is vital that United Nations operations on
the ground be adequately mandated, staffed and funded
to continue carrying out monitoring and reporting,
engaging with parties, developing joint action plans,
providing technical assistance to signatories for
implementation purposes and undertaking many other
often life-saving interventions, including securing
the release of children from conflict. Without child
protection advocacy and work undertaken on the ground
and by my Office, the situation would surely be worse.

22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

Thirdly, sustainable financial support and technical
assistance for timely, gender-, age- and disabilitysensitive, survivor-centred and inclusive reintegration
programmes for children, including for the survivors
of sexual violence, are critical for breaking cycles of
violence and allowing child survivors a second chance
at a constructive life. In addition, we must continue to
promote best practices and develop essential tools to
consistently evolve in our work. In that regard, I thank
our wide network of partners for their continuous
cooperation as we seek to enlarge and deepen our
analytical capacity to better serve children.
Children affected by conflict need our support — and
they need it now. There is much we can do. For example,
given the devastating impact of landmines and explosive
remnants of war on children long after conflict
ceases, it is critical for the international community to
urgently step up support for mine action, including to
increase child-sensitive data collection and assistance
programmes. All parties to conflict must respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and international
refugee law while conducting military and armed
operations. Furthermore, they must ensure that the
perpetrators of grave violations are held accountable.
There are many other actions that Member States
can undertake to support prevention, including signing,
ratifying and implementing relevant international
instruments and commitments to protect children from
hostilities, while preventing violations against them.
For those reasons, it is important to prioritize children’s
rights and needs as central to conflict prevention, early
warning, mediation and peace processes, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration initiatives, security
sector reform and other crucial peace and security
tools in the nexus between peace, conflict and postconflict reconstruction.
In conclusion, as we gear up to strengthening the
protection of children so that we can stop their use
and abuse in, for and by armed conflict, it is fitting to
end this statement with a stark fact. The best way to
protect children and prevent violations against them in
situations of armed conflict is to promote and champion
peace. Let us strive to do so, for their sake.
The President: I thank Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Russell.

S/PV.9096

Ms. Russell: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to join today’s critical open debate on children and
armed conflict. I am truly honoured to be here and to
follow my friend Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, who has
done such an extraordinary job.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/493) leaves
little to the imagination. Around the world, as conflicts
proliferate, grave violations against children continue.
Children and childhood are under attack. I would like
to pause and take a moment to reflect on just how
appalling the information in the Secretary-General’s
report really is.
The report presents verified evidence of more than
23,000 violations against 19,165 children in 2021. Some
of those children were killed. Some were grievously
injured. Some were raped. Some suffered multiple
violations. They were abducted from their families,
ripped from their schools and forced to take up arms
and risk their lives. Those are only the violations
against children that the United Nations has been able
to verify; there are many others we could not reach and
whose stories may never be known to us.
The world has failed them. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter has said,
there is no word strong enough to describe the horrific
experiences those children have suffered. I recently
met a young boy at a camp for displaced people in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He had fled there to
escape brutal violence in his home village. That young
child had seen his best friend beheaded in front of him.
I have never seen such a sad, haunted child.
On the same visit, I met a young girl. When the
armed men came to her village, she and her sister faced
an impossible choice — serve the group or die. In truth,
it was no choice at all. She and her sister were abducted,
raped and abused. Her sister died one week after they
were abducted. By the time I met her, she had already
given birth to a child shortly after she had escaped.
Those are only two children. There are many
more. This year we have three new situations added
to the report. There are three more conflicts in which
children are being forced to bear the brunt of wars
waged by adults. UNICEF calls on all parties to those
most recent conflicts to take action to protect children
now. The United Nations is here to support any party
to conflict that is willing to take measures to better
protect children.

22-430725/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

The report paints a grim picture, but the purpose
of the report is not only to point the finger but also to
point the way forward. Eight situations of concern have
been removed completely from the report over the years
because they have succeeded in ending grave violations
against children.
In 2021 alone, at least 12,214 children were released
from armed forces and armed groups, thereby bringing
the total number of children who are documented to
have been released since 2000 to more than 186,000
girls and boys. New action plans have been signed in
Mali and Yemen, and 21 action plans are currently
under implementation. That is progress. Crucially,
United Nations monitoring and reporting activities on
grave violations have grown stronger and more robust.
The data reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report this year are as strong as ever before. The United
Nations stands behind that data. I would like to take a
moment to commend the work of the United Nations
teams that collect and verify that information.
We are committed to doing that work in accordance
with humanitarian principles — humanity, impartiality,
neutrality and independence. We need Member States
to grant us the space to do so. We remain as committed
to this vital agenda as when it was launched. To our
collective shame, more than 25 years later, the agenda
is still necessary.
Member States have enormous power to drive
progress to protect children. Respectfully but urgently,
we call on them to do more. Yes, of course, they must
insist on compliance with international humanitarian
law, but we also request that they go beyond the
requirements of the law. They have the power to issue
military orders with zero-tolerance policies on grave
violations against children. We would ask them to please
use that power. They should endorse and implement
the Safe Schools Declaration to protect children and
schools from attack and misuse by parties to conflict,
and the Paris Principles to demobilize and reintegrate
children who have been used by armed forces and
groups. We call on them to use their influence to push
States and non-State armed groups to prevent and end
grave violations against children and to protect children
who have survived grave violations from stigma and
revictimization. That includes stopping the detention of
children who have been forced to serve armed groups and
ending the denial of their right to citizenship, no matter
which groups they have been associated with. Finally,
6/34

19/07/2022

we are counting on them to support United Nations
efforts to implement the children and armed conflict
agenda on the ground, both through the allocation of
resources and a commitment to working with us to
protect, strengthen and stand behind that agenda.
Every child has a right to be protected in times
of war and times of peace. Fulfilling that right is not
an option but a sacred obligation, reflecting our most
deeply human duty to safeguard the next generation and
build a more sustainable future for everyone. Ms. Graça
Machel famously said that protecting children from the
impact of armed conflict is everyone’s responsibility
and must be everyone’s concern. I thank the members
of the Security Council for making that responsibility
their own, and I thank you once again for inviting me to
speak today, Mr. President.
The President: I thank Ms. Russell for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kumi.
Mr. Kumi: I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Brazil to the United Nations for the invitation
to address the Member States, and Member States for
their willingness to listen.
My name is Patrick, and I would like to say a little
bit about myself and propose a few recommendations
that I think will work if we join together. I would like to
ask everyone here to listen, and I know everyone will.
In 2016, I was 15 years old. I lived with my family
in a village far from the terrorism in South Sudan.
One day, I went to work on our farm with my father.
Unfortunately, an armed group came and abducted us.
They took us far away from our home and village. They
tortured us and claimed that my father had a gun. They
forced us to sleep in a pit filled with water that came
up to our necks and beat us continually. Because my
father could not confess to something he had not done,
they shot him dead in front of me. I was then told to join
the group or die. I cannot remember what I said. I only
realized that I had answered yes when I found myself in
the centre of a camp where hundreds of other children
were congregated. I could not eat for days or stop crying.
There were more than 2,000 people in the barracks,
half of them children, and many of them carrying guns.
I was shocked and speechless. I learned from the few I
spoke to that some of the children had joined because
they were offered money and promised higher-level
positions. Some joined because their families had been
killed and they wanted revenge. A 10-year-old boy
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

told me that his parents were mistreating him and he
could no longer bear living with them. Other young
children had wives, and even some adults had married
children 14 or 15 years old. In every attack I was forced
to participate in, at least five children were injured or
killed. There was no medical care. When you were sick,
you either died or survived. We drank the same water
as the animals.
One day Government forces attacked our barracks.
There was shooting on every side. It was chaos. I ran.
I narrowly escaped death. I kept going and found my
way to Uganda, where I was registered as a refugee in
the Bidi Bidi refugee camp. It took me 11 months to
find my family. When I finally did, it was a day of joy,
happiness and sorrow.
In 2018, I joined the War Child programme known
as VoiceMore, a youth-advocacy programme. I went
through training and ran a project for orphans and
separated children, together with other young people in
my area. After the programme, together with friends, we
set up our own community-based organization, Similar
Ground, through which we are helping hundreds of
children recover from stress and trauma. We are also
running awareness campaigns for young people. It
means a lot to us to help hundreds of children recover
from their traumatic experiences and help other young
people play a greater role in their community. This year
I enrolled in a degree programme in human rights, peace
and humanitarian response. I lost three years of my life
trying to recover, and many children in my community
are not able to recover as fast. Some never recover at
all. Mine is just one story, but we know that there are
thousands of children currently going through what I
went through. I have given a lot of thought over the
years to what would have helped a child like me. Based
on my experience and my work with other children, I
would like to propose four recommendations.
The first is establishing better-quality reintegration
that really understands children. Children leaving
armed groups need our full support to heal. They
need medical care. They need to be reunited with
their families and given opportunities to learn. Most
importantly, their communities need to be supported
in welcoming them. The children who leave armed
groups are seen as a threat, and more work needs to be
done to help people understand their needs and what
they have been through. In addition, there is a gap in
opportunities for children and young people who leave

S/PV.9096

such armed forces. They need to learn new skills and
how to put them to good use.
Secondly, we all know that billions of dollars are
spent every year in humanitarian aid, but that there is no
overall sustainability. In the humanitarian response we
give money. Projects are implemented and then come to
an end. National and international organizations should
improve their collaboration with Governments and
national and local organizations so that when projects
are finished, the community and the Government
can take over. I would also like to ask that longerterm funding be made available for projects and local
organizations and community groups, including young
people, so that the young people themselves can lead
them. International non-governmental organizations
play an important role, but eventually they all leave,
whereas we know our own issues very well and we can
make activities more sustainable.
Thirdly, we need to enable greater participation
in decision-making for people like me, children and
youth. It is great that I am able to speak here today, and
I am grateful for the opportunity. But one young person
once a year is not enough. Young people affected by
conflict need more opportunity to participate in policy
and programming that is about them. Children affected
by conflict will soon grow into adults, and many will
be ready to be part of the solution. That will improve
the situation in the longer term. There should be more
opportunities for the participation and empowerment
of young people in the United Nations system and in
designing and leading responses.
Finally, there should be greater accountability.
There are many laws already in place that are supposed
to protect children affected by conflict, for example, the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child,
the Geneva Conventions and the many Security Council
resolutions. Many countries agreed to those laws, but
they are not respected. They are not enforced as they
are supposed to be at the country or regional levels.
There should be more accountability for the promises
and commitments made. There should be more effort to
ensure that militaries, armed groups, local government
and anyone who meets a child in a conflict zone know
and understand those laws, while those who break them
need to be held accountable.
Last week, I sat down with friends and colleagues
in Bidi Bidi, and I asked them what was the most
important thing that I should request of the Security

22-430727/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

19/07/2022

Council. They all agreed on the participation of young
people and children in policy and programming. If it is
something meant for children and young people, then
let it be for them.

also face barriers to accessing basic services, such
as education and health care. That situation imposes
serious limitations on the development of children and
increases the risk of additional grave violations.

I would like to finish by thanking my friends and
collaborators at Similar Ground, War Child and other
people and organizations that have helped me in my
journey. I thank the members of the Security Council
for what they will do to better help children in conflict.

Neighbouring, transit and host countries must
ensure that children arriving in their territories are
immediately identified and have full access to all
public services and social benefits, regardless of their
migration status. Such services should include access to
education, in accordance with last year’s resolution 2601
(2021). Brazil has been providing access to education
and health care, among other services and benefits,
for children fleeing countries such as Afghanistan,
Haiti, Syria and Venezuela. Children always deserve
our support, regardless of race, ethnicity, nationality,
migration or any other status.

The President: I thank Mr. Kumi very much
for sharing with us his experiences and for the
recommendations that he brought to our attention,
which, I am sure, will be important in guiding our work
in the future.
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as the Deputy Foreign Minister of Brazil.
Once again, I want to thank all participants for
the opportunity to share this important debate. Let
me thank the Secretary-General for his latest annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493).
I also commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
for her commitment and continued efforts in engaging
with parties in conflict-affected countries to protect
children. I thank her for the observations that she made
this morning, as well. I would also like to thank the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Catherine Russell,
for her tireless and dedicated work. Furthermore, I
again thank Mr. Patrick Kumi for his moving and
inspirational testimony to the Security Council.
In the past 25 years, the United Nations has made
valuable progress in protecting children from the
scourge of war. This year’s report alone shows that
more than 12,000 children were released from armed
groups and armed forces in 2021. Despite our efforts
to date, there is still a long road ahead of us. Children
remain subject to the six grave violations as a result of
the failure of parties in armed conflict to comply with
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law.
Some of those children were disproportionately
vulnerable, such as refugee, internally displaced and
stateless children. Displacement poses additional
risks for children’s safety, including vulnerability
to trafficking and exploitation, especially for those
children who are unaccompanied or have been separated
from their parents or caregivers. Displaced children
8/34

A concerning trend shown in this year’s report is
the increase in abduction by more than 20 per cent as
compared to 2020 — one of the fastest-growing grave
violations. Boys and girls are both at risk of abduction.
Boys who suffer abduction are also usually subject
to recruitment. Abducted girls are likely to suffer
violations such as sexual violence, forced marriage
and exploitation. Boys and girls often require different
types of support before, during and after conflict.
Prevention efforts and the protection of children
against grave violations should be a priority for the
international community, and so should reintegration,
which is essential to helping children rebuild their
lives. When released, they often face exclusion, stigma
and a lack of opportunities. A world that abandons
its children has no future; it inspires neither faith nor
hope. Reintegration must be seen as a third pillar of the
children and armed conflict agenda, complementing
the efforts of prevention and protection. Reintegration
must be understood as a long-term process that requires
a long-term commitment. It should also be seen as a
tool for peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We encourage the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to engage with
parties in conflict with a view to establishing specific
action plans on reintegration, in which the relevant
communities, partners and donors could be linked
into a single solidarity network. In doing so, we also
encourage the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict to make full use of the
expertise of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

uniquely positioned to bridge cross-pillar discussions,
such as the one that we are suggesting here.
I also want to share a few words on four key points
for the effective implementation of the children and
armed conflict agenda.
First, accountability is essential in ending grave
violations. Brazil agrees with the call in the SecretaryGeneral’s report for Member States to adopt national
accountability measures and to cooperate with the
relevant international accountability mechanisms.
Secondly, any counter-terrorism action must abide
by international law. If counter-terrorism takes place
at the expense of our children, it will have defeated its
purpose. Children should always be treated primarily
as victims, including those associated with groups
designated as terrorists, and they should only be
detained as a measure of last resort and for the shortest
appropriate time.
Thirdly, the Security Council should ensure
that sanctions do not have adverse humanitarian
consequences for civilian populations, including
children, or adversely affect activities carried out
by humanitarian organizations. We encourage it to
continue improving humanitarian carveouts in sanction
regimes and to consider the inclusion of child rights
experts in the monitoring mechanisms of sanctions
committees, including panels and expert work.
Fourthly, Brazil agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the importance of ensuring that
child protection provisions and capacity are included in
all relevant mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.
In conclusion, it is Brazil`s belief that children can
continue to bring the Members of this Organization
together. While recognizing that the Security Council
is divided on a complex range of issues, protecting
children from war should be one common denominator
for us. As stated in the Graça Machel report:
“In a world of diversity and disparity, children
are a unifying force capable of bringing people to
common ethical grounds.” (A/51/306, para. 6)
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

S/PV.9096

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the President for
hosting this year’s annual debate on children and
armed conflict. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter, Executive
Director Russell and Mr. Patrick Kumi for their
powerful briefings.
In the past year, we have witnessed a dramatic
increase in political instability, military takeovers
and coups. We have seen violent flare-ups and
unprovoked military aggression, and the annual report
for 2021 (S/2022/493) shows that, despite existing
legal obligations and normative frameworks aimed
at protecting children, the number of verified grave
violations remains alarmingly high. The report presents
a highly uncomfortable, but unquestionable truth: that
children pay the highest price of war.
In Myanmar, the United Nations recently reported
that the military has killed at least 142 children, more
than a quarter of a million children have been displaced,
and over 1,400 arbitrarily have been detained. These
children are highly vulnerable to further violations
and abuses of international law. We are also deeply
troubled by the reported targeting of girls’ schools in
the Lake Chad basin region and in Afghanistan. The
Afghan de facto authorities’ denial of girls’ rights to
education is unacceptable. Russia’s illegal war on
Ukraine is also causing immense harm, death and an
uncertain future for millions of children. Many have
been forced to flee their homes. Countries that receive
unaccompanied or separated children must ensure that
they are immediately identified and registered, and that
adequate protection and support are provided.
Against this troubling backdrop, allow me to
highlight a few actions we should be taking to advance
the agenda. First, we must have the facts and data in
order to respond adequately. United Nations country
teams and partners have proven to be adaptable,
monitoring and reporting on violations in challenging
environments. And the addition of four new situations
of concern in this year’s report is an important step
towards advancing country-level progress to protect
children. But we must do more to secure the necessary
funding, also with follow-up in the Fifth Committee.
Secondly, as we know, prevention is better than cure.
We must take concrete measures to prevent violations
and abuses against children. We call on all parties to
conflict to sign and implement action plans with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and

22-430729/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

on Member States to endorse and implement the Paris
Principles and the Vancouver Principles as well as the
Safe School Declaration. Effective implementation of
resolution 2601 (2021) is also key.
Thirdly, children must be treated as children. This
applies to all children, including those associated with
armed groups, even those designated as terrorist groups.
We urge Member States to treat all children involved
primarily as victims of violations of international law.
Societies cannot build sustainable peace without the
effective and sustainable reintegration of children.
Moreover, the imprisonment of children should
happen only as a measure of last resort, and for the
shortest appropriate period of time. First and foremost,
non-judicial measures should be sought.
Finally, accountability must be secured. All
Member States must bring to justice those responsible
for violations of international law, including through
cooperation with international justice mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court. The integrity and
independence of the Special Representative to monitor
and report on the six grave violations committed against
children is instrumental. All parties to conflict must
be held to the same transparent standards, including
through the listing and de-listing criteria.
Children living in conflict have no time to lose.
Their childhood and our common future are at stake.
As Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, Norway remains committed. Let us act now
to ensure a better life for the millions of children living
in armed conflict.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): In the words of my
illustrious compatriot and former Secretary-General
Busumuru Kofi Annan:
“We were all children once. And we all share the
desire for the well-being of our children, which
has always been and will continue to be the most
universally cherished aspiration of humankind.”
Today, as we meet in the Security Council Chamber,
united by our collective aspiration to protect children
and ensure their well-being, Ghana wishes to express
appreciation to Brazil for convening this high-level
open debate on children and armed conflict. Finding
ways to protect children from the harsh daily reality
they face growing up in communities ravaged by armed
conflict is the singular most important responsibility
we can exercise to defend the defenceless and most
10/34

19/07/2022

vulnerable. In that regard, let me express appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and Executive Director
Catherine Russell for their rich perspectives, as well
as Mr. Patrick Kumi, for his deeply moving story,
which rightly points us to the need for action on the
commitments and promises we have all made as an
international community to the world’s children.
Earlier this year, as Ghana joined in the
commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the children and armed conflict mandates, we were
encouraged by the outcomes that the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
UNICEF and others have achieved over the last two
decades, including the successful release of hundreds of
thousands of children from the custody of armed groups
and their reintegration into society, the development and
implementation of action plans by parties to conflict
and the provision of services to survivors and affected
families. These outcomes inspire hope in existing
capabilities to ensure child safety.
We nonetheless remain concerned by the fact
that many more children in conflict environments
are currently being subjected to all the six grave
violations against children, especially killing and
maiming, including through explosive remnants of
war antipersonnel landmines and improvised explosive
devices, recruitment and use, and the denial of
humanitarian access by a plethora of actors who operate
within an atmosphere of impunity and social dysfunction
who take pride in perpetrating the most heinous attacks
against children as a weapon of war. For child refugees,
internally displaced and stateless children, the horrors
of armed conflict are even more distressing, as their
lack of a home, family or even citizenship heightens
their vulnerability to extreme violence and abuse.
The arbitrary detentions and mistreatment of children
associated or allegedly associated with armed groups
are a prevalent feature of many armed conflicts which
must be tackled through the prioritization of both global
and national child-release and child-reintegration
mechanisms. The gut-wrenching images we see and the
disheartening stories we often hear within the Security
Council in relation to the plight of children in situations
of armed conflict must propel our righteous anger and
repugnance towards the consolidation of our culture of
robust action.
In today’s open debate, in addition to Ghana’s
alignment with the statements to be read by the Friends
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

of the Responsibility to Protect and the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, we would
like to highlight four key messages on how the United
Nations and its Member States can further enhance the
protection of children in conflict contexts. First, an
indication of the level of importance we attach to their
children and armed conflict agenda is reflected by the
resources we devote in support of its implementation.
We therefore urge full support for the location of
targeted, practical and rapid resources to facilitate
responses to threats against children or avert potential
dangers they may face. Such resources provide, among
other things, safe accommodation and enhanced
protection of displaced refugee and stateless children
from the six grave violations.
However, there is an urgent need for targeted
resources and collaborative efforts by the international
community and Member States to sensitize communities
on explosive-ordnance risk as well as to ensure the
identification, fencing off and eventual destruction of
all manner of explosive ordnance that could endanger
the lives of children.
Secondly, United Nations regional organizations
and Member States should mainstream child protection
into all efforts and discussions on conflict, including
conflict prevention, mediation, peacebuilding and postconflict reconstruction.
Peacekeeping missions need to ensure the
integration of child-protection obligations into
mission-planning policies, decisions and activities
and include child-protection focal points in their
peacekeeping and field operations.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need to ensure that
children associated with armed or terrorist groups are
not treated as criminals but, rather, as victims. With
the support of the United Nations, States that require
capacity should be assisted to put in place standard
operating procedures for the rapid handover of such
children to the relevant civilian child-protection actors
and their integration into society, in accordance with
resolution 2427 (2018) and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, among other instruments.
Finally, in view of the importance of child
education, we strongly condemn the military use
of schools as well as all attacks against schools
and educational facilities. Member States have a
responsibility to establish and strictly enforce laws that
criminalize attacks against schools as well as to ensure

S/PV.9096

the continuation, re-establishment and preservation of
education during armed conflict, in line with the Safe
Schools Declaration.
We call for that commitment to be upheld by all
and reiterate that all parties to conflict need to respect
the civilian character of schools in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that while
significant strides have been made globally in raising
awareness and protecting children affected by armed
conflict, there are still many more miles to travel
in enhancing international collaboration to protect
children in conflict. Ghana is committed to travelling
those extra miles for the cause of protecting such
children and securing their safe and sustainable future.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and
Executive Director Russell for their briefings. I thank
Mr. Kumi for sharing his experiences and insights; it is
very important for us to hear them. I also thank Brazil
for hosting this very important debate.
This year’s annual children and armed conflict
report (S/2022/493) provides a sobering snapshot of
how conflict impacts children. In Ethiopia, thousands
of children have been forced from their homes,
separated from their families and subjected to sexual
violence. We are encouraged by the humanitarian truce
in northern Ethiopia and hope that all parties will build
on that momentum to advance talks that achieve a
durable ceasefire.
The conflict in Yemen caused enormous suffering
for children, including the denial of humanitarian
access, and resulted in children being killed, maimed,
subject to sexual violence, recruited and used in the
conflict. We welcome the truce in Yemen, which
provides respite to all Yemenis, including children, and
continue to support the United Nations engagement
with the parties to the conflict to protect children and
prevent violations against them.
The situation in Myanmar is causing increasing
concern. On a single day in Kayah state last December,
the Myanmar military massacred at least 35 people,
including children and two staff members of Save the
Children, and then burned their bodies. According
to a doctor who examined the remains, almost every
victim’s skull was fractured. It is beyond comprehension
that amid such brutality, some in the international

22-4307211/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

community continue to provide the Myanmar military
with the lethal tools that enable its campaign of
violence and repression. The sale of arms and dual-use
technology to the military must end now.
Russia’s war against Ukraine has added another
dark chapter in the assault on children. Children in
Ukraine are increasingly in danger as Russia’s forces
strike a growing number of hospitals and schools.
Russia’s forces reportedly have forcibly deported
more than a million Ukrainian civilians to Russia
via processing through so-called filtration, including
more than 260,000 children. Meanwhile, Russia’s
Commissioner for Children’s Rights touts new efforts
by the Kremlin to fast-track the adoption of children
from Ukraine within Russia.
We commend the Secretary-General and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba
de Potgieter for listing Ukraine, Mozambique and
Ethiopia as situations of concern in the annual children
and armed conflict report. That action importantly
highlights the ongoing violations and abuses against
children that are taking place.
In 2021, violent attacks on schoolchildren in
Afghanistan, particularly girls, hindered access to
education. In 2022, armed groups and Government
forces may no longer be using school buildings for
military purposes, but there has been no peace dividend
for Afghan girls, who have been barred from enrolling
in secondary schools. Every Afghan child has an equal
right to access education, no matter who they are.
The Security Council has been clear and unanimous.
If the Taliban wants to normalize its relations with the
international community, schools need to be open for
all female students without further delay.
It is clear that we have not done enough to protect
children from the impact of conflict. The United
States remains firmly committed to the children and
armed conflict agenda and is keen to see it elevated,
enhanced and better integrated into all of the Security
Council’s work.
At the national level, violations against children
must be criminalized in national laws. We call on
all Member States to adopt national accountability
measures so as to hold perpetrators accountable.
At the international level, the Council must ensure
that all United Nations peace operations and political
12/34

19/07/2022

missions have adequate child-protection capacity, with
the prioritization of child protection during transition.
Moreover, building on Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter’s comments on
the need for safe humanitarian spaces this morning, we
call on her to develop a guidance note on the denial of
humanitarian access for children, in line with guidance
notes for other violations. We demand that all parties to
conflict allow and facilitate unimpeded, rapid and safe
access to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to affected populations, especially children.
This is not a matter of protecting a small subset
of the global population. When we take steps to
protect children, we are protecting and safeguarding
our collective future and actively taking steps to end
enduring conflicts. Protecting children is a critical
element of maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Brazil for having organized this debate. I also thank
Ms. Russell and Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter for their
briefings, and I commend the poignant statement made
by Mr. Kumi in his capacity as a survivor. Through
him, I pay tribute to all those involved in protecting
children during conflict.
France commends the ongoing efforts of the whole
of the United Nations system to free children from war.
With more than 150,000 children freed since 2005, the
children and armed conflict agenda represents what
the Council does best when circumstances require.
However, we can and must do more. Violations continue
as conflicts multiply, increasing the vulnerability of
children. Violations committed by regular forces are
also on the rise.
In that connection, France once again condemns the
Russian aggression against Ukraine, the consequences
of which are dramatic when it comes to children. The
mechanisms at the Security Council’s disposal must
be brought into play without delay — if necessary,
through more frequent reports when the situation is
urgent. Murders and mutilations and attacks against
schools and hospitals must be recorded and attributed
immediately. The credibility of the United Nations and
the Council’s sanctions list is at stake.
France is also concerned about the situations in
Somalia, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Syria and Yemen. We
welcome the efforts of the United Nations to establish
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

dialogue with the parties and promote the signing of
action plans.
In the face of those worrisome trends, I would like
to highlight three points.
First, the fight against grave violations must not
end with the release of children. Their reintegration
into society is fundamental, while re-recruitment
represents an unforgivable failure. The Paris Principles
and the Paris Commitments address the dual objective
of releasing child soldiers and reintegrating them into
civilian life. Since 2007, 112 States have endorsed those
Principles and Commitments — we reiterate our call
for their universal endorsement.
Secondly, we must redouble our efforts to protect
refugee and internally displaced children, who are
among the most vulnerable. France welcomes the work of
UNICEF and humanitarian actors. Access to education
is a major issue, which is why France has worked, for
example, towards the immediate enrolment in schools
of more than 18,000 Ukrainian refugee children.
We also welcome the emphasis placed today on the
situation of stateless children. Laws preventing mothers
from passing on their nationality must be repealed, and
universal birth registration must be guaranteed. All
children must be able to enjoy their rights equally.
Thirdly and finally, we must continue to fight
relentlessly against impunity. France commends the role
of the United Nations and all actors who are committed
to child protection. We must also make greater use of
sanctions as a tool to complement legal proceedings.
Rest assured that France will continue its historic
commitment to the protection of children in conflict.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Brazil for organizing this open debate
on children and armed conflict. We also thank His
Excellency the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Brazil, Ambassador Fernando Simas Magalhães, for
presiding over today’s meeting. We welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
and the UNICEF Executive Director, Ms. Catherine
Russell, and thank them for their respective briefings.
We also thank Mr. Patrick Kumi for his moving account
and his recommendations.
Children are the most critical stakeholders for our
future, hence the need to protect, nurture and empower

S/PV.9096

them. The best interests of the child should be at the
forefront of all our endeavours. Mahatma Gandhi once
said: “If we are to teach real peace in this world, and
if we are to carry on a real war against war, we shall
have to begin with the children”. However, children
continue to suffer disproportionately in most situations
of armed conflict around the world. They remain most
susceptible to suffering and are particularly vulnerable
to the impacts of armed conflict.
Over the past two decades, the Security Council
has actively engaged to protect children in situations
of armed conflict. While significant progress has been
achieved, grave violations against children continue
to persist, while the ongoing coronavirus disease
pandemic has further magnified the risks that children
face. It is therefore important for Member States to
focus on child protection measures in their pandemic
response and recovery plans as well.
As noted by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2022/493), the scale and severity of violations
perpetrated against children in armed conflict are
still on the rise. It is clear that there remain significant
challenges to the effective implementation of that
mandate. The international community has the
responsibility — and indeed the obligation — to do its
utmost to provide support to children affected by armed
conflict without any discrimination.
We appreciate the engagement of the United
Nations, particularly the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, with parties to armed conflicts,
which has resulted in the release of 12,214 children over
the past year alone.
National Governments have the primary
responsibility to protect the rights of the child, as
mandated by the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The Security Council must do everything it can to
support Governments’ efforts in that regard. We also
encourage Member States to ratify the Convention’s
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict.
Member States need to support effective legal
frameworks for the protection and promotion of
children’s rights. It is important to build an enabling
and conducive environment to ensure the holistic
development of the child, with a special focus on
nutrition, education and safety. Children who grow
up in conflict and post-conflict situations often need

22-4307213/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

a fresh start. Support for national Governments in
strengthening legal and operational tools for child
protection is important in that context.
We stress the need to end impunity for all actors
inciting and perpetrating grave violations against
children in armed conflict situations. It is vital
that Member States develop comprehensive legal
frameworks in line with international standards in
order to ensure the effective prosecution of childrelated crimes. National Governments have the primary
responsibility to prosecute and deter such crimes in
conflict situations on their territories, even if such
crimes are alleged to have been committed by non-State
actors. Where required, the United Nations could assist
Member States in augmenting their capacities to deal
with that issue.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child
establishes the obligation of States parties to promote
the rehabilitation and social integration of children
affected by armed conflict in an environment that
fosters the health, self-respect and dignity of the child.
Close cooperation between the United Nations and its
Member States is critical for developing an effective and
sustainable policy for the repatriation and reintegration
of children affected by armed conflict. Member States
need to work towards an inclusive approach to providing
protection to child victims during the rehabilitation and
reintegration process in post-conflict situations.
A dangerous and worrisome trend in global terrorism
is the rising number of children that are recruited and
involved in terror-related activities. For terror groups,
children are most susceptible to manipulation, whether
as active participants or as human shields to protect
the perpetrators of terror. School closures due to the
pandemic have been misused by those terrorist groups
to target children, including through online avenues,
for their radicalization and indoctrination in violent
extremist ideologies. There is an urgent need for a
more coordinated approach to implementing the child
protection and counter-terrorism agenda. Member
States need to demonstrate greater political will to
hold the perpetrators of terrorism and their sponsors
to account, as well as to fulfil the Council’s child
protection obligations.
The report of the Secretary General mentions
that more than 25 per cent of child casualties were
caused by mines, improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) and explosive remnants of war. It is a matter
14/34

19/07/2022

of deep concern that terrorist groups have resorted to
landmines and IEDs as low-cost and effective options
for spreading terror and threatening innocent civilians,
including children. The use of such devices has only
increased, hence the need to strongly condemn and take
effective measures to combat that trend. India supports
the efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
agencies that have been working in conflict zones
across the world.
We recognize the importance of having sufficient
resources and the requisite number of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping missions for the effective
implementation of child protection programmes.
The Council should consider incorporating adequate
child protection provisions and capacities in all
relevant mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There is also a greater need for constructive
engagement with respective national Governments in
the formulation and implementation of child protection
action plans, which are integral in order to sustain
durable peace.
We also note with concern that, despite the Council’s
clear mandate, the Secretary-General’s report includes
situations that are not situations of armed conflict or
threats to the maintenance of international peace and
security. We must be cautious, as attempts to selectively
expand the mandate will only politicize its agenda. It
would distract us and even divert our attention from
real threats to international peace and security and
children in armed conflict.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s firm
commitment and steadfast support to the United
Nations in all its endeavours to protect children in
armed conflict.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Brazil for
convening today’s important debate and for keeping
the children and armed conflict agenda a priority for
the Security Council. I would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the efforts
of Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and her Office to enhance the protection of
children in conflict zones around the world. In that
context, we want to express our deep concern about
the number of grave violations committed against
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

children, the majority of them by non-State armed
groups, including terrorist groups such as the Houthis,
the Al-Shabaab movement and the Da’esh organization.
I am also grateful to Ms. Russell for her comprehensive
briefing and to Mr. Kumi for participating in today’s
meeting. In the light of the commitment of the United
Arab Emirates to the protection of children in armed
conflict, pursuant to international law and the existing
Security Council frameworks, we would like to
highlight three important issues.
First, we should encourage and support
multi-stakeholder mechanisms dedicated to the
protection and reintegration of children affected by
armed conflict so as to ensure a whole-of-society
approach and set up integrated programmes that
will support peacebuilding efforts while facilitating
the necessary and sustainable funding needed for
programmes that focus on survivors and take gender
perspectives into consideration. As we heard today
from Mr. Kumi, it is essential that all peacebuilding
efforts incorporate the needs of those children in order
to ensure their reintegration into society and enable
them to build a hopeful future.
Secondly, we should continue to address the
abduction of children in conflict zones. According to
the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2022/493), in
2021 verified cases of such incidents increased by 20 per
cent over the previous year, despite the fact that grave
violations are severely underreported. We must also
accelerate age- and sex-disaggregated data collection,
which can help us acquire a better understanding of
how different stages of conflicts can affect boys and
girls and can assist relevant actors, such as regional
organizations, in developing better strategies for
information-sharing, as well as monitoring and
reporting, especially for grave cross-border violations.
Thirdly, as we are seeing the numbers of forcibly
displaced persons reach unprecedented levels, it is
crucial that the Council maintain its focus on the
specific needs of displaced children, including by
integrating their protection into the mandates of
peace operations. The right of those children to have
access to essential services such as psychological and
physical health care must be ensured. We underscore
that children displaced by armed conflict have the same
fundamental right to education as any other child. That
education should be inclusive, responsive to their needs
and tailored to their well-being, cultural background
and language preference.

S/PV.9096

As we have previously underscored, an effective
commitment to the protection of children requires
preventing outbreaks of conflict in the first place.
Regrettably, the situation of children continues to
deteriorate and is directly linked to the growing armed
conflicts spreading around the world. The Security
Council must work to uphold its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security by ending
and preventing conflicts, and the United Arab Emirates
will continue to cooperate in and support every effort
to achieve those objectives.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I commend you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate.
I also thank Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Catherine Russell,
UNICEF Executive Director, and Mr. Patrick Kumi
for their briefings. Kenya welcomes this opportunity
to consider the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2022/493) and further efforts needed to protect
children from armed conflict. Today we would like to
draw the Council’s attention to four recommendations.
First, an immediate measure the Security Council
should take is to incorporate child-protection provisions
and capabilities into all mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
The elements to be included are early warning,
the protection of civilians, transitional justice and
disarmament, counter-radicalization and -recruitment
and disengagement, demobilization and reintegration.
Secondly, the harm that terrorist groups do
to children requires the Security Council’s urgent
attention. Kenya condemns the grave violations
committed against children during armed conflict. We
note with concern the extraordinarily high incidence
of such crimes committed by terrorist groups such as
Al-Shabaab, Da’esh and the Houthis, which conduct
mass abductions as part of their recruitment. Children
are kidnapped from their homes and schools, trafficked
or forcibly married to terrorists and subjected to rape
and other forms of sexual violence.
The process of radicalization is itself gravely
damaging to children, leading them to take hateful and
violent actions that directly harm them, their families
and the public in general. The psychological dimensions
of radicalization need further attention from clinical
psychology experts and should be considered from
a child-safety and well-being perspective. It should

22-4307215/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

be noted by the Security Council and States that the
ability of Al-Shabaab, Da’esh and the Houthis to
control territory and the populations within it is key
to the harm they do to children. As such, the Council
should agree that military and police pressure on such
groups, to the extent that they struggle to control
territory, is integral to the protection of children. It
is also important to recall the periodic attacks on
educational institutions by groups such as Al-Shabaab.
Their rejection of education, as well as their assaults
on schools, is proof that they should not be considered
normal political actors or legitimate targets for dialogue
and negotiations.
A key takeaway for the Council is that attempts
to negotiate with terrorist groups should be supported
only if the groups disavow their ideological aims
justifying attacks on children and civilians at large.
With those observations in mind, Kenya calls for a
more robust and consistent counter-terrorism regime to
protect children. Al-Shabaab must be treated as such
and be placed under the most comprehensive counterterrorism sanctions regime to protect children from
its violations. We note the concern in the Secretary
General’s report about the impact of counter-terrorism
measures on children. However, given our prior
observations, which are recognized in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, we believe that competent, humanrights-sensitive and effective counter-terrorism is a key
tool in the protection of children.
Thirdly, children are often the victims of
explosive ordnance deployed by terrorist groups.
States in conflict situations should be supported with
the necessary capacity to suppress the use of such
ordnance by terrorist and armed groups. We encourage
continued collaborative partnerships between the
United Nations Triangular Partnership Programme
and the International Peace Support Training Centre
in Nairobi in order to supply the urgent training and
assistance needed to deal with this threat. United
Nations and regional peacekeeping missions should
also be strengthened with the relevant capabilities to
enhance proactive force deployment that can pre-empt
and defuse improvised explosive devices.
Fourthly, children born to active terrorists or who
have been recruited by terrorists and militant groups
need assistance when they surrender or are captured.
Too many children with family links to terrorist groups
are languishing in refugee camps, especially in Syria.
The United Nations and the international community
16/34

19/07/2022

should take the lead in their rehabilitation, counselling,
disengagement and reintegration into communities
outside the camps. Reintegration must ensure that the
specific needs of children are addressed, including
through access to health care, psychosocial support
and education programmes. In Kenya’s experience,
the effective reintegration of children radicalized
by terrorists includes proper identification, risk
assessment, vetting, disengagement and reintegration,
probation, aftercare and further surveillance. Kenya is
ready to work with Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to deploy to countries affected by armed
conflict an initiative for training and capacity-building
for disengagement and reintegration and other aspects
of our programme.
We also call for the continued support of UNICEF,
the Peacebuilding Commission and other relevant
United Nations entities in assisting Member States
to ensure that the protection, rights, well-being and
empowerment of children affected by armed conflict
are fully incorporated in their initiatives.
I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to continue
working closely with members of Security Council on
this important agenda.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative of convening
this important high-level debate, which once again
provides us with an opportunity to reaffirm the
need to protect this vulnerable segment of the
population — children — who systematically pay a
high price in situations of instability and conflict. We
welcome the participation of Mrs. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, Ms. Catherine Russell and civil society
representative Patrick Kumi at this debate. We thank
them for their insightful contributions and their personal
commitment to the cause of children, particularly
children in armed conflict.
The effects of security crises on children’s wellbeing led the Security Council in 2005 to acknowledge
that violations of children’s rights are a matter of
international peace and security. The adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005) prioritized this item on the
Council’s agenda. Resolutions 2143 (2014) and 1998
(2011) attest to the Council’s commitment in that
regard. Since then, much progress has been made and
thousands of child soldiers have been released and
reintegrated into society. Similarly, many countries
in conflict have adopted national action plans to stop
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

the recruitment of child soldiers and accelerate their
release and reintegration.
In addition to those achievements, more than ever,
we need to shoulder our even greater responsibility to
step up our advocacy on behalf of all children caught
in the stranglehold of precariousness, poverty and
instability, which is sometimes chronic in certain
regions plagued by armed conflict.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493)
on the issue reminds us that the situation remains
worrisome. In Yemen, Myanmar and Afghanistan,
millions of children continue to be indoctrinated and
recruited as soldiers and no longer have access to
schools. In the Sahel and other parts of the world, the
combined effects of insecurity and the impact of climate
change pose a constant threat to children. We must
therefore seize the opportunity provided by this debate
to better reflect together on how to build sustainable
peace through the implementation of the children and
armed conflict agenda.
Our message for this debate is unequivocal: children
belong with their parents, in their communities and
in school — not on the battlefield. The international
community bears the responsibility to reconnect
children affected by conflict with their educational
systems, including through technology and innovative
means. The use of temporary mobile classrooms
can provide a solution that can be duplicated in such
conditions and become part of the United Nations
humanitarian response.
In order to better ensure the protection of
children’s rights, we must also address the root causes
of instability. Hunger, poverty and limited basic
infrastructure — or the complete lack of access to
it — sometimes drive children, even in times of peace,
to join armed and terrorist groups. In that regard,
facilitating development, poverty reduction and gender
equality must be preserved in all circumstances. The
most vulnerable States must be supported, and their
capacities must be strengthened.

S/PV.9096

and intensify awareness-raising processes. Cooperation
among States and the concerted actions of the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, we
believe, are critical for promoting information-sharing,
particularly with regard to cross-border movement.
Secondly, with regard to combating impunity, those
responsible for child recruitment and violence, crimes
and abuse against children must be held accountable for
their actions.
Thirdly,
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration programmes adapted to the specific needs
of child soldiers, including rehabilitation and quickimpact projects for children, must be implemented. We
believe that the ratio of released child soldiers to those
who have been permanently reintegrated into society
remains rather low.
In that regard, we must propose sustainable
and long-term reintegration programmes that
include quality educational content, health care and
psychosocial support, while of course integrating the
specific and differentiated needs of girls and children
with disabilities. All of that will be possible only if
such specific programmes receive long-term financial
and technical support.
In conclusion, it is critical that our overall conflictresolution strategies in general and our efforts on behalf
of children affected by conflict in particular be based
on protection, prevention, the creation of multifaceted
partnerships and resilience-building. At the same time,
they should also address the root causes of armed
conflict. Such an approach will guarantee that today’s
child soldiers will become tomorrow’s leaders.

Furthermore, the protection of children in armed
conflict can be strengthened in several aspects.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I thank Brazil for
convening this debate and very warmly welcome,
you, Ambassador Fernando Simas Magalhães,
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, to the Security
Council. My delegation is also grateful for the briefings
by Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Executive Director Catherine Russell and Mr. Patrick
Kumi, whose courageous and moving testimony we
greatly appreciated.

First, with regard to prevention, early-warning
mechanisms in conflict environments can serve as
a radar to detect situations in which children are at
risk, strengthen the monitoring of existing criminal
networks, prevent opportunistic networks from forming

As we commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate on children and
armed conflict, it is clear that the agenda remains
a priority. But it continues faces new challenges, as
children are never excluded from the impact of wars

22-4307217/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

19/07/2022

and, as a consequence, are the most affected. As we
heard, the relevant United Nations reports give a clear
account on their behalf.

and social security. It is therefore not enough to prohibit
the recruitment of minors and child marriage. We must
go further.

For Mexico, the protection of children in armed
conflict remains a high priority from the perspective
of preventive diplomacy and the protection of civilians
in conflict, as well as for building sustainable peace in
post-conflict situations. It must also be underscored that
armed conflict is one of the main causes of the forced
displacement of millions upon millions of children.

We trust that such proposals will be grounds
for unity and action among all the members of the
Security Council and the entire membership of the
United Nations.

Mexico was the first elected member of the Security
Council to chair the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, in 2009 and 2010. We have once again
assumed that responsibility as Vice-Chair, working
closely together with the presidency of Norway.
It is undeniably true that there has been progress
over the past 20-plus years. Nevertheless, the listing of
parties to conflict continues. However, it is true that the
number of those who have been delisted is greater. It is
also noteworthy that there have been no re-listings of
parties to conflict, which is significant, as it suggests
that the mandate is ever-improving and effective and
must be strengthened.
We highly welcome the tangible results achieved
with the development and implementation of the 17
current action plans and the other commitments made
more recently. A compelling fact is that, since the
Office of the Special Representative was established,
more than 170,000 children have been released. That is
no small figure.
Looking ahead, it is clear that the Security Council
must continue to build on the achievements of the
Working Group. Coordination between the Working
Group and other subsidiary bodies of the Council,
including some sanctions committees, needs to
be strengthened.
While the prevention of grave violations is clearly
the main task of the Working Group’s mandate, it is
also important to ensure the full implementation of
reintegration programmes. Assistance programmes
should always be designed with an age and a gender
perspective and should include mental health aspects.
It is becoming increasingly clear that psychosocial
support is an essential pillar of that mandate, as it
should be for all humanitarian assistance programmes.
It is clear that full reintegration also requires national
child protection services that include education for all
18/34

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
join other speakers in thanking our briefers today for
their illuminating remarks. I would like to highlight
three key points in relation to what we heard today.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the inclusion
of the situations in Ukraine, Ethiopia and Mozambique
in the Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2022/493).
Data gathered by United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations on the ground
attest to the serious protection needs of children in
those countries.
Establishing monitoring and reporting mechanisms
will build an even stronger evidence base so that all
parties can identify the actions needed to prevent grave
violations against children.
In Ukraine, there is already ample evidence that
Russia is committing at least four of the six grave
violations against children. Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter will have our full support in
engaging on that agenda. But there is only one solution
to ending the suffering of Ukrainian children, that is,
an end to Russia’s illegal invasion.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned that attacks
on schools have continued to increase, including
targeted attacks on girls’ schools. The United Kingdom
has long campaigned for the right of every girl to 12
years of quality education; that includes girls affected
by conflict.
We continue to urge all Member States to endorse
the Safe Schools Declaration and to address the
gendered impact of attacks on education. I again echo
the Secretary-General’s call for the Taliban to enable the
immediate return of all Afghan girls to the classroom.
Thirdly, the increase in cases of sexual violence
against children documented in the Secretary-General’s
report is particularly concerning given that those
figures no doubt represent only the tip of the iceberg.
Tackling sexual violence in conflict and ensuring
support for survivors remain a top priority for the
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

United Kingdom, including with respect to children.
We will convene an international conference in London
in November to that end.
Ahead of that conference, we are committed to
strengthening the international legal architecture to
improve accountability for sexual violence in conflict
and to rolling out the Murad Code, launched here in
April. We welcome all Member States joining us in
that effort.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank Brazil for hosting
this important annual meeting. I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba de
Potgieter and Executive Director Russell for their
tireless advocacy for children globally. I thank
Mr. Kumi for his truly powerful testimony, as well as
for his very clear recommendations.
Once again, as we meet to discuss this important
topic, we confront shocking numbers of violations
against children. But behind every figure, as we heard
this morning, there is a child who has had their life
derailed or destroyed and their future undermined.
Children worldwide, including girls, children with
disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
queer plus children and, as this debate has highlighted,
refugee, stateless and internally displaced children,
experience conflict in different ways. The recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict worldwide robs
children of their childhoods and puts them at risk on the
front lines. The denial of humanitarian access blocks
life-saving aid and services from reaching children.
We are dismayed by the high numbers of children
killed and maimed globally last year, notably in
Syria, Yemen and Afghanistan, as well as during the
escalation of violence in May 2021 in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory. We urge the relevant
parties to cooperate with the Secretary-General and put
in place action plans.
The extent to which children are impacted by
violations of international humanitarian law, including
those arising from the use of explosive weapons in
populated areas, is appalling. We call on all States to
support the Political Declaration on Explosive Weapons
in Populated Areas, which was recently concluded
following a process led by Ireland in Geneva. Stark
increases in abductions, rape and other forms of sexual
and gender-based violence have horrific impacts on

S/PV.9096

children and differentiated consequences for girls
and boys.
We urge all parties to release abducted children and
end further violations of their rights. Survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence must receive comprehensive
health and psychosocial support. Attacks on schools
and hospitals destroy another lifeline for children, and
we must work to implement resolution 2601 (2021).
Education is vital for children affected by conflict and
is an indispensable right for all children. In that regard,
we reiterate our call for the Taliban to allow girls in
Afghanistan to return to school.
Amid horrendous violations against children, we
commend the decision of the Secretary-General to
add Ethiopia, Mozambique and Ukraine to the list of
situations of concern with immediate effect, as well as
his call for more monitoring in the central Sahel region.
Such situations have shown just how quickly escalations
of violence can destroy children’s livelihoods and
illustrate why rapid action is necessary. Since the onset
of Russia’s illegal war against Ukraine, grave violations
have destroyed the lives of many children. We call
on Russia to end those senseless attacks and stop all
violations against children.
As this is Ireland’s last open debate on children and
armed conflict as an elected Council member for this
term, I want to finish with a number of reflections.
First, as we know, there is much law to protect
children, but there is a lack of implementation. We call
on parties to conflict to comply with international law,
including international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international refugee law. We call
for accountability for violations.
Secondly, our fine words in this context must be
accompanied by hard cash. Funding is required to keep
pace with a growing number of violations and situations
of concern to monitor crimes, protect children and
ensure reintegration support. This includes support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
UNICEF and United Nations missions, including those
in transition.
Thirdly, holistic reintegration and peacebuilding
are vital for healing and recovery. We must build on
the successes achieved by United Nations action plans
globally. We should mainstream the children and armed
conflict agenda across the Peacebuilding Commission

22-4307219/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

and Peacebuilding Fund. Investing in the agenda is
investing in children’s futures.
Fourthly, all children are equal, and grave violations
of the laws that protect them are equally unacceptable,
no matter where they happen. Ireland continues to call
for the objective, impartial and transparent listing of
perpetrators in the annex of the annual report, including
based on patterns and trends, in order to promote
accountability. In order to be effective, listing must be
objective and accurately reflect the facts on the ground.
Progress by parties to conflict must be recognized only
if it is real and demonstrable. Parties must cooperate
with the United Nations to develop action plans to end
violations against children, or face consequences.
Fifthly, we must advocate children’s rights at
every opportunity. We call on States to endorse the
Paris Principles, the Vancouver Principles and the
Safe Schools Declaration, and to become parties to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Ireland has been immensely proud to serve in the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Our
children are our future. To protect and invest in them is
to invest in our future peace and prosperity.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to express our gratitude to
you, Mr. Simas Magalhães, and to the entire Brazilian
delegation for organizing today’s open debate. I would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Catherine Russell
and Mr. Patrick Kumi for their comprehensive briefings.
The Russian Federation truly values the work that they
do for children.
The war started by the Kyiv authorities in 2014
against the people of the Donbas has hit children in the
cruellest ways. Over the eight years of armed conflict
in this region, hundreds of children have died. Ten
times more have been injured. The youngest victim
of the Ukrainian aggression was only 27 days old
when killed. Children are dying as a result of artillery
shelling and from sniper fire. They are being blown up
by mines laid by Ukrainian army as far back as 2014
and 2015 on forest footpaths and near bodies of water.
These children are being seriously traumatized. For
eight years, children in the Donbas have been born,
gone to school, lived and grown up under constant
shelling from Kyiv.
20/34

19/07/2022

Armed units of Ukraine are cynically shelling
civilian infrastructure in the Donbas nursery schools,
schools and medical institutions. Children are also
being killed using weapons provided by the United
States, the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Czechia,
Slovakia, the Netherlands and other countries, which
are therefore complicit in crimes of the Ukrainian
regime against children.
I will share some statistics just from the week of
8 to 14 July. On 8 July, Ukrainian armed forces shelled
nursery school No. 118 and a music school in Horlivka,
medical facility No. 3, an Olympic reserve school and
a children’s educational health centre in Donetsk, and
school No. 19 in Shakhtarsk. On 9 July, Ukrainian
forces shelled nursery schools Nos. 380 and 398, school
No. 113 in Donetsk and a nursery school in Horlivka. On
10 July, school No. 4 was shelled, as were school No. 51
and a centre of primary medical care No. 3 in Donetsk,
together with school No. 19 in Horlivka. On 12 July,
nursery school No. 86 in Horlivka was shelled, as were
a children’s centre in Makiivka and a primary medical
service centre in Donetsk. On 13 July, the Republican
Clinical Psychological and Neurological hospital, was
shelled in Donetsk. On 14 July, school No. 46 was hit
in Makiivka.
These statistics represent a single week. Over the
last months, in the Donetsk People’s Republic alone,
249 civilians died, including 16 children. Some 1,493
people were injured, including 83 children. As a result
of shelling, 72 medical institutions and 238 educational
institutions have been damaged.
But that is not all: the Kyiv authorities do not balk
at directly targeting children either. For example. a
schoolgirl from Luhansk, Faina Savenkova, whose
personal data were published on the infamous
Peacemaker site in October 2021. On the eve of the
Day of the Protection of Children, Faina wrote an open
letter to the United Nations requesting that it not to
forget the children of the Donbas. She and her family
immediately started to receive threats. We turned to the
Secretary-General and asked for assistance to remove
this child’s personal data from a Ukrainian neo-Nazi
website so as to protect her, but unfortunately we have
not seen any results.
At the same time, the situation is only worsening.
I can inform the Security Council today that Russian
non-governmental organizations have found that the
personal data of at least 327 minors has been published
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

on the Peacemaker website, which poses a real threat
to their lives. Today we will pass information about
this on to the Secretary-General. I would also like
to draw Ms. Russell’s particular attention to this
unacceptable situation.
One of the aims of Russia’s special operation is to
protect the people and children of the Donbas from the
crimes committed by the Ukrainian regime. According
to data from the Interagency Coordination Office, as
of the 12 July, since the start of the special military
operation, 2,497,432 people have been evacuated from
the dangerous regions of Ukraine, namely, the Donetsk
People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic,
to the Russian Federation, including 392,890 children.
All of these people came to our country voluntarily,
saving their own lives and the lives of their children.
We categorically reject unfounded accusations that the
Russian authorities are abducting children.
In constituent entities of the Russian Federation,
we have more than 9,500 temporary accommodation
points working permanently. We also have field offices,
with regional children’s ombudspersons, to work with
evacuees. All refugees receive individual support, and
we provide assistance to address various pressing issues
in terms of further accommodation, ensuring that food
and basic necessities are met and that social benefits
being paid. Particular attention is paid by the Russian
Federation’s Presidential Commissioner for Children
Rights, Maria Lvova-Belova, with regard to families
with minors, orphans and unaccompanied children.
Children younger than school age attend nursery
schools, and school-age children go to general or
vocational educational institutions. Many of them
are provided with targeted humanitarian and medical
assistance, including psychological rehabilitation. The
main aim is to help these children forget all the horrors
they have lived through over the last eight years, when
Kyiv, with the complicity of its Western sponsors,
started to destroy peaceful civilian life in the Donbas,
and this with impunity. A separate area of the work
carried out by the Russian Human Rights Commissioner
Tatiana Moskalkova is locating relatives of minors
whose parents have died as a result of bombing and
shelling from the Ukrainian forces.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child enshrines
the rights to life and development for children, access
to housing, health care, education and protection from
all forms of violence. Children have a right to specific

S/PV.9096

care and assistance. Russia is helping children in the
Donbas to benefit from these rights.
We took note of the Secretary-General’s decision
to take up the situation in Ukraine as a situation
of concern in the next report and request a special
representative to address the issue. For our part, we
stand ready to cooperate with a special representative
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Ukraine,
including providing the information that we have.
The topic of child protection in the Syrian Arab
Republic is still relevant, particularly in the areas not
controlled by the Government. Against the backdrop of
a gradual stabilization of the security situation in a large
part of the Syrian territory, a main obstacle to ensuring
the protection of children’s rights is the complex
humanitarian situation combined with the worsening
socioeconomic situation following the imposition of
suffocating sanctions by the United States and the
European Union. Washington should immediately end
its unlawful occupation of part of Syrian territory and
its pillaging of the country’s natural and agricultural
resources. American troops should be withdrawn
from the territory of that State, to which they were
never invited.
In regions held by illegal armed groups and
terrorist organizations, children’s rights are being
systematically violated. Children are being recruited
into military units and involved in terrorist activities.
They are being deprived of access to education and
subject to propaganda and radical ideology. The real
breeding grounds for that phenomenon are the camps
for internally displaced persons in the north-east of
Syria, Al-Hol and Roj, where families of Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant fighters are located.
The majority of Western States persist in refusing
to repatriate their citizens and members of their
families despite the many calls made by the SecretaryGeneral and interested States to that end. Unlike them,
we are actively working to repatriate Russian children
from armed-conflict zones, as decreed by the Russian
Head of State. That work in Syria has been done by a
specialized inter-agency working commission led by the
Russian presidential commissioner on children’s rights.
So far, 252 children have returned from prisons
and shelters in Damascus and from temporary
accommodations in the north-east of Syria. There is
an effective system in place to fulfil the necessary
legal, organizational and administrative procedures. In

22-4307221/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

Russia, children have the necessary qualified support
provided to them. Measures are taken to ensure their
medical recovery and social adaptation.
I should like also to touch also on the situation
in Afghanistan. Years of unlawful occupation by the
United States and its NATO allies of the territory of
that State has brought incalculable misery to the people
of Afghanistan. In many previous years, Afghanistan
had one of the highest numbers of recorded crimes
against children, committed, inter alia, by the armed
forces of the former Government and their sponsors
located oceans away. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/493) also contains heartbreaking
statistics on the violations against children committed
in the first half of 2021, up until the rushed withdrawal
of American forces from Afghanistan.
Following its liberation from foreign occupation,
the situation in Afghanistan radically changed. We also
need to ensure that the United States returns the assets
stolen from Afghanistan, which are currently being held
in American banks. The Afghan people urgently need
those assets to be able to ensure economic recovery,
tackle poverty and create infrastructure, including
schools and hospitals.
The American authorities’ cynicism truly knows no
bounds, holding forth on Afghan children’s rights while
keeping monies destined for the people of Afghanistan.
No less cynical are the cruel actions committed in
Afghanistan by the United Kingdom. Suffice it to
remember the BBC’s discovery of the fact that British
special forces had killed hundreds of innocent citizens,
including children, in night-time raids during the
United Kingdom forces’ presence in Afghanistan.
Information on those crimes was made public in 2018
and 2019, but the scandal was quashed thanks to the
vehement statements made by the Ministry of Defence
of the United Kingdom about investigations and the
punishment of the perpetrators if the accusations
proved true. We understand that that has not been done.
We call on the Special Representative to keep a focus
on Afghanistan and carry out the necessary monitoring.
In conclusion, I should like to underscore that we
agree with the proposal contained in Brazil’s concept
note (S/2022/540, annex) about devoting particular
attention to refugee children. We share the concern of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) regarding the growing number
22/34

19/07/2022

of children forced to leave their homes. According to
UNHCR data, 41 per cent, or 36.5 million, of the overall
number of refugees and internally displaced persons in
the world are children.
Of particular concern is the situation in the
Mediterranean sea, where people, including children,
are still dying as they try to reach Europe. Thus,
according to the IOM, since the start of 2022 the number
of people dying or going missing while crossing the
Mediterranean has reached 970 migrants, including
32 children. In 2021, 2,048 people died, including 76
children. We are convinced that the most effective way
of addressing the problem of those forced to migrate,
including children, is to address the root causes that
force such people to leave their homes. We believe
that addressing that issue entails political solutions
in migrants’ countries of origin and the provision of
assistance for social and economic development and
State-building in the fight against terrorism.
We will continue to make a significant contribution
to strengthening the international regime for protecting
refugees and addressing migration-related problems,
providing far-reaching humanitarian support and also
actively participating in political efforts to prevent and
resolve crises.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank the Brazilian
presidency for having organized this open debate as
well as the briefers for their insightful presentations.
Twenty-six years after the creation of a mandate
dedicated to strengthening the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, there have been some
deliverables. More than 170,000 children have been
released from armed groups and armed forces; 39 action
plans have been signed between the United Nations and
parties to conflict; and the Security Council has placed
the issue of children and armed conflict on its agenda
as a central issue with an impact on peace and security.
Yet despite the progress made in strengthening
the normative and institutional framework on children
and armed conflict, implementation lags far behind; it
remains weak and unsatisfactory. As the findings of the
annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493)
indicate, the situation of children in many parts of the
world is dire.
The proliferation of armed conflicts and armed
groups employing extreme violence against children,
particularly their killing, maiming and recruiting, is
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

alarming. We are seeing an increase in the number of
cases of abduction, cases of sexual violence against
children, especially against girls, and attacks on
civilian infrastructure, including schools and hospitals,
and their use for military purposes. An ever-growing
number of children is being forced to flee in search
of protection.
Coups and violent takeovers of power have
aggravated the situation of children in Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Sudan. In Myanmar, the military junta has
brutally attacked and killed children and systematically
violated their human rights, while in Afghanistan girls
continue to be denied the basic fundamental right
to attend secondary school. That should and must
be reversed.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia,
Syria and Yemen, the situation remains grim for many
children, who are the subject of grave violations and in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance.
The Secretary-General has added new situations
of concern in his report. That is something we called
for and which we welcome. That is a very important
first step towards advancing country-level progress to
protect children everywhere through the children and
armed conflict agenda’s mandating tools.
Reports from Ukraine remain deeply concerning.
As a result of Russia’s war, some 349 children have
been killed and hundreds more injured, and 4.3 million
children have been forced out of their homes. Those
still inside the country remain trapped in the horrors of
a war that after five months continues to be as deadly
as it was the first day.
Children in Ukraine do not go to sleep with bedtime
stories. They are terrified by the detonation of shells
and the explosion of missiles. They are denied dreams
and are left only with nightmares. That should stop.
There is an undeniable sense of urgency for
change, to do more and to do better, and to do that we
believe that, first, we must focus more on prevention
and accountability. We must, of course, invest more in
prevention, but that cannot be fully achieved without
proper accountability. Holding the perpetrators of
such violations accountable increases the cost of
non-compliance with international law and may deter
future violations.
Secondly, we need to strengthen the children and
armed conflict mandate and make it more agile so as

S/PV.9096

to tackle the actions and violations committed by all
actors, in particular non-State armed groups. There is a
need for dedicated child-protection capacity in United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions,
including in the context of transitions.
Thirdly, child-protection practitioners, civilsociety organizations and humanitarian personnel in
the field must be protected. All parties must allow and
facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded humanitarian
access as well as access by children to services,
assistance and protection.
Fourthly, we need to better address the challenges
linked to the integration and rehabilitation of
children, who today represent more than half of
refugees worldwide.
In the course of the last three years, Albania has
taken decisive steps to address the horrific situation of
the children and women of Albanian origin trapped in
several refugee camps in Syria and Iraq. Albania has
conducted three repatriations of children and women
from Syria and Iraq, which in total included 28 children
and nine women. The latest repatriation took place
in May, in which 10 children and three women were
successfully brought back to the country. We thank
UNICEF for its continued support during and after the
repatriation process and for providing a full package
of child-care services. The same has been done for
Afghan children received by Albania, with additional
support for education and health and for making them
feel at home, as far as possible.
We all have an obligation to prevent and respond
to violence against children and to their abuse, neglect
and exploitation. For that we need laws and policies,
dedicated human and financial resources, responsible
governance, data collection and monitoring, childprotection and response services and constant support
to families and communities. It is our moral duty and
our legal responsibility to do whatever is needed to
make sure that children are raised with care, love and
protection, away from violence and conflict.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Sir, for presiding over today’s meeting, and
I thank Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter
and Executive Director Russell for their briefings. I
also listened carefully to Mr. Kumi’s statement. Based
on his own experience, Mr. Kumi gave us a thoughtprovoking account of the endless pain and wounds that
armed conflict inflicts on children. Children deserve

22-4307223/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

a carefree childhood and should not be forced into the
wars created by adults or grow up in fear of violence,
yet the Secretary-General’s annual report for 2021 on
children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) once again
shows us the harrowing realities.
In the past year, 19,000 children in 21 conflictstricken countries and regions were subjected to nearly
24,000 serious violations, an average of 65 per day.
Among those violations, the killing and maiming,
recruitment and use of children and the denial of
humanitarian access to them stand out as most shocking.
The fact that those young lives were subjected to
repeated merciless pain confronts us with inescapable
questions about the international community’s moral
conscience and ability to protect the next generation.
Those children have lost their homes and childhoods to
war, and we cannot let them lose their future and hopes
on top of that. The best way to protect children is to put
an end to conflict. The Security Council should strive
for a cessation of hostilities and an end to fighting while
working for political solutions so that children caught
in the depths of conflict can see peace dawn as soon as
possible. In addition, the Council should take a zerotolerance approach to violence, ensure the protection
of all children and firmly prevent violent conflict from
trampling on children’s fundamental rights. With that
in mind, I would like to share a few points.
First, we must put an end to egregious violations
against children. The six grave violations against
children, as defined in Security Council resolutions,
should never be permitted in conflict situations. The
parties to conflicts should end their grave violations
against children, increase their cooperation with
the United Nations, formulate action plans for the
protection of children and prioritize children’s rights
and interests during the mediation of disputes and peace
talks and in processes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and post-conflict peacebuilding.
The international community should leave no gaps in
child protection. Countries that have not yet ratified
the Convention on the Rights of the Child should take
immediate action. Truth and justice in this area must
be upheld, and the perpetrators of grave violations
against children should be held accountable. It has
recently been pointed out in the media that between
2010 and 2011, foreign special forces in Afghanistan
killed civilians indiscriminately and went so far as
to hold killing contests, many of whose victims were
24/34

19/07/2022

children. Such atrocities are deeply shocking, and the
perpetrators should be severely punished.
Secondly, we should afford all children protection
without discrimination, whether they are boys, girls,
children with disabilities, refugee or immigrant children
or children held by terrorists and armed groups. All
children should enjoy the basic rights stipulated in the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and should not
be treated unfairly for any reason. It is appalling that
tens of thousands of refugee children in the refugee
detention centres at the borders of certain countries are
made to endure rampant disease and a lack of proper
sanitation and food while being forcibly separated
from their parents. Other refugee children have been
deported and forced to survive amid violence, poverty
and displacement. Children associated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham are all victims, and we
endorse the Secretary-General’s appeal that they be
granted the right to voluntary repatriation.
Thirdly, we should provide children with
opportunities for comprehensive development. Poverty,
hunger and being forced to drop out of school leave
children more vulnerable to violence. Adequate
nutrition, education and skills give them the opportunity
to emerge from the shadows of war. The international
community should encourage countries in conflict
situations to increase policy support and resource
investment for children in order to expand dedicated
assistance for them in the fields of development and
education. Amid our global food, energy and financial
crises, children in conflict now need help more than ever.
Cuts in development aid are tantamount to weakening
the protection of children. In Afghanistan, poverty is
spreading and hunger is raging, with children being
the most vulnerable victims. The decision by some
countries to freeze or misappropriate Afghanistan’s
overseas assets as the country is going through such
difficult times is depriving Afghan children of their
hopes of survival. The reckless imposition of unilateral
coercive measures is making those children and other
vulnerable groups pay the highest price, and such
practices should be changed.
Fourthly, we should make good use of the childprotection toolbox. The Secretary-General’s annual
report and its listing and delisting mechanisms are
indicative of the state of child protection in conflictstricken areas and countries. Clear, uniform and
measurable listing criteria should be established. The
Security Council Working Group on Children and
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

Armed Conflict should adopt the same frequency of
deliberations and the same cycle for issuing countryspecific conclusions, and should avoid paying attention
selectively, based on political positions.
The question of Palestine has remained elusive for
more than seven decades. Countless children have died
in childhood, and generations of them have never seen a
way out towards peace. With gang violence intensifying
in Haiti, more than 1,700 schools have closed since April,
and more than half a million children have lost access
to education. The killing, kidnapping and recruitment
of children by gangsters have cast shadows over their
childhoods. If we choose to continue to disregard the
legitimate rights of Palestinian and Haitian children,
how many more tragedies will we have to witness
before long-overdue justice can be restored to them?
Though much remains to be done, the past year has
nonetheless brought us promising news. Through the
efforts of Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter,
12,214 children embroiled in conflict have been released,
and the competent United Nations agencies are actively
working to save children. With China’s help, 10-yearold Muhammad, from Syria’s Al-Hasakah governorate,
was fitted with a prosthetic limb on his right leg, which
had been severed by a bomb. Since then, he has been
able to bid farewell to his wheelchair. With China’s
help, Amran, a displaced mother in Bosaso, Somalia,
enjoys nutritious meals with her two preschool-age
daughters and is no longer threatened by severe famine
and malnutrition.
So long as there is action, there is hope. From the
Middle East to North Africa, from Europe to Latin
America and from the Horn of Africa to the Sahara, the
eyes of young children are upon us, and we cannot let
them down.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than three minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Children and Armed Conflict.
We welcome today’s open debate, convened by
Brazil, and thank the briefers for their statements.
We would in particular like to acknowledge and
thank Patrick Kumi for sharing his experiences and
recommendations. We encourage the Security Council

S/PV.9096

to regularly include children and youth briefers in its
deliberations and briefings. We call for the safe and
meaningful inclusion and participation of children
and young people in all peace and security matters,
including political and peace processes, protection and
humanitarian responses and reintegration programming.
The Group of Friends is deeply concerned about the
figures and trends presented in the Secretary-General’s
annual report (S/2022/493). Reading the report together
with the recent analysis conducted by UNICEF,
which highlights the fact that grave violations have
increased year after year for the past 16 years, we are
presented with a dire picture of the plight of conflictaffected children.
The persistently high levels of killing or maiming
of children, the recruitment and use of children and the
denial of humanitarian assistance by parties to armed
conflict are extremely troubling. The dramatic increase
in abductions is cause for serious concern, as abduction
often leads to other grave violations against children.
The significant increases in verified incidents of sexual
violence against children are also alarming and must
be reversed. That grave violation disproportionately
affects girls and also impacts boys and is already prone
to severe under-reporting and lack of data.
We are dismayed by the widespread attacks against
schools and hospitals as described in the report,
particularly amid the ongoing coronavirus disease
pandemic, which is causing the largest disruption to
children’s education in history. Furthermore, we are
alarmed by the soaring numbers of children displaced as
a result of conflict and violence around the world — now
more than 36.5 million children, according to the
United Nations. That figure does not include the more
than 4.5 million children who have been displaced by
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.
Displaced children face heightened risks, including
vulnerability to trafficking, forced deportation,
exploitation, recruitment and use and other abuses;
children with disabilities and those who are
unaccompanied or separated from their caregivers are
at especially high risk. Against that troubling backdrop,
the Group of Friends would like to make the following
recommendations, on which we are committed to
following up through our own collective engagement.
First, we urge all parties to armed conflict to fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and

22-4307225/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

international refugee law and to act to prevent and
end grave violations against children. To that end, we
strongly encourage all parties to armed conflict to
sign and implement action plans and other concrete
and time-bound measures to enhance the protection of
children in armed conflict.
Secondly, we call for full accountability for grave
violations through national and international justice
mechanisms, such as the International Criminal Court.
True justice also involves reparations and access to
gender- and age-sensitive comprehensive specialized
services, including medical, mental health and
psychosocial support, sexual and reproductive healthcare services and legal and livelihood support for
survivors of grave violations.
Thirdly, a growing number of Member States
have acceded to or endorsed key instruments aimed
at strengthening the protection of children in armed
conflict. We encourage all States Members of the
United Nations to accede to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to consider
endorsing and implementing practical child-protection
instruments, such as the Safe Schools Declaration, the
Paris Principles and Commitments and the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers.
Fourthly, we call for adequate resourcing for child
protection specialists and activities, including within
United Nations peace operations, United Nations
country task forces on monitoring and reporting
and international fact-finding and investigative
mechanisms, as well as international judicial bodies.
Fifthly and finally, we urge the Security Council,
Member States, the Secretariat and host countries to
support the full implementation of child protection
mandates by United Nations peace operations,
including in contexts in which the United Nations may
be transitioning. We also recall the importance of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, which can play key roles in mobilizing attention
and resources to address the needs of children in
conflict and post-conflict settings, including for the
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed forces and armed groups.
26/34

19/07/2022

(spoke in French)
On the twenty-fifth anniversary of the mandate on
children and armed conflict, we express our sincere
gratitude for the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and all those involved in the protection of
children within the United Nations and civil society.
Over the past 25 years, we have worked together to
implement a range of robust tools to support that unique
and important mandate, ranging from the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism to the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
among many others. Those tools must be upheld
and strengthened.
In that regard, the Group of Friends reaffirms
the importance of the independence, impartiality
and credibility of the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism, as well as the mechanism for establishing
the lists contained in the annexes to the annual report
of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict. Those two tools together remain particularly
important in our efforts to protect children and foster
accountability for serious violations.
We note that Ethiopia, Mozambique, Ukraine and
the central Sahel region have been included in the
report, with immediate effect, as situations of concern.
We also underline the decisions taken concerning the
lists contained in the annexes to the report and the
criteria underpinning those decisions.
We reaffirm our long-standing call for the
information presented in the Secretary-General’s
annual reports, as collected and verified by the
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, to be accurate
and to be reflected in the annexes to the report in a
timely manner. We also recall that it is important for the
Secretary-General to use clear criteria and procedures
for the listing and delisting of the parties to conflict
that are deemed to be responsible for serious violations
in all situations mentioned in the report.
Allow me to make a brief statement as the
representative of Canada.
More than 40 million children throughout the world
are now displaced due to conflict and violence. That
statistic exceeds the total population of my country,
Canada, and the populations of more than 157 States
Members of the United Nations. The displacement of
a child due to war is one displacement too many; the
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

displacement of more than 40 million children is a
disaster — one that is human-made.
Although this issue is the subject of debate within
the Council, those violations occur in States in which
Governments and other stakeholders have obligations.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban shamelessly tramples the
rights of girls, in particular their right to education. Last
year, more Afghan boys were killed or maimed than
in any other country of the world. In the central Sahel
and Lake Chad basin regions, we note a considerable
increase in the number of serious violations perpetrated
against girls. In Syria, the Al-Assad regime continues
its attacks on children, bombs schools and hospitals and
recruits children into its armed forces.
We are concerned about the decision to list the
Syrian Government in annex I.B to the SecretaryGeneral’s report. That decision should have been taken
only based on a significant decrease in serious violations
and respect for specific time-bound commitments.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, the
Syrian Government has not achieved either of those
things. The decision therefore sets a troubling precedent.
In Ukraine, children have been killed or maimed
by Russian forces. It can be proved that deliberate
large-scale attacks have been mounted against schools
and hospitals. Russia has arrested and forcibly expelled
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian children. Rape and
sexual violence against Ukrainian girls and boys are
widespread. Those are not mere assertions by Canada
but facts that have been corroborated by the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and independent organizations.
(spoke in English)
The designation of Ukraine as a situation of
concern in the Secretary-General’s report is a welcome
step, as is the inclusion of Ethiopia and Mozambique
in the same category. We applaud the SecretaryGeneral’s initiative. In those three situations and all
others, we urge the Secretary-General to ensure that the
verification of information on grave violations against
children leads to accurate, credible and transparent
listing decisions. That is critical to changing behaviour
and holding the parties to conflict accountable. Allow
me to make three points to conclude.
First, we hear the calls for more resources for
child protection. There is no substitute for dedicated
expertise. And we know that the demands on the

S/PV.9096

system are greater than ever. Canada is committed to
advocating for those resources to ensure that the United
Nations has what it needs to do this important work.
Secondly, it is encouraging to see the growing
number of countries endorsing key instruments aimed
at protecting children.
Thirdly and finally, for years Canada and many
other Member States have asked the Secretary-General
to release his report earlier in advance of the Council’s
annual open debate on the subject. It is an important
report, with significant decisions that can affect both
bilateral and multilateral policies. All Member States,
regardless of their status, should have more time to
consider and review its contents.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
express my gratitude to the briefers, in particular Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and
UNICEF Executive Director Catherine Russell. We also
acknowledge the presence of Mr. Szijjártó, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary, which attests to
how important this subject is to his Government.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union and the
statement just made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, and I would like to add the following points in
my national capacity.
The daunting reality faced by children in the 21
countries and one regional situation in 2021, highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493), is
alarming. We commend the work of the team for the
children and armed conflict agenda in engaging with
parties to protect children in a number of countries,
including Nigeria, the Philippines, South Sudan,
Somalia, the Sudan and Yemen, which has resulted in
the release of more than 12,000 children from armed
groups and forces. At the same time, the other statistics
on grave violations against children in armed conflicts
remain distressing. I should also note that the current
report does not cover the horrible consequences for
children of the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
which means that their actual extent is even worse.
However, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
decision in response to Russia’s war on my country to

22-4307227/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

add Ukraine as a situation of concern with immediate
effect. All gross violations against children will be
subject to daily monitoring by the entire United Nations
system throughout the territory of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders and in accordance
with the relevant General Assembly resolutions. As
a party to the core international instruments related
to the protection of the rights of children, Ukraine
remains determined to engage in constructive dialogue
and cooperation with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in order to stop and prevent
violations against children affected by Russia’s war of
aggression on my country.
Since February, Russia’s full-scale invasion of
Ukraine has already affected 7 million children there.
Almost two of every three children have been displaced.
According to UNICEF, 3 million children within
Ukraine and more than 2.2 million children in host
countries are now in need of humanitarian assistance.
At least 353 children have been killed, and 666 have
been injured, many of them severely. The unabated
bombardment and shelling by the Russian armed
forces has damaged 2,116 educational institutions, of
which 216 have been destroyed. In addition, more than
50 children’s health-care facilities and more than 130
homes for orphans and children deprived of parental
care have been damaged or destroyed.
Two days ago, residents of the Ukrainian city of
Vinnytsia gathered to say a final goodbye to four-yearold Liza Dmitrieva. Many people present here today
may have seen the two different sets of video footage
of this sunny girl, taken on Thursday within an hour of
each other. The first shows a child full of life walking
joyfully together with her mother. The second was taken
immediately following the Russian missile strike on
Vinnytsia’s city centre, which killed two dozen people,
including Liza and two boys, seven and eight years old.
The heartbreaking images of Liza lying next to her
stroller were shared by the media worldwide and left
millions shocked by Russia’s brutality and inhumanity.
Those images will be used at a future tribunal to try
Russian war criminals, and her killers will be sitting
in the dock.
The Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine
has documented 31 cases of the use of schools and
kindergartens for military purposes by the Russian
invaders. As of today, 317 children have been
reported missing during hostilities. The Office of
the Prosecutor General is currently conducting 28
28/34

19/07/2022

criminal investigations into the abduction and forced
deportation of more than 5,000 Ukrainian children
to Russia, Belarus and the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine. The real number is much higher,
and the Ukrainian Government is continuing to track
and collect data to identify all missing, abducted and
deported children. We repeat our call to the United
Nations and the international community to closely
monitor the situation and assist Ukraine in ensuring
the rapid and safe return of all children who have been
forcibly deported. Ensuring accountability for all grave
violations against children, as well as other war crimes
and crimes against humanity, is paramount. Together
with its partners, Ukraine is sparing no effort to bring
all the perpetrators and their commanders to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Brazil for organizing
today’s open debate. I also thank and commend the
Secretary-General, Special Representative Gamba de
Potgieter, UNICEF and the other briefers, not least
Patrick Kumi, for their contributions.
Malta aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union and the statement
just made by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
We remain concerned about the scale and severity
of the violations committed against children. We
welcome the progress made in engaging with parties to
conflict, as highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/493). We have also taken note of
the newly listed countries of concern. We encourage
the Secretary-General to alert the Security Council
whenever there is credible information that parties are
committing grave violations, and to include it in his
annual report as well.
Malta remains strongly committed to supporting
the integrity and impartiality of the listing mechanism
of the children and armed conflict agenda, while the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must
continue to hold the parties to conflict accountable,
and I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Norway for its leadership of the Group. We deeply
regret that the six grave violations remained prevalent
in 2021. We remain especially concerned about the
increases in the killing and maiming of children, the
recruitment of children and the denial of humanitarian
access. The rise in abductions, reports of rape and other
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

forms of conflict-related sexual violence make it more
imperative than ever to accelerate efforts to strengthen
the monitoring and reporting of such violence against
girls and boys. We condemn them in the strongest
possible terms. Impunity is completely unacceptable.
Gender-inclusive justice involving child victims
or survivors is crucial. Children with disabilities are
also disproportionately affected by armed conflict. We
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGenera1 to ensure that they too are considered in the
implementation of the children and armed conflict
mandate. Internally displaced children must be
guaranteed the same rights and freedoms as all other
children, but they often face discrimination. The reports
of abuse of refugee and migrant children are appalling.
The reintegration of children should be prioritized
and sustainable. That requires a long-term vision that
brings together stakeholders, including Member States,
the United Nations, civil society, financial institutions
and the private sector. They have a key role in designing
and implementing comprehensive and gender-sensitive
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
All parties to conflict must comply with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights. We encourage all Member States to commit to
the Safe Schools Declaration, the Paris Principles and
the Vancouver Principles and to ratify the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Malta and the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General are collaborating to hold a
virtual summer school on children and armed conflict
later this summer, which will lay the groundwork for
diverse individuals working in the field to meaningfully
contribute to the children and armed conflict agenda.
Children and armed conflict will be one of our top
priorities when we join the Security Council in January
2023. We are convinced that this is an area in which we
can contribute in a significant manner.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): First of all, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Government of Brazil
for having convened the Security Council around this
topic. We highly value the pro-family policies of your
Government, Mr. President, and the Christian-based

S/PV.9096

approach of the Administration of President Bolsonaro.
We also wish the best of luck for the upcoming elections.
Unfortunately, from the perspective of its topic,
the meeting that Brazil convened is highly timely. I am
representing a country, Hungary, that is a neighbouring
country to Ukraine, a country that has been at war for
146 days. I am also representing a generation whose
members were born around the end of the 1970s, a
generation that had the hope that we would never have to
experience war from so close. However, unfortunately,
that hope has become an illusion since 24 February,
when the war in Ukraine broke out.
That war definitely brings suffering to Ukraine, but
also to the neighbouring region and the entire European
continent. The war has caused extremely high inflation,
a war-inflation environment in Europe, complete
uncertainty regarding the energy supply in major parts
of the European continent and clearly the threat of a
global crisis when it comes to the food supply.
Those who lose the most because of that war are
definitely children, who clearly lose the enthusiasm of
their childhood and the entire future, or at least a big part
of their future is at risk. Without a doubt, the war causes
enormous physical and mental suffering for children.
As a neighbouring country, from the very beginning
of the war, we received 840,000 refugees. Because of
the conscription regulations in force in Ukraine, those
are clearly families that have been torn apart. They are
therefore mostly mothers, accompanied by children and
sometimes by grandparents. It is really heartbreaking
to see that those families are arriving, leaving their
fathers back at home, with total uncertainty of ever
reuniting in the future.
To help those people fleeing from war, Hungary
has been carrying out the country’s largest-ever
humanitarian aid action in its history. We receive
everyone who would like to come to Hungary, and we
take good care of them, especially the children. We
enrol all the children who will stay in Hungary for the
longer term in kindergartens and schools. We provide
assistance when it comes to language. Our language is
perhaps the most complicated language on Earth. We
therefore definitely have to help the children arriving
to at least have some connection with our language. In
order to create some kind of normal circumstances for
those children, 897 kindergartens, elementary schools
and secondary schools of ours have been involved in the
programme to enrol Ukrainian children. By June, more

22-4307229/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

than 2,000 Ukrainian children had been enrolled in our
kindergartens and schools, and we are ready to also do
the same in the upcoming period of the school year.
I would like to underline that exactly the same
rights as Hungarian children are being enjoyed by
Ukrainian children when it comes to education and
access to health-care services. In addition, we have
provided special treatment in our hospitals to 130
children from Ukraine and a scholarship, fully financed
by the Hungarian State, to 1,000 students from Ukraine
who could not continue their studies in the universities
due to the fact that they were not operational, and we
provide those who pass their school-leaving exam at
the beginning of the summer and cannot continue their
studies in universities with State-financed scholarships.
However, here we come to the really important
question, which is the following. What is the solution
to all the problems that the war has created and to
ending the suffering of those children? It is definitely
one word, that is, peace. As a representative of a
neighbouring country to Ukraine, I would like to urge
the international community to do all that it can and
not to spare any effort to restore peace to our region.
Instead of measures that might prolong the war, we
must do our best to establish an immediate ceasefire
and to finally launch peace talks, because peace talks
are the only way to go forward and to end the suffering
of the people, especially children, in Ukraine.
I would like to warmly thank the Government of
Brazil once again and to wish it the best of luck for
the future.
The President: I thank His Excellency Mr. Szijjártó
for his kind words.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/493) underlines
the unconscionable suffering of children in armed
conflict, which has sadly increased over the past year.
We wish to highlight in particular the significant
rise in sexual violence perpetrated against boys
and girls, as also documented by the All Survivors
Project non-governmental organization. Educational
institutions are increasingly used for military purposes
and are subject to targeted attacks in places such as
Syria, Yemen and Afghanistan. Young girls in particular
face a heightened risk of abduction in, or on the way to,
30/34

19/07/2022

school, such as in the Lake Chad basin region. In the
same vein, pandemic-related school closures increase
the potential for the recruitment of child soldiers, as
children out of school are easy targets.
The war in Ukraine adds another shocking
dimension to the appalling scale of the grave violations
committed against children in conflict. Massive
numbers of Ukraine’s children have been displaced, and
hundreds died, as a result of the Russian aggression.
Reports of the forced separation of families, as well
as the abduction and forced deportation of Ukrainian
children in high numbers to Russian territory, are
particularly alarming and constitute yet another serious
violation of international humanitarian law.
Strengthening accountability is crucial to ending
impunity for grave violations against children. Criminal
investigations and prosecutions should adopt childsensitive approaches, as well as dedicated resources, to
enable the safe and meaningful participation of victims
and survivors in such legal proceedings.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court mandates the Court’s Prosecutor to investigate
and prosecute the conscription, enlistment and use
of child soldiers. Those who recruit children, or use
them, to take active part in hostilities are committing
serious international crimes and must be held to
account. The Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict is another meaningful instrument,
ratified by 172 countries. Despite that broad support,
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict
continues unabated. In order to safeguard children
and protect them from the physical and mental trauma
inflicted by conflict, we need to redouble our efforts
to promote the strict adherence to both the Optional
Protocol and other instruments, including the Paris
Principles and the Vancouver Principles, as well as the
Safe Schools Declaration.
Moreover, in line with its own resolution 2068
(2012), the Security Council should take targeted
measures against parties that persistently violate the
rights of children in armed conflict. We continue
our strong support for the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Its independence and integrity
are crucial to its effectiveness and credibility, which
also includes the objective, consistent and transparent
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

practice of listing parties that have committed grave
violations against children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
annual open debate. I also thank the briefers for sharing
their perspectives.
During
armed
conflicts,
international
humanitarian law requires parties to armed conflicts
to take the measures necessary to protect civilians,
particularly children. This is an obligation that must
be fully honoured by all parties. However, children are
constantly subjected to a host of egregious violations.
Meanwhile, children who are refugees, internally
displaced or stateless as a result of conflicts are more
likely to endure during armed conflicts such severe
violations and other major abuses as recruitment and
use, sexual violence, trafficking and detention.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/493), children continued to face a high number
of serious violations in 2021. The United Nations
documented 23,982 grave violations, the most common
of which were the killing and maiming of children,
followed by the recruitment and use of children
for military purposes, as well as cases of denial of
humanitarian access to them.
Unfortunately, the Middle East, from Afghanistan
to Yemen to Palestine, continues to confront such
horrific violations against children. In Afghanistan,
the United Nations confirmed 2,577 grave violations
against 2,430 children in 2021, including killing and
maiming, sexual violence, abduction, recruitment,
attacks on schools, particularly girls’ schools, and
the intimidation of school personnel. The Taliban
should allow all Afghan children, including girls, to
attend school. As Afghanistan’s neighbour and host to
millions of Afghan refugees, including children, Iran
has provided basic services, such as education and
health, for Afghan children living in Iran.
In Yemen, the United Nations recorded 2,748
serious violations against 800 children in 2021, a large
number of whom were killed and maimed. Iran supports
the truce agreement to end the suffering of the Yemeni
people, including children.
The Israeli regime continues to commit the most
systematic and flagrant violation of children’s rights

S/PV.9096

in the Middle East. In 2021, the United Nations
documented 2,934 grave violations against 1,208
Palestinian children in occupied Palestine and the
Gaza Strip. According to the United Nations report, in
2021, the Israeli regime killed 86 and imprisoned 637
Palestinian children, 85 of whom suffered ill treatment
and violation of due process by the Israeli regime
while incarcerated, with 75 per cent reporting physical
violence. Moreover, the United Nations verified 22
attacks on schools.
These atrocities constitute clear proof of the
commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The perpetrators of such heinous crimes must therefore
be brought to justice.
In conclusion, putting an end to ongoing conflicts,
preventing their re-emergence and guaranteeing the
conflicting parties’ full and effective compliance with
international humanitarian law are all necessary to the
protection of children in armed conflicts. Additionally,
it is imperative to address conflicts’ underlying causes.
Children have frequently been recruited in conflicts
to support their families financially. Furthermore,
such problems as poverty, lack of access to quality
education and employment opportunities, as well as
illegal unilateral sanctions and economic blockades,
continue to play a significant role in such grave
violations. We urge the Secretary-General to conduct
an assessment of the main causes of conflicts, focusing
on the detrimental effects of unilateral sanctions on the
protection of children in such situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg supports the statement of made observer
of the European Union and those made on behalf of the
Groups of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict
and on the Responsibility to Protect. Allow me to
complement those statements with some considerations
in my national capacity.
We thank the Brazilian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing today’s important open debate
and all the briefers for their insightful briefings. In this
context, I would like to reiterate Luxembourg’s full
support for the mandate of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and stress the importance of strengthening the
Office of the Special Representative and continuing to
support the work of UNICEF.

22-4307231/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

The publication of the Secretary-General’s annual
report on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493) and
its consideration by the Security Council is a testament
to the international community’s continued commitment
to the protection of children, a subject that remains
ever relevant. Today’s news is the Russian aggression
against Ukraine. While waiting for the situation in
Ukraine to be included in the next annual report, we
take note of the fact that Ukraine has been added to the
list of countries of concern, with immediate effect.
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified military
aggression against Ukraine has blatantly violated
international law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. The relentless shelling of civilian
targets, including schools and hospitals, by Russian
military forces continues to cause numerous casualties
among the population of Ukraine. Children are
not spared.
On 21 March, the Group of Friends on Children and
Sustainable Development, chaired by Bulgaria, Jamaica
and Luxembourg, issued a joint statement lamenting
the deaths of at least 75 children as a result of the war
in Ukraine. As of 17 July, according to the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, 346 children
have died in this conflict, and this figure is certainly
lower than the actual number of dead children. Russia
must immediately stop its indiscriminate attacks
on densely populated areas, including schools and
hospitals. We call on all States to sign and implement
the Safe Schools Declaration, which provides a relevant
framework for action.
We are also very concerned about reports of the
forced deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia.
Children fleeing the war in Ukraine are at increased
risk of human trafficking and exploitation. It is vital
that these children are protected from becoming victims
of war a second time.
In the light of the terrible suffering of the civilian
population, and in particular of children, we regret that
the Security Council is not in a position to condemn
the war in Ukraine and adopt a draft resolution that
could help put an end to it. That does not exonerate
the perpetrators of war crimes. They will be held
accountable for their actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
32/34

19/07/2022

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Brazil for organizing today’s
debate, and all the briefers for their valuable briefings.
“Children are both our reason to struggle to
eliminate the worst aspects of warfare, and our best
hope for succeeding at it.” (A/51/306, para. 6)
Those were the words of Graça Machel in her seminal
report on the impact of armed conflict on children in
1996. Her words still ring true, as the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/493) demonstrates. We
are deeply concerned about the high number of grave
violations against children. It is particularly alarming
that sexual violence and abductions have increased by
20 per cent.
Switzerland would like to highlight three points.
First, internally displaced children and children abroad
are particularly vulnerable and exposed to grave
violations. We have just heard some examples. Often,
these children are also deprived of their fundamental
rights, such as the right to education. Switzerland calls
for the implementation of Security Council resolution
2601 (2021) which was introduced by Norway and the
Niger, on the protection of education in conflict. We also
call for the adoption of the Safe Schools Declaration by
all States.
Secondly, children associated with armed groups
must be treated as victims. In line with resolution 2427
(2018), we call on all States Members of the United
Nations to prioritize non-judicial measures focused on
rehabilitation and reintegration and to use detention
only as a last resort. Successful reintegration in turn
contributes to sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Commission should treat reintegration as a priority,
also through the theme of mental health and
psychosocial support, and keep the Council informed
of its deliberations.
Thirdly, to protect children in conflict, it is
urgent to preserve the independence, impartiality and
credibility of the instruments at our disposal. The
criteria for listing or delisting parties responsible for
grave violations in the annexes to the annual report
must be clear, consistent and objective. This year the
Secretary-General added Mozambique, Ethiopia and,
following the Russian aggression, Ukraine to the list of
situations of concern and called for the strengthening
of monitoring capacities in the central Sahel region.
The situation of children in these new contexts, as in
22-43072

19/07/2022

Children and armed conflict

all countries mentioned in the report, must receive the
necessary attention from the Council.
Let us also ensure that there are sufficient human
and financial resources for the Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism on the ground everywhere.
To that end, we call on the Council to include childprotection provisions in all relevant mandates and on
Member States to allocate the necessary resources.
Switzerland calls on all parties to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
human rights law and international refugee law. Graça
Machel’s aspiration must become a reality. As a future
member of the Security Council, Switzerland will
continue to work to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. González (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Brazil for having convened this open
debate and in particular to welcome the presence
of the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil,
Ambassador Fernando Simas. Uruguay is very pleased
to see a representative of MERCOSUR presiding over
the Council. We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter.
We also welcome Ms. Catherine Russell of UNICEF
and civil-society representative Patrick Kumi of the
non-governmental organization Similar Ground for
their valuable contributions.
We welcome the report of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, particularly
with regard to the need for greater accountability and a
comprehensive approach to the tasks of demobilization
and reintegration into society.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of Botswana on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect and by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. We wish also
to make a few remarks in our national capacity.
Children and young people are disproportionately
affected by conflicts and atrocities. Serious violations
against children, including recruitment, abductions,
killings, maiming and rape or other form of sexual
violence are atrocity crimes, and it is therefore

S/PV.9096

increasingly necessary to bolster our capacities to
protect children and to put children and young people
at the heart of efforts to protect children and their rights
and needs. That must be central to all efforts for peace,
including mediation and conflict prevention.
The prevailing impunity for serious violations is
unacceptable. It is therefore urgent to adopt laws to
criminalize serious violations at the national level;
to adopt national accountability measures; to step up
the cooperation of Member States with international,
regional and national accountability mechanisms;
and to continue to work to prevent violations through
strategic commitments and specific prevention plans
aimed at mitigating the effects of violence on children.
I should like in that regard to underline the need
for Member States and regional organizations to
bolster their capacities for child protection and commit
to the United Nations in that regard, strengthening
regional partnerships on children and armed conflict,
specifically with the Special Representative and
regional and subregional organizations.
The importance that Uruguay attaches to the
children in armed conflict agenda is linked to its longstanding commitment to respect for and the promotion
of the rights of the child, along with its long history of
participation in United Nations peace operations and of
carrying out tasks involving the protection of civilians,
particularly children.
In that regard, to reaffirm what has already been
stated, Uruguay was one of the main countries behind
the creation of the Group of Friends of Children and
Armed Conflict in 2015, and we currently coordinate
the Group’s activities along with Belgium.
In early 2020, Uruguay adopted its child-protection
policy for personnel deployed in peace operations, thus
becoming the first country in the peacekeeping system
to have a specific policy for the protection of children in
conflict situations. My country received support from
the United Kingdom, UNICEF and Keeping Children
Safe in establishing that policy.
I would also like to underscore the launch by our
country’s Ministry of National Defence in November
2021 of a national guide for child-protection instructors
in peacekeeping missions that includes chapters on
training, prevention, detection, protection of the rights
of victims, the drafting of reports and the screening of
personnel prior to deployment.

22-4307233/34

S/PV.9096

Children and armed conflict

19/07/2022

It is also noteworthy that our national peacekeeping
operations school offers courses on issues related to
child and civilian protection in armed conflict, which
has positioned our country as a regional centre for
education, capacity-building and training.

promotes a robust international architecture for the
protection of the rights of the child in all situations,
including in armed conflict, without any distinction
on the basis of nationality, ethnicity, gender or any
other status.

In conclusion, Uruguay once again calls on those
States that have not yet done so to adhere to the relevant
protocols on the protection of children, including the
Paris Principles, the Vancouver Principles and the
Safe Schools Declaration. We remain at the disposal
of the United Nations and its membership to share
our national experiences in that area and to continue
working together closely on this agenda and, of course,
with full commitment to this presidency.

My country, Ecuador, is also committed to
continuing to devote particular attention to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children who
have fled their homes. Given the difficulties involved in
crossing borders in a safe, orderly and regular manner,
many children who are fleeing zones of conflict
or violence are exposed to criminal smuggling and
trafficking networks.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Brazil for having convened
this open debate, and I would highlight the statements
made by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, and Catherine Russell, Executive
Director of UNICEF, as well as Mr. Patrick Kumi’s
moving testimony.
Ecuador aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and urges the
international community to maximize efforts to promote
and protect the rights of the child in all contexts.
The report of the Secretary-General, António
Guterres, covering the period January to December
2021 (S/2022/493) once again shows that children in
armed conflict constantly suffer serious violations
of their rights, including sexual violence, killings,
maiming, abductions and forced recruitment, among
other intolerable acts of aggression. This is attested to,
for example, in the reports of the Secretary-General
S/2022/397 and S/2022/46, which state that displaced
girls in confined living conditions are more vulnerable
to sexual violence. The international community and
the Security Council must pay particular attention to
those specificities.
As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its three Optional Protocols, Ecuador

34/34

I would underscore the increasing educational
needs of refugee and displaced children, for whom it
is urgent to adopt specific measures for the protection
of schools, teaching personnel and pupils in line with
international law and international humanitarian law,
as well as to proscribe the use of educational facilities
for military purposes.
All of that requires a coordinated response on the
part of the United Nations, in which the Council has
a central role to play, including the monitoring and
implementation of the 13 resolutions on children and
armed conflict, as underscored in the report of the
Secretary-General.
No effort should be spared in freeing abducted and
recruited children, and that must be accompanied by
appropriate measures to reintegrate them into their
communities, as highlighted during this meeting.
Finally, Ecuador has stated that the protection of
children in armed conflict will be a priority during its
membership of the Council in 2023 to 2024. It believes
that the international community has a collective duty
to strengthen its efforts to alleviate the suffering of
the more than 400 million conflict-affected children
throughout the world.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

22-43072
