S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4478th meeting
Wednesday, 27 February 2002, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aguilar Zinser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Yakimov
Mr. Tchatchouwo
Mr. Wang Donghua
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Doutriaux
Mr. Mamadouba Camara
Mr. Corr
Mr. Latona
Mr. Dammen
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Foo
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Rosenblatt

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 20 February 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Yemen to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/184)
Identical letters dated 20 February 2002 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/182)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-26417 (E)

*0226417*

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 6.15 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Sudan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Manis
(Sudan) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Malaysia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation
commends you for convening this meeting of the
Security Council in response to the request of the
Chairman of the Arab Group to consider the current,
very grave situation in Palestine.
Since the Council last debated this issue, the
situation has further deteriorated. The violence there is
threatening to spiral out of control. To date, more than
1,200 people have died since September 2000, more
than 1,000 of them Palestinians. Clearly, with the
certainty of more deaths and injuries in the coming
weeks and months, the situation cannot be allowed to
continue. It is high time for the Council to take
decisive action to immediately ease the tension, deescalate and end the violence, restore calm and provide
a basis for constructive dialogue between the
conflicting parties, which remains the only viable
approach towards a lasting solution to the problem.
Malaysia strongly believes in the Council’s
responsibility with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security. We reject the
argument advanced by some quarters that the United
Nations, and the Council in particular, have no role
whatsoever in intervening on this issue. Because of
this, the Council has over the years been effectively
sidelined and prevented from playing its legitimate role
in the search for peace in the Middle East. If the

2

Council cannot intervene at this critical time, when,
one may ask, will it be allowed to fulfil its
responsibility?
My delegation welcomes the decision of the
Council to discuss the situation in Palestine on a
regular basis. This represents a positive change in the
way it deals with the issue. However, it is not enough
for the Council merely to consider the situation in its
informal consultations, or even in this Chamber, and
then fail to take decisive action to end the violence and
assist in the search for a final resolution of the conflict.
Council members should have realized by now that it is
not enough for the Council to periodically express its
concern about the situation in that troubled land and
then quickly turn its attention away from the problem,
in the hope and on the assumption that it is for the
parties themselves to resolve the conflict.
Clearly, as the tragic events have borne out, that
hope is misplaced and that assumption fallacious. To
continue with this line of approach would be to
continue to ignore the situation indefinitely, with all
the consequent risks to international peace and security.
Continued inaction by the Council is tantamount to
continuing to appease the occupying Power, which can
only deepen the sense of frustration, hopelessness and
despair of the Palestinian people and aggravate the
situation even further. It would also further undermine
the credibility and prestige of the Council.
Last week, when the Secretary-General addressed
the Council, he had chosen his words very carefully,
but he did not fail to describe the situation on the
ground as grim. He justifiably raised the alarm when he
said that we were nearing the edge of the abyss and
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict risked sliding
towards full-fledged war. Malaysia and others had
voiced similar warnings of that grim possibility since
the beginning of the intifada.
The Secretary-General’s warning must be heeded.
Indeed, the entirety of his message to the Council,
based on a sound analysis of the problem, must be
given the attention it deserves. We agree with him that
the issue of security, while important in itself, cannot
be dealt with in isolation. It must be seen in a context,
and that context remains the continued Israeli
occupation and the illegal and unabated expansion of
Jewish settlements on Arab lands. Clearly, the
Secretary-General recognized that, given the deep
mistrust between the two sides, the Palestinians and the

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

Israelis will not be able to find a solution to the
problem, and there is an urgent need for a “third party
role”, as he put it. The situation demands the
intervention of the international community, including
the Council.

have been tabled for Council consideration.
Regrettably, all of these proposals have met with
opposition in the Council. We are convinced that if any
had been acted upon, the situation in Palestine today
would have been vastly different.

As the Council grapples with this issue in the
context of its own responsibility, we would encourage
the Secretary-General and his Special Coordinator,
Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, to intensify their efforts and
consultations with the parties as well as with other
important international actors who can and are
prepared to make a difference in the situation. In this
regard, the ideas being promoted by Saudi Arabia, as
reported in the news media, constitute an important and
welcome contribution by an influential regional actor.
It deserves the serious attention of the international
community in the overall context of finding a
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian Middle
East issue.

We understand that in recent days, an idea was
floated concerning the dispatch of a Council factfinding mission to the area. Unfortunately, it has not
been formally presented to the Council because of a
lack of necessary support from certain important
quarters. We would urge the Council not to abandon
this laudable and technically feasible idea. We hope
that through further consultations, the necessary
political will will be found to authorize such a mission,
in the same way as the Council has sent missions to a
number of conflict areas. Surely, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory deserves the same, if not
greater, attention from the Council as conflict
situations in other parts of the world.

My delegation strongly rejects the approach of
apportioning blame to and placing demands solely
upon President Arafat while ignoring or condoning the
provocative policies of Prime Minister Sharon. We
condemn all forms of violence, including the violence
perpetrated by the military and other security forces of
the occupying Power, which involves, inter alia, house
demolitions, closures of Palestinian National Authority
institutions and other facilities, confiscation and/or
destruction of lands and property, torture of detainees,
extrajudicial killings of targeted Palestinians, which are
on the increase, and continued illegal expansion of
Jewish settlement activities in the occupied territories,
including Al-Quds al-Sharif.

We believe that the Council should use its
tremendous prestige and political clout to influence the
situation, as it has done in other conflict areas. The
world will surely be waiting to see whether, in the face
of the grim situation on the ground, the Council will be
able to muster the necessary political will to do what
needs to be done or will once again fail to rise to the
challenge.

All of these must be put to an end immediately;
they must not be allowed to continue with impunity.
The international community must act to ensure that
the Palestinian people will no longer endure the
grievous violations of their rights and the other
indignities to which they have been subjected. Their
leader, President Yasser Arafat, must be allowed
complete freedom of movement.
Malaysia continues to believe that the United
Nations can intervene effectively by dispatching a
United Nations mission which would monitor the
situation, ease the tension and maintain peace and
security on the ground. More or less similar proposals
involving the establishment of a United Nations or
other international presence to monitor the situation

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia, whom I invite
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely and important meeting on an
issue of deep interest to Member States. Let me add my
congratulations to you personally on the professional
way in which you have led a difficult debate,
particularly so early in your tenure of office in New
York.
Like the Secretary-General, the Australian
Government was deeply alarmed by the escalation in
violence last week between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, and the resulting heavy death toll. At the
highest levels in our Government, we have repeatedly
called for an immediate end to the violence and an
early and effective resumption of negotiations. The
importance of calls like ours does not diminish. There
is no military solution to the situation between the
Israelis and the Palestinians and there is no real

3

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

alternative to a negotiated settlement. Australia
condemns all acts of terrorism. Aimed at innocent
civilians,
terrorism
is
morally
reprehensible,
undermines peace and is tragically futile. It will never
solve the differences between Israelis and Palestinians.
Australia has consistently expressed its support
for efforts to build peace in the region. As we stated as
recently as November last year in our statement in the
general debate to the General Assembly, we remain
committed to a negotiated settlement based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. We remain — and we will
say this as often as we need to and for as long as
necessary — strongly committed to the territorial
integrity of Israel and the right of the people of Israel
to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries, free from threats or acts of force, as
affirmed in resolution 242 (1967). We are, of course,
equally committed to the application of this principle
to all States in the region.
Australia has consistently recognized the proper
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination.
We expect that a comprehensive, just and durable
resolution of the region’s conflict necessarily will meet
the legitimate aspiration of the Palestinians to a
homeland of their own, in accordance with the
principles of resolution 242 (1967).
While a cessation of the violence is paramount,
the international community should not lose sight of
the importance of other issues identified by the
Secretary-General. We recognize the heavy burden that
the closures and movement restrictions have placed on
the Palestinian people. An alleviation of these
circumstances is essential to assisting peace and
economic prosperity in the region.
The international community can give political
support to rebuilding confidence, but it is at least
equally important that it remain committed to a longterm process of economic assistance. It is vital that the
people most affected by violence see the benefits that
would come from an end to violence and a return to
economic development and the prospect of a better life.
Australia has a long-standing programme to
provide development assistance, in coordination with
other donor countries, to support the social and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and Gaza in areas where we have expertise,
such as agriculture, health and education, as well as

4

assistance to build the Palestinian Authority’s legal,
agricultural and vocational training capacity. This
assistance is designed to deliver tangible benefits to
those most in need.
Australia has consistently supported international
efforts to achieve peace and security and we will
continue to do so. In this respect, let me add that, like
others, we are encouraged by the reports of new
thinking attributed to Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia. However, violence must be halted and lead to a
durable ceasefire in order to rebuild the confidence
necessary for a return to negotiations. International
efforts must be directed at assisting building the
confidence of both sides.
The present situation is difficult, but we do have a
viable set of principles to guide the parties back to the
path of a negotiated peace. The recommendations of
the Mitchell report and of the Tenet plan are the vital
and necessary steps to end the current violence. The
Australian Government urges the unconditional
resumption of security cooperation between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority and urges both sides to exert
full and complete efforts to implement all the
recommendations of the Mitchell report.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Australia for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Chile. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Valdés (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As this is
the first time that I am speaking during your
presidency, Sir, let me first congratulate you on taking
the initiative to organize this open debate on a conflict
whose persistence and special implications are a matter
of concern to the entire international community.
For that reason, Chile wishes today to add its
voice in this Chamber to those that have expressed
their deep concern at the dangerous and intolerable
situation of violence in Israel, Palestine and the
occupied territories and to warn of its grave potential
consequences for the region.
My country regrets that, despite the parties’
acceptance in earlier negotiations of the principle of
peaceful coexistence, dignity and security, for the past
18 months they have once again been locked
irresponsibly in a spiral of destruction and death that is

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

having tragic consequences for the civilian populations
of Israel and Palestine.
Chile strongly supports the position enunciated in
the recent statement of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, on the conflict and fully agrees that the main
problems to be resolved are the illegal occupation of
territory, the need to put a rapid end to the acts of
violence and terror and an early solution to the
economic hardships of the Palestinian people. In this
regard, Chile agrees that the political, security and
economic issues are interrelated and should be
addressed in a comprehensive manner.
We urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
make every effort to bring about the immediate
cessation of all acts of violence, returning as soon as
possible to negotiations under the peace process which
the international community has proposed to that end,
contained principally in the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan — initiatives that been followed up by
neither party.
The situation today, however, requires urgent
measures that go beyond the issue of how to implement
the Tenet or Mitchell schemes. There is now a dire
need for the parties to restore the minimum conditions
of mutual respect needed to ensure that the negotiations
are held under equal conditions. To that end, therefore,
we request the Security Council to make every effort to
promote such a rapprochement. The Security Council
must fully assume the responsibilities assigned to it by
the Charter.
Chile reiterates once again the need for a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East
based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on
the principle of land for peace. We also wish to
underscore the critical role of the Palestinian Authority,
which continues to be the legitimate and indispensable
partner for peace and must be fully protected.
My country recognizes the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to an independent, viable and
democratic State, as well as the right of Israel to exist
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
We appeal to the parties to abandon rigid positions that
do nothing to help place dialogue above violence and
to refrain from taking unilateral steps that might affect
the course of the dialogue and/or prejudice the final
outcome of the talks.

Chile values and supports the efforts being made
by the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to persuade
the parties to end the violence and return to the
negotiating table. It also appreciates the contributions
being made to that end by other international actors
who have proposed new and interesting ideas for
consideration — such as that put forward by the Crown
Prince of Saudi Arabia — and urges them to continue
to assist the parties.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Ukraine. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Ukraine is seriously
concerned over the extremely dangerous situation in
the Middle East, which has been steadily deteriorating
since September 2000. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict
has now reached its most critical point, and risks
sliding into full-fledged war.
Ukraine strongly condemns the continued
violence, including terrorism, which almost every day
produces numerous additional victims and increasingly
aggravates the situation in the entire region. I would
like to add my voice to those of delegations that have
expressed their condolences to the families of all killed
and wounded Palestinians and Israelis.
Hundreds of dead and thousands of wounded on
both sides, considerable damage to the infrastructure,
and a dire economic situation and living conditions
among the population in the occupied Palestinian
territories — those are the consequences of the 17month-long confrontation. Obviously, the path of
violence is not bringing the parties closer to the
achievement of their goals and contradicts the true
interests and aspirations of both Israelis and
Palestinians.
Ukraine is convinced that there is no alternative
for both Palestinians and Israelis but to go back to the
negotiating table. It is really regrettable that the
favourable opportunity that existed after the speech by
Chairman Arafat on 16 December last year, which was
followed by three weeks that witnessed a major decline
in violence, was not utilized to move forward with the
political dialogue.
The current dangerous situation requires that
Israel and the Palestinian Authority take a number of
steps to restore calm and resume dialogue. We call on

5

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

the Palestinian leadership to take urgent and decisive
action to prevent terrorist acts, cease the violence and
stop the activities of terrorist networks. At the same
time, Ukraine condemns the excessive use of force and
the reoccupation of Palestinian-controlled territories. It
is our firm conviction that the practice of extrajudicial
killings, devastating raids into Palestinian-controlled
territory and attacks on heavily populated areas must
stop immediately. Any Israeli settlement activities on
Palestinian territories, as well as closures and economic
sanctions against the Palestinians, should also be
terminated.
We strongly believe that the Palestinian Authority
and its elected Chairman, Yasser Arafat, are legitimate
partners for Israel to resume negotiations with in order
to stop the violence and build peace. Any attempts to
weaken them could only undermine the prospects for
peace.
We noted the recent decision of the Israeli
Security Cabinet to lift the blockade on the
headquarters of Yasser Arafat. That is a positive step in
the right direction. However, we believe that all the
restrictions on the freedom of movement of the
Chairman of the Palestinian Authority should be lifted.
Today as never before, the parties should
recommit themselves to the renewal of the peace
process based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace, as well as other principles laid down at the
Madrid Conference and in the Oslo Agreements.
Lasting peace can be achieved only through the
establishment of a viable, independent and democratic
Palestinian State and through ending the occupation of
Palestinian territories. On the other hand, it is also true
that lasting peace can be achieved only through the
reaffirmation and full recognition of the irrevocable
right of Israel to live in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders.
Ukraine continues to believe that full
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations and
Tenet understandings could bring the violence to an
end, restore mutual trust and confidence and create the
necessary conditions for the resumption of the IsraeliPalestinian negotiating process.
It goes without saying that the primary objective
for the parties should be to stop the violence and to
prevent attacks against civilians. However, it is
becoming increasingly obvious that the security issues

6

cannot be effectively addressed if they alone are
tackled. We do agree with the Secretary-General that:
“Unless both parties have a political horizon on
which their hopes for peace and an improved
livelihood can be based, there will be no enduring
ceasefire.” (S/PV.4474, p. 13)
In that regard we are encouraged by a number of
new initiatives and ideas — which include the political
perspective — that have recently been put forward
from various quarters. We see merit in proposals
coming from the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and
from European countries, as well as in the so-called
Peres-Abu’Alaa peace plan. Those proposals might
bring about new prospects for peace, and should
therefore be carefully considered by the parties and the
international community.
One of the major obstacles to peace in the Middle
East is the intensifying mutual distrust and total lack of
confidence between both the leadership and the peoples
of the two nations. Ukraine believes that the chances
for success of the peace process and for a final
settlement of the conflict will be significantly
strengthened by launching a wide process aimed at
developing
confidence
between
Israelis
and
Palestinians, engaging the intellectual, religious,
scientific, public, social, economic and other sectors of
their civil societies. My country is ready to assist the
parties in that regard.
The gravity of the present situation in the Middle
East requires more decisive engagement by the
international community, a more active role by the
Security Council, and renewed diplomatic efforts by
the co-sponsors of the peace process and by all other
international actors in order to assist the two parties to
stop the violence and to restore the peace dialogue. We
welcome the activities of the representatives of the
United States, the Russian Federation, the European
Union and the United Nations Special Coordinator —
the so-called “Quartet” — and call on them to intensify
their efforts. We also consider the personal
involvement of the Secretary-General in the process of
finding a settlement to the Middle East question to be a
critically important factor. We support his mediation
activities and encourage him to continue them.
Finally, the Security Council cannot remain
silent, and should give an adequate and prompt
response to the extremely dangerous situation in the

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

region. We expect that the Council will be in a position
to take an effective decision in that regard shortly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
India. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Sharma (India): Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. We would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul of Mauritius for his
successful stewardship of the Council last month.
We associate ourselves with the statement made
by South Africa on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. As we are deeply concerned at the recent
developments, we thought it necessary also to share our
sentiments with the Security Council.
The tragic cycle of violence that has engulfed the
Middle East region since September 2000 has been
very damaging to peace and stability. It is a source of
deep concern to all. This violence has led to the most
tragic loss of hundreds of lives and grievous injuries to
thousands. It has derailed the Middle East peace
process and severely dented trust and confidence
between the parties, without which there cannot be
forward movement on negotiated agreements about
interim and final status issues. The longer the violence
continues, the greater the danger that extremist and
radical tendencies will be strengthened to the detriment
of prospects for a peaceful resolution. That is why it is
essential to exercise the utmost restraint, to eschew
violence and to shun all kinds of acts that could
destabilize the peace process.
The unfortunate situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, exacerbated by the incidents of
provocation and excessive use of force, underlines the
urgent need to restore calm and peace there. India has
consistently stood by the Palestinian people. It has
actively supported peace initiatives in the Middle East.
India is committed to a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region, based on United Nations Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. We support the inalienable
and legitimate right of the Palestinian people to a
homeland. We recognize the right of all States of the
region, including Israel and Palestine, to exist
peacefully within secure and internationally recognized
boundaries.

An important issue that has vitiated the
atmosphere has been the establishment and expansion
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The rapid growth and expansion of
settlements and the establishment of new ones since the
signing of the Oslo Accords and the establishment of
the Palestinian Authority undermine mutual confidence
as well as the credibility of the peace process. We trust
that Israel will respect the overwhelming sentiment of
the international community for a freeze on all
settlement activity.
We remain convinced that, under the leadership
of President Arafat, the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people, for which they have waged a long
struggle, can be realized. We remain vitally interested
in peace, development and stability in the region and
are ready to assist in whatever way we can.
We believe that the Mitchell report and the Tenet
plan are means to enable the transition from the current
situation to the negotiating table, where the modalities
of ending the Israeli occupation and final status issues
must be resolved.
Violence and terrorism have to be abjured; there
can be no justification for such acts. We believe that,
given will and determination, and a commitment to
settle disputes peacefully, no odds are insurmountable,
no goals too far. Ultimately it is the parties themselves
that have to shoulder the major responsibility for
achieving a permanent and lasting solution. A spirit of
accommodation and political will must imbue the
negotiation process. The parties must harness all their
energies to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in
their vital mutual interest.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Fadaifard (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
first congratulate you on the assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of February
and express my full confidence in your leadership and
ability to steer the work of the Council. I should also
commend the Ambassador of Mauritius for the able
and effective manner in which he conducted the work
of the Council last month.
Once again the ongoing Israeli repression of the
Palestinians has warranted another open debate — and

7

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

possibly an action — by the Security Council.
Excessive and disproportionate measures adopted by
the Israeli Army, in full disregard for any established
principles of international law and humane standards,
continue to take a heavy toll on Palestinian civilians.
Israel’s resort to state-of-the art weapons, such as F-16
warplanes, Apache helicopter gunships and heavy
tanks, to target Palestinian installations and invade
civilian areas in the occupied territories, have outraged
the international community in general and the Islamic
world in particular. Suffocating closures and the siege
imposed on Palestinian people and officials are further
worsening the situation.
The continuation of targeted assassinations and
the bulldozing of civilians’ homes by Israel brought an
end to a few weeks of relative calm in December and
January and have once again demonstrated that Israeli
repressive acts lie at the origin of each new cycle of
violence. Such acts have frustrated efforts made by
Western envoys and have also pushed back some
positive initiatives taken by some Western countries
that could provide new opportunities for addressing the
flagrant injustice the Palestinian people have faced for
decades.
At the same time, it is unfortunate that Israel,
through a massive disinformation campaign, which
includes resorting to levelling accusations against other
States, aims at exacerbating the tension in the region in
an attempt to cover up its campaign of aggression
against the Palestinian people and undermine the
support of international public opinion for them.
Occupation lies at the very origin of the
Palestinian conflict and overall tension and instability
in the Middle East. The uprising of the Palestinian
people constitutes a legitimate response to the
occupation and aims at achieving their right of selfdetermination in their own homeland. The shocking
developments over the past few months have brought
closer into view the fact that, unless the principal cause
of conflict is effectively addressed, the crisis will never
subside.
Undoubtedly, repressive acts by Israel are prone
to further exacerbate the Middle East crisis unless the
international community and the United Nations
intervene immediately to stop the brutal campaign
against civilians carried out by Israeli armed forces.
We fully concur with the Secretary-General, who,
in his latest speech in the Council, alerted the

8

international community to the possibility of the
region’s nearing the edge of the abyss. We further
concur with him that security cannot be dealt with in
isolation and that it has to be addressed alongside key
political issues, particularly the question of land, and
economic and social issues, including the increasingly
critical and desperate conditions of the Palestinians.
We believe that the international community
should stand by the Palestinians and lend support to the
establishment of a viable, sovereign Palestinian State,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. A complete end
to foreign occupation and the full restoration of all of
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination and to return
to their homeland, should be the main pillars of any
solution.
There is no doubt that the Security Council is
expected to act appropriately, with a view to putting an
end to the violations by the occupying Power and to
paving the way for bringing those responsible to
justice. Regrettably, the exercise and the threat of
exercise of the veto have so far prevented the Council
from discharging its constitutional responsibility with
respect to so crucial an issue, to the profound
disappointment of the international community.
Undoubtedly, the inaction of the Security Council is
emboldening Israel to defy the wishes of the
international community, which are reflected, inter alia,
in numerous General Assembly resolutions.
The lingering violence in the occupied territories
has further demonstrated the need for an international
protection force to be established by the Council, with
a view to protecting defenceless Palestinian civilians.
The resort to the veto last year to discard draft
resolutions intended to authorize the establishment of
such a force proved a disservice, as can be seen from
the worsening situation in the area. The presence of
such a force on the ground could have forestalled more
violence and more bloodshed and saved many precious
lives.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran for the
kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): The Government of
Japan is deeply concerned at the fact that the vicious
circle of violence that has been raging in the Middle
East for more than a year has recently intensified, with
large numbers of casualties on both the Israeli and
Palestinian sides.
The Government of Japan once again urges the
Palestinian Authority, led by Chairman Arafat, to make
the utmost effort to suppress extremists. It also urges
the Government of Israel to refrain from actions such
as attacks against facilities of the Palestinian Authority,
which do not contribute to calming the situation, and to
make constructive efforts, including a genuine dialogue
with the Palestinian Authority.
As Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated before
the Council last week, it is imperative for the
international community to work with the parties in a
concerted manner towards a peaceful settlement of this
conflict. He also stressed the importance of addressing
security, political, economic and social issues together.
Japan has called for both parties to return to the
negotiating table, in the spirit of the Oslo Accords as
well as the Mitchell recommendations and the Tenet
understandings. Recently, the Secretaries-General of
the three ruling coalition parties of Japan met with the
leaders of the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, conveying letters to them from Prime
Minister Junichiro Koizumi, and urged both parties to
resume negotiations.
The Government of Japan also expresses once
again its appreciation for the active efforts being made
by the United States of America and European and
Arab countries, as well as the United Nations, towards
a peaceful settlement of the conflict. In this connection,
we welcome the fact that initiatives have recently been
proposed from several quarters, in particular by Crown
Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. This is indeed an
indication of the international community’s strong
desire for the resolution of the conflict.
In addition to its efforts aimed at the settlement of
the conflict, the international community has an
important responsibility to alleviate the economic and
social difficulties confronting the Palestinians as a
result of the present grave situation on the ground.
Since 1993, the Government of Japan has provided
economic assistance to the Palestinians amounting to
more than $600 million. Since September 2000, it has
provided approximately $50 million in emergency

assistance to alleviate the serious economic hardships
of the Palestinian people. In this connection, I regret
that facilities and equipment provided by international
donors, including Japan, were damaged in the Israeli
attacks against facilities of the Palestinian Authority.
In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on 11
September last, there is a new momentum for
cooperation among the international community which
transcends religious, racial and cultural differences. On
the question of peace in the Middle East, it is important
that both parties seize this opportunity to redouble their
efforts to move forward, with a view to the attainment
of a durable peace in the region, based on a spirit of
conciliation and cooperation. The Government of
Japan, for its part, is determined to do its utmost to
support such efforts by the two parties.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you our
thanks for presiding over the work of the Council. I
wish you every success in your work.
I should like also to express our gratitude to you
for having convened this meeting, in order to consider
the very dangerous situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. Indeed, the
Zionist entity, in its military actions and acts of
aggression, has exceeded all limits. Its acts should be
described as terrorism, with all that implies in terms of
great loss of human life and of property. Everyone is
fully aware of these acts, which cannot be compared
with acts of general terrorism perpetrated by
individuals.
Once more the Security Council is undergoing a
test with respect to the maintenance of international
peace and security: its credibility and effectiveness are
being put to the test, along with those of its member
States. Here, I would recall that as of 15 February 2002
the Permanent Observer Mission of Palestine has sent
97 messages to the Security Council calling on it to
intervene and to put a stop to Zionist terrorism and
massacres in Palestine. But, unfortunately, the Council
has been unable to take action to put an end to the
tragedy. This, we believe regretfully, will continue
because of United States hegemony. That State
provides military, political and media cover for the

9

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

crimes perpetrated by the Zionist entity against the
people of Palestine.
International relations are now going through a
very difficult and complex negative phase because of
the negative concept of force and the effects of that
concept on law, and because of flagrant disrespect for
international law on the part of certain permanent
members of the Security Council. This results in a
departure from the laws of justice and equity when the
Council considers a situation. The international legal
underpinning of human civilization is threatened with
destruction; there is a trend towards rapidly enshrining
the law of the jungle.
We have noted a number of negative phenomena
that have always been part of the international legal
system represented by the Security Council. Let me
describe the most flagrant of these. The international
system has been dominated by a policy of force and
opportunism, in spite of the checks and balances and
the joint responsibility set out in the Charter and in
international law. The second is the political double
standard that is applied and pursued as a matter of
policy. The third is the undermining of the stability of
international law and the introduction of aberrant and
alien interpretations of international rules and laws to
further the policies of certain influential States
members of the Security Council. The result is a set of
dangerous realities that have a negative affect on
international relations in general and that, because of
recent world developments, have created dangerous,
impossible situations.
This leads, first of all, to erroneous
interpretations that are not based on any legal concept
of self-defence as set out in the Charter and that do not
accord with the interpretations of the International Court
of Justice or with the conditions under which States,
individually or collectively, may have recourse to that
concept in order to defend themselves. The principle of
self-defence is a noble one; it is one of the vital
foundations of international law. But it has been made
into a political tool to justify acts of aggression, which
is insolently used by the Zionist entity every day in the
face of the world community: it claims self-defence as
it seeks to bring down the Palestinian people through
killing, starvation and siege. Thus it destroys legal
principles that are the basis of the Charter and other
stable principles of international law.

10

Secondly, we see flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law and the principles of
human rights, along with military actions and
occupation. That was mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, in his statement to the
Council on 18 January 2002, and was reaffirmed by
Ms. Mary Robinson, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in a 19 February
2002 statement to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
The Zionist entity’s daily practices in the occupied
Arab territories and its acts of aggression against the
Palestinian people are a flagrant violation of all four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and pose a dangerous
threat to the very foundations of international law and
the principles of human rights.
Thirdly, it leads to a distortion of the right of
peoples to self-determination and of their inalienable
right to resist occupation and to defend themselves,
their territorial integrity and the integrity of their
people, as set out in the Charter and reaffirmed by
many Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and by the International Court of Justice.
That premeditated, intentional distortion of these rights
is being carried out with help from the vast power that
a major Power holds over information; that Power
places all its resources at the service of the Zionist
entity, dangerously distorting the distinction between
the victim and the aggressor. The crimes perpetrated by
the Zionist entity’s forces of occupation against
unarmed Palestinians go beyond the cruellest crimes in
the history of colonialism, including the use of
sophisticated warplanes against Palestinian civilians in
their homes, towns and villages. Since the beginning of
the occupation in 1948, the sadism and brutality of the
Zionist occupation have caused the deportation of 68
per cent of the Palestinian people: 4.5 million Palestinian
refugees are waiting to return to their homeland. The
Zionists have also uprooted more than 150,000 olive
trees. The millions of Palestinians who remain in
Palestine are in places where children and pregnant
women are killed every day and where gravely ill
civilians perish daily because of the many checkpoints
and the inhuman conditions they must constantly
endure.
The cities and towns of Palestine have become a
huge prison in which the Palestinian people are
confined. As with the apartheid system in South Africa,
this is State aggression and State terrorism. When the
Palestinian people attempt to resist this occupation and

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

terrorism and to claim their inalienable rights and their
land, they are forced to pay the price: the United States
and the Zionist entity claim that their acts are terrorist
acts. Can there be any more flagrant attempt to portray
the victim as an aggressor? Most people throughout the
world would reject this. These practices cannot be used
as a pretext for violating stable international laws,
which grant peoples the right to self-determination and
the right to resist occupation. In the final analysis, one
cannot solve problems by military means, by weapons,
bombs and missiles, but by applying the rules and
norms of international law.
In conclusion, today world Governments and
States, the United Nations Organization and the
Security Council must adopt a position defending the
rights of the Palestinian people: the right to recover all
their land, the right of return of refugees and the right
to the return of all other occupied Arab territories. Now
and in the future, the Security Council must fully
assume its responsibilities and take the proper
measures in accordance with the Charter and the
foundations of international law in order to put an end
to this terrorism and to compel the occupying force to
fully comply with international humanitarian law. It
must do so immediately, taking measures to protect the
Palestinian people. Otherwise, everyone will, without
exception, bear the historic responsibility for the
deterioration of the international legal system, and the
ship that carries us all will simply sink.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Iraq for his kind words addressed to
me.
I now call on the representative of Argentina. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Sir, for the timely holding of this open
meeting. We congratulate you on presiding over this
meeting, and we extend our appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius for his
stewardship during the month of January.
Argentina, in line with its commitment to
maintaining international peace and security, is closely
following the situation in the Middle East, which is
extremely grave and deteriorates day by day. The tragic
dimensions of the situation should not, however, cause
us to abandon the necessary quest for a negotiated
settlement to the conflict and for the protection of the

lives and rights of the civilian population. Every
possible effort must be made to ensure that the parties
regain mutual confidence and return to the negotiating
table in line with path traced by the Mitchell
recommendations and the Tenet plan.
It is our view that the security issues are
extremely important. However, it does seem to us that
they cannot be resolved in isolation but must be placed
within a broader context so that we can simultaneously
and comprehensively address the underlying political
questions. We particularly appreciate the recent
statement by the Secretary-General, and we share his
concerns.
We believe that urgent action is necessary and of
great priority in order to put an end to violence and the
disproportionate use of force. The parties, together
with the international community, should extensively
and flexibly study ideas and proposals that would get
the peace process back on track. In this regard, the
proposal of the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, as has
been mentioned by a large part of the international
community, offers fresh hope for peace and must be
examined by both parties in a constructive, forwardlooking manner.
Argentina maintains its traditional support for the
process established by resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the Madrid Conference, the Oslo Accords and
the other agreements and understandings between the
parties. Argentina wishes to reaffirm its support for a
stable and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on
the Palestinian people’s inalienable right to selfdetermination and to an independent and viable State,
as well as for Israel’s right to live in peace with its
neighbours
within
secure
and
internationally
recognized borders. In this context, we add our voice to
the international community’s exhortation to maintain
the role properly belonging to the President of the
Palestinian Authority, Yasser Arafat, as the legitimate
interlocutor for his people.
Until mutual confidence has been restored
between the parties, the international community and
the Security Council must act in concert to find a
solution to the conflict and to help the parties resume
the path of dialogue. The United Nations has a
historical responsibility towards Palestine and a central
role in the urgent efforts to assist the Middle East peace
process.

11

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

We urge the parties once again to return to the
negotiating table, encouraged by a political readiness
for compromise and reciprocal concessions, since the
path of peace is the only option for all people living in
the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Argentina for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Allow me at the outset to
present to you, Sir, our congratulations on assuming the
presidency of the Council. We wish you every success.
Turkey has already aligned itself, yesterday, with
the
statement
delivered
by
the
Permanent
Representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union. It was a skilfully crafted text reflecting our
main concerns with regard to the situation in the
Middle East. This being so, we deem it worthwhile to
bring forth the following at this gathering of the
Security Council.
It was not long ago that we met in this Chamber,
condemned violence and terrorism in the strongest
possible terms and warned the Israeli and the
Palestinian parties about the then looming threat of an
escalation of confrontation.
It is with great regret, therefore, that we note
today the sheer lack of any advance in warding off this
trend. Rather, the grim realities on the ground confirm
the frightening picture the Secretary-General brought
to the fore during a recent Council meeting, on 21
February. We add our voice to the Secretary-General’s
call and urge the parties to do everything in their power
to get off this hook of spiralling violence, move away
from confrontation and return to the negotiating table.
It is evident that this dynamic of violence and
retaliation must stop, lest we run the risk of a fullfledged war. We believe it is incumbent upon the
leaders of both parties to exercise maximum restraint
right now. And it is incumbent upon us, the
international community, to spare no effort in helping
the parties to overcome this vicious circle, which leads
nowhere other than to treacherous grounds.
Turkey, for its part, continues to encourage all
new and constructive ideas which have a fair and

12

realistic chance of application. We also believe that the
recommendations of the Mitchell report and the Tenet
understandings embody the right political instruments
and are still the right vision. Through them, peace can
be achieved on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
Let me highlight here that both parties have
agreed on the intrinsic even-handedness of the report
and the understandings, though they have yet to
implement them. After all, the only way to peace and
security is through meaningful dialogue. There cannot
be a military solution to this problem.
The main responsibility lies with the parties
themselves. We call on them to take the long view, to
see that there is a brighter future befitting the long and
honourable history of both nations. The future is not
the one depicted in a photograph on the front page of
yesterday’s New York Times: Palestinian fathers
handing Kalashnikov rifles to their four-year-old sons
cannot herald a future that we want to head for, and
this image should not be allowed to reign over the
imaginations of new and coming generations. There is,
and always will be, a much better way.
A while ago, I stressed the importance of
statesmanship and restraint. In this regard, it is a
welcome development that the Palestinian leadership
has arrested the suspected criminals in the
assassination of the Israeli Minister of Tourism,
Mr. Rehavam Ze’evi. We hope that justice will be
brought to bear on the perpetrators of this heinous
crime. Such concrete steps should also be taken against
the perpetrators of other terrorist crimes against the
Israeli people. The security officials of both parties
should cooperate in earnest with a view to avoiding
renewed terrorist acts.
The decision on the part of the Israeli
Government to withdraw its tanks from Chairman
Arafat’s compound is welcome, yet it needs to do
more. Turkey has always believed that putting
restrictions on Mr. Arafat, thus lessening his room to
manoeuvre and thereby hampering his propensity for
action, is counterproductive. Therefore, we believe that
such restrictions must be lifted, as Chairman Arafat is
the legitimate leader of the Palestinians and the only
interlocutor.
The establishment of a just and viable peace in
the Middle East remains the shared goal of the

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

international community. Turkey, for its part, has
always been a vocal and energetic supporter of the
peace process and will continue to act as a facilitator.
We welcome the efforts of the United Nations, the
“Quartet” and others. This having been said, we
consider greater American involvement to be key in
putting the process back on track and restoring the
brighter prospects that we have lost along the way.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Turkey for his kind words.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saudi
Arabia, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to associate myself with
those who preceded me in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are convinced that, by
virtue of your wisdom, competence and skill, you will
be able to lead the work of the Council to success. We
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Mauritius for having led the work of the Security
Council so skilfully during the last month.
No one in the world today can deny that what the
Palestinian people are enduring in the occupied
territories is one of the worst forms of injustice, racial
persecution, occupation and systematic terrorism in the
history of mankind. The Palestinians are subjected to
injustice, oppression and domination in the view of the
entire world, and Israel flouts all resolutions of
international legitimacy and defies the most
fundamental human rights. Despite all the international
resolutions that have been adopted against Israel, none
of them has been implemented and Israel has not been
compelled to comply with any of them.
Israel claims that it seeks peace and aspires to
good-neighbourliness on the basis of security, and that
the Palestinians do not seek peace and are endangering
its citizens. However, it is the Arabs who seek peace
and good-neighbourly relations and are the ones who
made peace a strategic option. Therefore, the initiative
of the Crown Prince and Deputy Prime Minister was
welcomed and supported throughout the world. The
world was convinced that the demands of the Arabs
include reclaiming their lands in the Palestinian
occupied territories, the Golan Heights and Shebaa’
Farms in Lebanon, in accordance with international
resolutions, as well as regaining the legitimate

Palestinian rights and putting an end to the Israeli
occupation. Israel created new pretexts regarding its
security, and it has brandished those pretexts in the
face of all those seeking peace, thus trying to obstruct
any attempt to implement the resolutions of the United
Nations.
This has been Israel’s policy. Even the application
of international legality is subjected to Israel’s own
concepts of security. No one denies that every State has
a right to ensure the security of its people, but what
security is Israel speaking of? Is it an exclusive right of
Israel that excludes all other peoples in the region? Is it
to be carried out in the absence of peace while
occupation continues? Israel deprives Arabs of their
rights and water, expands its settlements, seeks to
dominate others, imposes a blockade on Palestinians
and prevents them from working, all for security
reasons? Can Israel demolish houses, destroy fields and
crops and carry out a policy of displacement and
forcible expulsions, all for security reasons?
In view of these facts, we ask: where is security
for Palestinians? Every Palestinian should have
security. As Palestinians have suffered from the
inhuman practices to which they are subjected every
day, the pretext of Israel’s security is total disregard of
the security needs of Palestinians and Arabs.
Israel has no desire for peace and no desire to
settle the Middle East problem or to comply with
international resolutions, and thus it drags the
international community into a vicious circle of
security considerations to prevent it from considering
the very essence of the Middle East problem, which
lies in the Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands. To
continue its occupation and oppression of those lands,
Israel has prevented the recognition of the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people and obstructed the
Security Council. Israel is aware of all of this, and the
international community knows that Israel is seeking to
promote its security at the expense of preventing any
attempt to examine the occupation.
Israel’s oppression of Palestinians and its
repeated statements regarding Palestinian violence
should lead us to ask what causes have led to that
violence, which are Israel’s unwillingness to seek
peace and its desire to circumvent the peace process. It
is seeking to avoid any withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories and Jerusalem and to expand its
presence in the occupied territories and beyond.

13

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

What can justify this violence? The Palestinian
violence is merely a response to Israeli terrorism and
the ongoing occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands.
It is an expression of bitterness and frustration at many
years of waiting and expectation, which has made
Palestinians lose hope for a peaceful solution in the
face of Israel’s stonewalling, reneging on its
commitments, and acts of repression, reprisal and
collective punishment, in flagrant defiance of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the
principle of land for peace and the many agreements
and accords it has concluded in this regard.
Israel’s objective has been and remains to expel
the Arab people from Palestine and to occupy even
more Palestinian territory in order to establish an
exclusive State. That objective is the real foundation of
Israel’s current policy and of all its programmes against
the Palestinian people, subjected to hateful occupation.
Israel’s assassination of Palestinians is aimed at
eliminating an entire people motivated by the desire to
survive and to regain its rights. It is no coincidence that
Israeli forces are seeking to dam the sources of the
Palestinian people’s resistance. They take Palestinian
women and children in an effort to prevent the creation
of new militants and, by precluding the emergence of a
new generation, to make Palestinians believe that they
have no future.
The current Israeli Government does not hesitate
to use any form of violence, which it justifies under
pretexts of legality. In this case, Israel cannot arrogate
to itself a legitimate right by monopolizing the
violence. Palestinian violence is a response to Israeli
violence and is recognized as resistance to occupation
under international law.
The events of the last 18 months have proven that
Israel’s hope that military force can thwart Arab claims
is misplaced. History shows that no Power, whatever
its might, can dominate forever. Israel’s domination
today contravenes the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law. All peoples must enjoy
their rights and history confirms that no community,
whatever its military might, can monopolize peace,
security and sovereignty over other territories or usurp
the rights of others.
We cannot allow the current situation to continue.
If it does, the frustration and anger will only increase
and give rise to further violence and extremist actions
on both sides, making it impossible to obtain the final

14

objective of peace. The situation is explosive. Israel’s
military terrorism and the reaction of the Palestinian
people have claimed numerous victims. Both parties
clearly need external assistance to break the cycle of
violence and to prevent this volatile situation from
deteriorating further. If we fail to bring the parties back
to the negotiating table, the situation may well spiral
out of control.
We fully agree with the statement of the
Secretary-General to the effect that the situation in the
region is extremely serious, that bitterness and mutual
distrust are being exacerbated every day and that the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict could deteriorate into total
war. We are truly at the edge of the abyss. We agree
that the fundamental problem lies in the Israeli
occupation, which has led to an escalation of violence
and terrorism in the region and to terrible economic
deprivation and suffering. All these problems are
related to attempts to identify the issue merely as one
of security. A solution defined on that basis cannot
succeed. Security cannot be sought independently of
other issues. It must be addressed side by side with
other basic political issues. If it is not, we will see a
renewed and even worse exchange of violence.
The deterioration of the situation in the
Palestinian occupied territories is fraught with serious
consequences of international scope. The situation
requires international efforts to restore peace and
security in the area to be stepped up. The parties must
settle the conflict through the rigorous implementation
of Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The total
withdrawal of the Israeli forces of occupation from the
territories occupied in 1967 will ensure security and
stability and allow the Palestinian people to exercise its
right to self-determination and to create its own State,
with Jerusalem as its capital. A withdrawal from the
Sheba’a farmlands and the Syrian Golan Heights will
reinforce good-neighbourliness, security and stability.
The international community has an important
responsibility towards the Palestinian people as it seeks
to exercise its legitimate rights and a political
responsibility with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security, especially in the
Middle East, and to the implementation of resolutions
of international legality.

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Saudi Arabia for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Yemen. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like, on behalf of the delegation of the
Republic of Yemen, to express our pleasure at seeing
you, Sir, preside over the Council. We are confident
that your country’s membership on the Council will
contribute to the success of its work and add to the
record of your friendly country, which has always held
clear positions in support of peace and justice. I also
wish to congratulate the new members, which represent
a positive addition to the Council’s work.
I also offer our thanks and appreciation for your
prompt convening of this emergency meeting of the
Council to consider the deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem,
which requires urgent action from the Council. We also
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his statement to the Council, which contained
important elements and ideas that may be built upon in
taking urgent steps to calm the situation and to ensure
the resumption of negotiations.
In his statement, the Secretary-General expressed
his firm conviction that the key interrelated problems
remain occupation, security, deprivation and economic
suffering. He also stated that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict could never be solved militarily or on the basis
of security alone, and that the question of security
could not be dealt with in isolation from the other key
political issues, especially those of land, other
economic and social matters and the dire living
conditions of the Palestinian people. The SecretaryGeneral’s message to the Security Council was clear:
failure to address all these issues would lead to more
devastation and violence. It is for that reason that the
Security Council should work together intensively with
the other parties to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace in the Middle East.
The Israeli Government’s recent statement that it
would establish buffer zones in the occupied territories
is a continuation of the war against the Palestinian
people, their leadership and the peace process itself.
Once again, we agree with what the Secretary-General

said, that security measures and military solutions will
never bring security for Israel.
The continuation of the bloody military campaign
by the Israeli Government under the leadership of Ariel
Sharon against the Palestinian people and the
Palestinian Authority has led to more Palestinian
civilians being made victims or becoming injured and
to massive destruction of Palestinian institutions and
infrastructure and official buildings of the Authority,
including the headquarters of the Chairman of the
Authority. Israeli occupation forces are continuing their
inhumane blockade and their unjust restrictions on
movement between the villages and towns of Palestine,
thereby preventing the Palestinian people from moving
about freely on a daily basis.
The Government of Israel, the occupying Power,
should shoulder its full responsibility for its violations
of human rights and the crimes and acts of terrorism it
commits against the Palestinian people in flagrant
violation of international human rights laws and
resolutions of international legitimacy. In its most
recent campaign, Israel used F-16 fighter jets, Apache
helicopters, seacraft and tanks against residential areas
and the facilities of the Palestinian Authority. The
Israeli authorities even opened fire on medical crews
trying to save injured persons. In its recent acts, it has
also aimed at subjugating the Palestinian people and at
undermining the Palestinian National Authority,
depriving it of its inalienable national rights guaranteed
by international law and norms and relevant United
Nations resolutions.
We have called on the Security Council many
times to shoulder its responsibilities with regard to
maintaining international peace and security, to quickly
intervene to protect Palestinian civilians against Israeli
attacks and acts of aggression, and to stop the
bloodshed. Regrettably, the Council has not played its
role or shouldered its responsibilities. Once again, we
have come to the Security Council in the wake of great
deterioration in the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. It has
become extremely dangerous in recent days. It is now
imperative that the Council intervene immediately and
positively to address this dangerous situation and to
stop the bloodshed.
The latest events have proven that the
continuation of Israel’s occupation is the cause of the
explosion in the situation in the region, for there is no

15

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

military solution to the situation in the occupied
territories. The Israeli Government’s continuing
military campaign will never bring about security for
its people. The solution is to be found through
negotiations on the bases agreed upon and through the
implementation of the agreements concluded between
the two parties. It is for that reason that the Security
Council should shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter by adopting a resolution to send international
forces or observers or to take any other steps it deems
necessary to immediately provide protection to the
Palestinian people.
What we are hoping for is a comprehensive and
just peace that will provide security in the region, a
peace that makes it possible for the Palestinians to
realize all their rights. Those rights include the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital. We also call on the sponsors of
the peace process — the United States of America, the
Russian Federation and the European Union — to do
everything possible to put an end to the serious
deterioration in the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, to end the violence, lift the
blockade imposed on the territories, end Israeli
aggression, provide international protection to the
Palestinian people, and end Israel’s occupation of all
Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since 1967.
In conclusion, we expect a clear message from
the Council. We also expect a new vision to be
translated into a resolution acceptable to all members
of the Council, especially to the permanent members.
Failure to adopt such a resolution at this historic
juncture in the region will lead to disappointment and
serve to push the situation into an unimaginable state
of deterioration.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Yemen for his kind words addressed
to me.
The last speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Sudan. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend to you, Mr. President, my
sincere congratulations on the important achievements
of the Security Council during your presidency. I also
wish to thank you for having convened this very
important meeting to consider current developments in
Palestine. I must also extend my thanks to the

16

delegation of Mauritius for its very excellent conduct
of the work of the Council last month.
In this regard, Sudan would like to pay tribute to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for the statement he
made in the Council last Thursday. We would also like
to hail his efforts to contain the deteriorating situation
in the region.
The situation in the Palestinian occupied
territories is so dangerous that the Security Council
must assume its responsibility for safeguarding
international peace and security. It must act quickly to
halt the ominous deterioration of the situation, which
might push the entire region into a global
conflagration, due to the use of excessive military force
by the occupying Israeli forces against innocent
Palestinian civilians and the isolation of villages and
towns in Palestine, as well as the destruction of all
institutions of the Palestinian Authority. In an alarming
development, this blockade has included the very
symbol of the Palestinian cause, President Yasser
Arafat, the legitimate leader of the Palestinian people.
This measure is totally unacceptable, and it must be
condemned by the international community.
The Security Council must act quickly to end the
Israeli Prime Minister’s criminal plans aimed at
creating buffer zones around the cities and towns of
Palestine and at constructing a wall to separate East
Jerusalem from West Jerusalem in a serious attempt to
create total isolation of and between the Palestinians.
The Secretary-General affirmed in his statement
to the Council that there were no security measures or
military solutions to the Palestinian problem, and he
reaffirmed what many delegations have already
repeated on many occasions to the Council, that Israel
must understand that violence cannot guarantee the
security it desires, because such security cannot be
attained as long as Israel continues its expansionist
policies, its acts of violence, repression and aggression.
The only way to bring about peace in the Middle
East is to put an end to Israeli occupation in the
Palestinian occupied territories and the Arab occupied
territories — the Golan Heights and Shebaa’ Farms in
Lebanon. Israel must show its total commitment to the
resolutions of international legitimacy and the Security
Council, particularly 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
allow the Palestinian people to establish their own
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as respect the terms of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

S/PV.4478 (Resumption 1)

In conclusion, we hope that the Council will
endeavour to use the present momentum to take rapid
measures and assume its fundamental role in ensuring
international peace and security, that it will work
promptly to halt Israeli aggression against the citizens
of Palestine and that it will impose respect for Security
Council resolutions regarding the Palestinian cause.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 8.05 p.m.

17
