S/PV.8143

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8143rd meeting

Tuesday, 19 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/1009)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/1030)
Letter dated 15 December 2017 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/1058)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-44990 (E)
*1744990*

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 1 December 2017 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/1009)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2017/1030)
Letter dated 15 December 2017 from
the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2017/1058)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Germany to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2017/1009, which contains
a letter dated 1 December 2017 from the Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); S/2017/1030, which contains the fourth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015); and
S/2017/1058, which contains a letter dated 15 December
2017 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs; Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim
of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations; and Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent
2/21

19/12/2017

Representative of Italy, in his capacity as a Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Almost two years after
implementation day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), we are at a critical crossroads.
Today’s meeting is an important opportunity to reflect
carefully on what has been achieved and the challenges
that lie ahead.
Since 16 January 2016, the International Atomic
Energy Agency has reported to the Council nine times
that Iran is continuing to adhere to its nuclear-related
commitments. Against this positive story of JCPOA
implementation, on 13 October the President of the
United States decided not to certify to Congress that
the suspension of its national sanctions pursuant to the
agreement is, in the words of President Trump’s speech,
“appropriate and proportionate to the specific and
verifiable measures taken by Iran with respect to
terminating its illicit nuclear programme”.
This decision has regrettably created considerable
uncertainty about the future of the JCPOA. The
Secretary-General is reassured that the United
States, during the recent seventh meeting of the
Joint Commission, together with other participants,
expressed its continued adherence to its commitments
and stressed the need to ensure the full and effective
implementation of the agreement in all its parts, in
good faith and in a constructive atmosphere.
The support of the Security Council for the
agreement is vital in order to ensure the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, as well
as regional and international stability. The agreement
is in the interest of the global non-proliferation regime
and of regional and international peace and security.
It is also the best way to realize the aspirations of the
Iranian people through an opportunity for greater
economic engagement with the world.
The international community will be following
carefully what the participants to the agreement in the
Council will do in the coming months and years, and
will certainly calibrate its own actions accordingly.
For these reasons, the Secretary-General encourages
the United States to maintain its commitment to the
agreement and to consider the broader implications for
the region and beyond before taking any further steps.
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

Similarly, he encourages the Islamic Republic of Iran to
consider carefully the concerns raised by other JCPOA
participants. The Secretary-General also encourages
the international community to continue to support
the full implementation of this historic agreement and
welcomes the affirmative statements by numerous
other Member States in support of the plan.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the fourth report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1030) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). The report was submitted to
the Council on 8 December, pursuant to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) and the note by the President
of the Council issued on 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44).
As guided by the Security Council, the report of the
Secretary-General focuses on the implementation
of the provisions contained in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). I now turn to the main findings of the
fourth report.
First, the Secretary-General has again not received
any report regarding the supply, sale or transfer to
Iran of nuclear-related items undertaken contrary to
the provisions of the resolution. Meanwhile, Member
States are making greater use of the procurement
channel. Eight additional nuclear-related proposals
have been submitted to the Security Council for
approval, bringing the total number of proposals
submitted since implementation day to 24. These
proposals have been processed in accordance with the
timelines established by resolution 2231 (2015), with
due regard for information security and confidentiality.
I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge once
again the excellent cooperation we enjoy with the
European External Action Service, especially its
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission.
Secondly, regarding the implementation of ballistic
missile-related provisions, the report reflects official
information provided by Member States on the launch
of the Simorgh space launch vehicle in July by the
Islamic Republic of Iran and on several ballistic missile
launches by the Islamic Republic of Iran. In October
and November, the Secretariat was requested to travel
twice to Saudi Arabia to examine the debris of the
ballistic missiles launched at Yanbu‘ and Riyadh on
22 July and 4 November, respectively. Saudi authorities
assessed that Iran had a role in manufacturing these
missiles, which were used in the July and November
attacks. We take note of the information presented at

S/PV. 8143

the recent press conference by Ambassador Haley on
14 December and Iranian statements in response.
At this time, the Secretariat is not yet in a position
to confirm whether those missiles were Iranian Qiam-1
missiles — a variant of the Scud missile — transferred
contrary to resolution 2231 (2015), as assessed by Saudi
authorities. However, the report contained preliminary
observations indicating that first, the two missiles
had similar features, which suggest a common origin;
secondly, the missiles contained features that are
consistent with missiles of the Scud family; thirdly, the
missiles also had features known to be consistent with
the Qiam-1 missile; and fourthly, one of the missiles
bore casting similar to that of an Iranian entity on the
list maintained pursuant to resolution 2231 (2015). The
Secretariat is still analysing the information available
and will report to the Council in due course.
The Secretariat recommended a joint meeting
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the Council in the 2231 format, to
be jointly briefed by the Panel of Experts on Yemen
and the Secretariat on their respective findings at
the appropriate time. It is important that the Security
Council be able to consider this issue holistically and
coherently on the basis of all the information available
to it.
Thirdly, in terms of restrictions on arms related
transfers, the Secretariat was requested to examine
the arms and related materials seized by the United
States in March 2016. The Secretariat also received
information on an unmanned surface vessel laden
with explosives, allegedly used against the Saudi-led
coalition, and had the opportunity to examine parts of
its guidance and detonation systems. The Secretariat
was also requested to examine two unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), reportedly recovered in Yemen after
implementation day.
The Secretariat is confident that close to 900 of the
assault rifles seized by the United States are identical
to those seized by France, also in March 2016, which
the Secretariat assessed as being of Iranian origin
and shipped from the Islamic Republic of Iran. The
Secretariat is also confident that half of the 200 rocketpropelled grenade (RPG) launchers had characteristics
similar to Iranian-produced RPG launchers. We are still
analysing the remaining weapons found in the shipment
and will report back in due course.

17-449903/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

The Secretariat could also observe that the guidance
and detonation systems of the unmanned surface vessel
included a computer terminal with a dual EnglishFarsi keyboard and characteristics similar to those of
Iranian-produced terminals. It was also observed that
the detonation system included items identical to those
found on board the dhow Adris by the United States in
March 2016, and that the electrical cables within the
detonation mechanism and in the guidance system bore
markings indicating Iranian manufacture. An update
will be provided in due course.
The Secretariat observed that one of the UAVs,
which Saudi authorities determined as resembling the
Iranian-made Ababil-II, was similar to other drones
reportedly seized in Yemen, brought to our attention
by the United Arab Emirates. We look forward to the
opportunity to examine these other unmanned aerial
vehicles in order to independently ascertain their origin.
Fourthly, the report also highlights the participation
of the Defence Industries Organisation in another
foreign exhibition, the International Aviation and Space
Salon, held in the Russian Federation in July. The issue
was raised with the Russian Federation and we were
informed that an investigation into the issue found no
action inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
The Secretary-General’s report also provides
information on additional travels by Major General
Qasem Soleimani, noting that the Security Council
should call upon the Governments of relevant Member
States to take the steps necessary to ensure the proper
implementation of the travel ban and other provisions
of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015).
Before concluding, I would like to underline that
the Secretariat carefully considered the information
that the Islamic Republic of Iran conveyed in its letter
dated 28 August, which stated that the Countering
America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act, signed
into law on 2 August, violated the terms of paragraphs
3, 4 and 5 of Annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). It is our
assessment that that information does not fall within
the scope of the report, unless guidance to the contrary
is provided to us by the Security Council.
In closing, I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy for his
successful tenure as Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) during this challenging year.
I would also like to take this opportunity to wish well
His Excellency Ambassador Karel Jan Gustaaf van
4/21

19/12/2017

Oosterom of the Netherlands as he will assume the role
of Facilitator on 1 January 2018, and to assure him of
the Secretariat’s full support.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Adamson.
Ms. Adamson: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today again, on behalf of Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
First, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy,
who is serving as Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in 2017, for their excellent
cooperation. Let me also express my gratitude to our
colleagues in the Security Council Affairs Division for
their unwavering support and excellent cooperation, in
particular regarding the management of the Procurement
Channel. I would also like to note my appreciation for
their work in preparing the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/1030) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).
As we approach the second anniversary of the
JCPOA’s Implementation Day — 16 January 2016 — I
believe it is right to say that we are at a critical juncture.
On 13 October, President Trump announced his decision
not to certify Iranian compliance with domestic United
States legislation. We respect that as having taken place
in the context of United States domestic legislation, but
it has created uncertainty regarding the United States
continuing commitment to the JCPOA. In response to
that announcement, the European Union (EU) stressed
that it expects full and effective implementation of
the agreement by all sides. That view was expressed
by High Representative Mogherini and all Foreign
Ministers and Heads of State and Government of the 28
EU member States.
Since implementation day, seven JCPOA Joint
Commission meetings have taken place, chaired
by the Secretary General of the European External
Action Service, on behalf of the High Representative/
Vice-President, monitoring implementation and
providing guidance on a number of implementation
issues. The most recent meeting took place in Vienna
on 13 December and I am pleased to report that all
participants expressed their continued adherence to
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

their respective JCPOA commitments. They stressed the
importance of ensuring the effective implementation of
all sections of the Agreement, in good faith and in a
constructive atmosphere.
The JCPOA is a key strategic priority, not only
for European security but also for regional and global
security. While the community of nations again faces
the threat of unchecked nuclear capabilities, the JCPOA
has become an example of peaceably resolving issues
pertaining to the international non-proliferation
agenda. An overwhelming number of partners around
the world — in Asia, Africa, Latin America and the
Pacific — have signalled that they share the view that
the JCPOA must be preserved and fully implemented.
The EU fully agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that it is in the interest of the international
community that the JCPOA — an achievement of
multilateral diplomacy — overcome its implementation
challenges, cementing our collective commitment to
diplomacy and dialogue.
The JCPOA functions as intended. As the only
body mandated by the Security Council to undertake
the necessary verification and monitoring of Iran’s
nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has issued
nine reports — the latest on 13 November — confirming
that Iran is abiding by its commitments under the deal.
Iran’s nuclear programme is the subject of a strong
monitoring, verification and transparency mechanism.
In accordance with Iran’s commitments under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the country will be required to apply the IAEA
comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional
Protocols, which will allow the Agency to continue
monitoring Iranian nuclear activities and provide
assurances about the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme.
But while the JCPOA is working, a number of
serious issues outside of the deal cast a shadow. The
situation in the region has clearly worsened over the
past few months and the EU has repeatedly called upon
all parties to de-escalate their current rhetoric and find
common ground on which to base their neighbourly
relations. The EU closely follows developments
concerning ballistic missile launchers aimed at
the territory of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and
encourages the Secretariat to seek more information
in that regard. I call upon all actors in the region and
beyond to do their utmost to contain the current trend

S/PV. 8143

towards violence and conflict. What we need above all
is for all actors to demonstrate their full commitment
to finding a peaceful solution to the problems at hand.
The EU has a long-standing track record of
expressing its concern about the regional military
build-up, including Iran’s missile programme. The
EU has repeatedly called upon Iran to refrain from
activities that may deepen mistrust, such as ballistic
missile tests, which are inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015), and from making statements that reference
them. The situation in the region, including the issue
of ballistic missiles, must be addressed as a priority
outside the JCPOA. Dismantling a nuclear agreement
that is working would certainly not put us in a better
position to discuss all the rest. The EU stands ready
to actively promote and support initiatives to ensure a
more stable, peaceful and secure regional environment.
In addition to Iran’s nuclear obligations, which
are laid out in annex 1 of the JCPOA, and to elements
related to sanctions-lifting, contained in annex 2,
allow me to touch upon issues related to annex 3 of the
Agreement, which covers civil nuclear cooperation.
The EU views annex 3 as key to the overall balance of
the Agreement and essential to the overall objective of
ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme.
The EU engages with Iran on the basis of an EUIran statement on civil nuclear cooperation, adopted in
April 2016, in a number of concrete projects focused
on nuclear safety and research. Last month, the second
EU-Iran High-Level Seminar on International Nuclear
Cooperation: Progress and Prospects was held in
Isfahan, building further on the concept that civil nuclear
cooperation and the adherence to international norms
on nuclear governance must go hand-in-hand. While
implementing projects on the ground and conducting
research, Iran is also taking steps towards its accession
to the international nuclear regulatory framework. Such
steps must be encouraged and supported further.
I will now focus on the reporting related to annex B
of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular on the work of the
Procurement Working Group, responsible for reviewing
proposals by States seeking to engage in activities
with Iran that offer nuclear and non-nuclear civilian
end uses. Since Implementation Day, the Procurement
Working Group, which is comprised of the E3+3 and
Iran representatives and coordinated by a delegated
coordinator of the EU High Representative, has been

17-449905/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

in full operation. Setting up that new authorization
mechanism after a long prohibition period was not an
easy task. As a result of outreach efforts and as proof
the mechanism works, the number of States interested
in transfers to Iran has increased, as has the number of
countries submitting proposals.
Transparency has been one of our guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the JCPOA.
According to paragraph 6.10. of annex 4 of the JCPOA,
the Joint Commission reports to the Security Council
every 6 months on the status of the Procurement
Working Group’s decisions and on any implementation
issues. In that context, on 1 December the Coordinator
of the Procurement Working Group submitted to the
Facilitator, on behalf of the Joint Commission, its
fourth biannual report. That report aims to provide
the Facilitator and Security Council members with an
overview of the work undertaken by the Procurement
Working Group from 13 June to 30 November. The
report has been circulated as document S/2017/1009.
During this period, the Procurement Working
Group has continued to work intensively to further
develop and update the Group’s operational modalities.
It has also intensified its efforts to be as transparent
as possible without compromising confidentiality
by reaching out to Member States and promoting
a better understanding of its aims, objectives and
review process, which are embedded in the JCPOA’s
multilayered system of checks and balances.
In addition, it is important to underline that the
proper functioning of the Procurement Channel needs
to be ensured. Proposals need to be judged based on
their technical merits, as the aim of the Procurement
Channel is to support the transfer of sensitive goods to
Iran while ensuring that they cannot be misused. The
Procurement Channel is ready to receive more proposals
for transfers, and we are ready to further support
countries and authorities interested in such transfers.
To that end, our outreach efforts will continue, together
with colleagues from the Security Council secretariat
and the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).
Allow me to conclude by calling upon all parties
to remain committed to the full implementation of
the JCPOA in good faith, as well as to resolution 2231
(2015) in all its dimensions. The very same values
embodied by the United Nations community are the
building blocks of the JCPOA, which has allowed us
6/21

19/12/2017

to tackle a nuclear proliferation issue in a peaceful
way. We need to continue to build on that achievement
of multilateral diplomacy, which is the best hope
for security and stability in the region. As ever, the
Coordinator of the Joint Commission stands ready to
work with United Nations bodies and Member States to
support the objectives of the JCPOA.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Adamson

for

I now give the floor to Ambassador Cardi.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank you in particular,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. My thanks
also go to Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, and Ambassador Joanne Adamson for
their briefings.
Today, I will touch on three aspects of my report
covering the period from 16 June to 15 December
2017: first, the activities of the Council in the 2231
format; secondly, monitoring of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015); and thirdly, developments in the
Procurement Channel. The full version of the report
has been circulated to Council members and has been
issued under the symbol S/2017/1058.
On 23 June and 13 December, the Security Council
met in the 2231 format to review the findings and
recommendations contained in the third and fourth
reports (S/2017/515 and S/2017/1030) of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
On 14 July, I held an open technical briefing to inform
Member States on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) and to enhance their understanding of
the opportunities and obligations inherent to it. The
Coordinator of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission and the Secretariat also participated
in the briefing. On 8 September, the Security Council
held a meeting in the 2231 format to discuss the 27 July
Simorgh space launch vehicle launched by the Islamic
Republic of Iran, and the various letters addressed to
the Security Council in that regard. I will summarize
our discussion in the second part of my briefing.
In line with paragraph 4 of the resolution, in August
and November the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency submitted two quarterly
reports on verification and monitoring activities (see
S/2017/777 and S/2017/994). In both quarterly reports,
the Agency affirmed that the Islamic Republic of Iran
had not pursued the construction of the existing Arak
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

heavy water research reactor based on its original
design, had no more than 130 metric tons of heavy water,
had no more than 5,060 centrifuges that have remained
installed in 30 cascades at the Fuel Enrichment Plant
at Natanz, had not enriched uranium above 3.67 per
cent U-235, had not conducted any uranium enrichment
or related research and development activities at the
Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant; and that there had been
no nuclear material at the Plant.
In its November 2017 report, the Agency confirmed
that it continued its evaluations regarding the absence
of undeclared nuclear material and activities for the
Islamic Republic of Iran, including through the conduct
of complementary accesses under the Additional
Protocol to all the sites and locations in the Islamic
Republic of Iran which it needed to visit.
On 8 September, during a meeting in the 2231
format, the Security Council considered the Simorgh
space launch vehicle launch by Iran of 27 July. The
meeting’s discussion evinced various views. Some
representatives considered the launch to be inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015), since the technology used
was similar to that of a ballistic missile, and that the
Simorgh, if configured as a missile, was “inherently
capable” of delivering nuclear weapons. Other Member
States noted that the Simorgh was not designed and
could not be modified to deliver nuclear weapons, and
that the language in resolution 2231 (2015) contained
a call to refrain from but not to ban ballistic activities.
During the reporting period, three Member States
sent communications to the Security Council alleging
transfer and activities by Iran that fell under the
restrictions provided for by resolution 2231 (2015).
Those are listed in detail in my report, together with
all the replies received from the Iranian Mission to the
United Nations. Since implementation day, a total of 24
proposals to participate in or permit activities set forth
in paragraph 2 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015)
have been submitted to the Security Council by four
Member States from three different regional groups,
including States that are not participants in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The continued
submission of nuclear-related proposals to the Security
Council shows the steady confidence of Member States
in the Procurement Channel. I am also pleased to note
that, on average, the proposals were processed through
the Procurement Channel in fewer than 49 days.

S/PV. 8143

On 1 August, the Security Council updated the list
of items, materials, equipment, goods and technology
whose supply, sale or transfer to Iran requires approval
in advance, on a case-by-case, basis by the Security
Council, in accordance with paragraph 2 of annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015).
As we approach the second anniversary of
implementation day, transparency, practical guidance
and outreach remain a priority. In that regard, the open
briefing for Member States on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), held on 14 July, was one of the
many efforts to raise awareness, with a focus on the
Procurement Channel.
Finally, since this is my third and last report on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and I am
of course approaching the end of my annual mandate
as Facilitator, allow me to conclude by saying that I
am confident that the international community will
continue to act in line with paragraph 2 of resolution
2231 (2015), which calls upon all Member States,
regional organizations and international organizations
to take such actions as may be appropriate to support
the implementation of the JCPOA.
The President: I thank Ambassador Cardi for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): This
discussion could not have come at a better time. There
were reports this morning that the Houthi militants in
Yemen had fired yet another missile into Saudi Arabia.
According to the Houthis themselves, it was targeted at
a meeting of Saudi leaders in Riyadh, in an area crowded
with Government offices. Thankfully the missile was
intercepted before it could hit its intended target, but
the very fact of this attack is a flashing red siren for
the Council. This is not the first time that the Houthis
have fired missiles at civilians in a country belonging
to the Group of 20 (G-20) and, unless we act, it will not
be the last. While we do not yet have sufficient insight
into this particular attack, it bears all the hallmarks of
previous attacks using weapons provided by Iran. It is
only a matter of time before one of these missiles hits
its target. If we do not do something, we will miss the
opportunity to prevent further violence from Iran.
Before us is the Secretary-General’s fourth report
(S/2017/1030) on the Iranian regime’s lack of full

17-449907/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

compliance with resolution 2231 (2015), and it is the
most damning report yet. The report makes the case
that Iran is illegally transferring weapons. I know that
many Member States put a lot of effort into the nuclear
agreement with Iran, but that should not allow us to look
the other way as concerns the very serious non-nuclear
items, like the sales of arms, ballistic missile testing
and support for terrorism. The report was compiled
before the latest attacks, but it points to evidence of the
Iranian origin of missiles fired from Yemen into Saudi
Arabia this year. It notes that arms seized by the United
States from a ship in the Gulf of Oman were identical
to those previously seized by France, which the United
Nations had concluded were of Iranian origin.
The report describes a dual English-Farsi keyboard
that was part of the guidance system of an unmanned
surface vehicle used against the Saudi coalition in
Yemen. That was just one of several pieces of evidence
that point to the Iranian manufacture of the detonation
and guidance systems of the weapon. There is plenty
more. The United States and our partners went to great
lengths to support the Secretary-General’s investigation.
We shared our intelligence, and we insisted on the use
of the highest standards of evidence and methodology.
We therefore welcome this report and the evidence
it presents.
To build on its conclusions, the United States took
the extraordinary step of revealing, in a public setting,
military equipment recovered directly from military
attacks on our partners in the region. Last week, we
put this information on display in Washington, D.C.
Nearly a dozen countries have sent delegations to
see it. Members of Congress are now viewing it.
We invite the entire Security Council to visit this
massive and compelling display of information about
Iran’s violations.
The material speaks for itself. The evidence is
undeniable. The Secretary-General’s report refers to
debris from missiles fired by Houthi militants from
Yemen into Saudi Arabia in July and November. The
inventory at the warehouse in Washington, D.C.,
removes any shred of doubt that the missiles are from
Iran. The missile debris recovered in Saudi Arabia
came from Iranian Qiam-I missiles. We have multiple
indicators: everything from the lack of tail fins at the
base of the missile — which only Iranian missiles
lack — to the logo of an Iranian defence manufacturer
stamped on the side. The fact that these missiles were
transferred from Iran and fired by a group of militants
8/21

19/12/2017

should gravely concern us. The intended target of the
4 November missiles should concern us even more. The
target was the civilian airport in Riyadh. Hundreds of
innocent civilians could have been killed. Just imagine
if this had been the John F. Kennedy airport in New
York City, or Paris or Brussels.
The warehouse also contains material from
Iranian-manufactured anti-tank guided missiles,
which the Houthis have used to destroy buildings, an
unmanned aerial vehicle known as a kamikaze drone,
and material from a Shark-33 explosive boat. Those
boats have a warhead inside them that has blown
six-foot-wide holes in the sides of ships, killing and
injuring numerous personnel. All of these weapons
recovered from attacks and planned attacks on a G-20
country were made by Iranian weapons industries
tied to the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. We
have made this information public because Iran’s
destabilizing behaviour is only growing. It will
continue to grow unless we raise the cost of defying the
international community.
International peace and security depend on our
working together to expose and hold accountable the
Iranian regime’s hostile actions. The United States
will continue to share what we know with the United
Nations and other parties to combat this threat, but
the effort of one nation is not enough. We must all
act cooperatively to expose the crimes of the Tehran
regime and do whatever is needed to make sure they get
the message. If we do, then Iran will bring the world
deeper into a broadening regional conflict.
Based on the violations mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, there are a few options that we can
use to put pressure on Iran to adjust its behaviour. The
Security Council could strengthen the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015). We could adopt a new resolution
that makes clear that Iran is prohibited from all
activities related to ballistic missiles. We could explore
imposing sanctions on Iran in response to its clear
violations of the Yemen arms embargo. We could hold
the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps accountable for
its violations of numerous Security Council resolutions.
In the coming days, we will continue to explore those
options and others with our colleagues. We must speak
with one voice in dealing with Iranian threats to peace.
While we do so, we must also make it clear — as I do
now — that the Iranian people are not the problem. The
Iranian people are victims of their own Government.
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

I want to add a final point about the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. The SecretaryGeneral’s report devotes considerable space to Iranian
compliance with the nuclear deal. While the Plan itself
was not intended to directly address Iran’s non-nuclear
behaviour, we must all recognize that resolution 2231
(2015) does address such behaviour, and that is made
clear in the Secretary-General’s report. While the
United States continues to uphold its commitments
under the Plan, the international community must also
demand full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
by responding to Iran’s dangerous violations. We must
not allow ourselves to be held hostage to the nuclear
agreement or treat Iran any differently than we would
any other country violating a resolution.
Today, based on the United Nations report, we
have an opportunity to confront the Iranian regime for
its actions, which are clearly in violation of Security
Council resolutions. The international community
must demonstrate that we are committed to ensuring
accountability for the full spectrum of Iran’s malign
behaviour. The Security Council must follow through on
the violations listed in the Secretary-General’s report.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to express my appreciation to the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, for his valuable briefing.
The delegation of Egypt has considered with
great interest the fourth report (S/2017/1030) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). Egypt reiterates the need for the Security
Council to continue to fulfil its responsibility to closely
and comprehensively monitor the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) in a manner that ensures Iran’s
compliance with its commitments, whether in relation to
nuclear non-proliferation or in the other areas covered in
the resolution. The Council must also carefully monitor
the consistency of Iran’s policies and behaviour with the
various other Security Council resolutions related to the
Middle East, which all constitute an indivisible whole.
Egypt stresses that following up on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) is not a
matter that concerns only the participants in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. All States members
of the Security Council and the United Nations,
particularly the countries of the Middle East, have a
stake in ensuring the proper and full implementation
of the resolution, which is now an integral part of

S/PV. 8143

the United Nations machinery concerned with the
establishment of peace and security in the region.
While Egypt takes note of the report’s content
with regard to the continued ability of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to verify the non-diversion
of declared nuclear material from peaceful nuclear
activities, my delegation reiterates the need for Iran’s
policies to be coherent and consistent with the letter and
spirit of the aforementioned resolution and all the other
areas covered therein, including in annex B. We call on
Iran to work to build confidence and to immediately
cease any activities that could destabilize and fuel
sectarian divides in a number of Arab States.
The contents of the Secretary-General’s report
concerning Iranian violations of multiple Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2231 (2015)
and 2140 (2014) — some of which have been confirmed
while others remain under investigation — offer
compelling evidence of the need for the Council to
intensify its efforts to follow up on that information
and fulfil its responsibilities in addressing those
violations without delay in order to preserve regional
and international peace and security.
Egypt expresses its particular concern over the
information and evidence connected with Iran’s supply
of weapons and missiles to militias, encouraging them
to use those weapons target neighbouring countries,
in violation of Security Council resolutions, United
Nations principles and the most basic rules of goodneighbourliness. Another disconcerting element noted
in the report is Iran’s defiance of other sanctions
related to the travel ban and assets freeze. In that
context, Egypt calls for the timely completion of the
Secretariat’s investigations into whether the missiles
that the Houthis have launched against the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia from Yemen are of Iranian origin.
Egypt also supports the implementation of
the important recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report so that they Security
Council and other United Nations organs can assume
their responsibilities, including by considering
measures that could supplement the nuclear agreement
and reduce Iran’s threat to regional and international
peace and security and its interference in the affairs of
neighbouring States and the Middle East.
The Middle East is already one of the regions of
the world most affected by violence and instability.
We must therefore do our utmost to prevent further

17-449909/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

deterioration. In that regard, we emphasize that
maintaining the nuclear agreement in no way implies
turning a blind eye to any violation of Security Council
resolutions or actions that threaten peace and security.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for presenting
the fourth report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1030)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I
thank Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’Affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, and the Permanent Representative of
Italy to the United Nations, Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, in
his capacity as a Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
briefings. As on previous occasions, the information
conveyed in such briefings sheds light on some positive
aspects that deserve to be highlighted, a few challenges
and some causes for concern.
Uruguay is a country that is strongly committed
to non-proliferation and the consolidation of the
disarmament regime, to which those present have borne
witness over the past two years. It is well known but
still worth recalling that Uruguay has never possessed
nuclear weapons and does not intend to so. We are
members of the world’s first nuclear-weapon-free zone
under the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which celebrated its
fiftieth anniversary this year, and of the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, which brings together the 33 States of the
region signatories of the Treaty. We are also party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Uruguay therefore optimistically welcomed the
signing of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on 14 July 2015 between Iran and the P5+1 group in
relation to the Iranian nuclear programme. In my
country’s view, that agreement is a key achievement
for non-proliferation and a significant contribution to
international peace, security and stability, as well as
to the elimination of one of the main points of tension
in the more than tumultuous region of the Middle East.
The agreement demonstrates, perhaps more than any
other signed in recent years, that positive results can
be achieved with political will and through the avenue
of diplomacy and negotiation, even in cases when that
seems like a distant reality.
Uruguay welcomes the progress made in the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
10/21

19/12/2017

Action, as well as the verification and monitoring
processes of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in Iran. The nine successive quarterly reports of
the IAEA on that topic confirm that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has to date complied with the provisions of the
agreement. Similarly, it is essential that all parties to
the agreement comply with its provisions, in addition
to those contained in resolution 2231 (2015), including
its annexes A and B.
We are concerned about the claims included
in the report regarding Iran’s possible violations of
some provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Any ballistic missile activity pursued by Iran has the
potential to inflame tensions in the region, and we
therefore call on its authorities to exercise caution in
their actions. In accordance with the fourth report of
the Secretary-General, we reiterate that it is in our
interest to include in future reports, in addition to the
detailed analysis of Iran’s compliance with annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), information pertaining to annex
A, which contains no less than the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action itself and the commitments that all
panties to the agreement have assumed, including the
lifting of sanctions imposed on Iran.
To conclude, Uruguay continues to call on
all parties to the agreement to adopt all measures
stipulated in resolution 2231 (2015) and to comply
with its provisions in order to avoid jeopardizing the
historic agreement reached in 2015, which is the fruit
of more than two years of very intense negotiations. In
that regard, we urge the parties to act with the highest
possible degree of restraint and caution and to abstain
from undertaking any action that violates that which
has been agreed and was later endorsed by the Security
Council. The Secretary-General’s report is very clear
that no national executive and legislative actions of the
parties to the agreement shall detract from the validity
of the Plan or the commitments incumbent upon
participants as detailed therein.
We regret that those measures are creating
uncertainty about the future of the agreement, which,
given its importance and success to date, must be
protected and championed as an achievement of the
entire international community. The Security Council,
as guarantor of international peace and security,
should ensure in full future compliance with the Joint
Comprehensive Action Plan and resolution 2231 (2015).
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
first thank the Japanese presidency for convening this
meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and the observer of the European Union for
their very enlightening briefings. I would also like to
particularly thank the Italian Facilitator and his team,
whose work I warmly commend.
The Council has worked for years with the rest
of the international community to build a strong and
sustainable system of collective security, at the heart
of which is the current non-proliferation architecture to
which each of us has contributed. Today, that architecture
is based on robust international instruments, to
which we are all committed and of which the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is the
cornerstone. The nuclear agreement reached with Iran
on 14 July 2015 in Vienna is part of that framework and
must reinforce it.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
entered into force two years ago. Its adoption, endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), has
enabled us to respond robustly to a major proliferation
crisis. It ensures that the Iranian nuclear programme
will not be used for military purposes for more than
10 years. It is a key step both for our international
non-proliferation efforts and for international peace
and security. The JCPOA is well established, and the
decision by the United States not to proceed to the
certification that its domestic legislation envisages
does not change the situation. The JCPOA remains in
place and must be fully implemented. Nevertheless,
the decision has created uncertainty, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates (S/2017/1030). All the parties
to the agreement must abide by it in the interests of the
international community, which has other proliferation
crises to deal with, and because respect for commitments
voluntarily entered into is a fundamental element of
international relations.
The JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) are closely
linked. In that regard, France welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s solid, balanced report on the implementation
of the resolution. Ensuring the ongoing monitoring of
Iranian commitments under the resolution is essential
if the international community is to follow the situation
as carefully it should. France was an active participant
in the negotiations for the robust agreement reached on
Iran’s nuclear programme and endorsed in resolution
2231 (2015). We have frequently expressed our firm
commitment to both documents and to their full and

S/PV. 8143

effective implementation by all parties. In October,
President Macron of France, together with the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom and the Chancellor
of Germany, reaffirmed that commitment. Iran has
not violated its nuclear commitments under the
JCPOA. I would like to point out that in its report of
13 November, the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) did not identify any violations by Iran of its
nuclear commitments for the reporting period. France
fully supports the IAEA’s excellent monitoring and
verification efforts, and we also welcome the reports
that the Procurement Channel is functioning well.
However, it should be clear to all that the
commitments undertaken more than two years ago are
not limited to the framework of the JCPOA or to the
nuclear sector generally. Just as it would be a mistake to
denounce the JCPOA, it would also be irresponsible to
selectively implement the provisions of the resolution
endorsing it. Iran must respect the totality of its
commitments under resolution 2231 (2015), and which
it voluntarily committed to implementing. The long list
in the Secretary-General’s report of the cases of Iran’s
ongoing non-compliance with several of its important
provisions is very worrying.
First, there is Iran’s pursuit of its ballistic-missile
programme and its transfers of ballistic-missile
capabilities in the region, activities that are a growing
cause for concern for my country. They contribute to
the destabilization of the region and are a threat to the
security interests of countries there. The recent tests
and launches of missiles capable of carrying nuclear
warheads, such as those on 18 June and 4 July, as
well as the space launch on 27 July, are in violation of
resolution 2231 (2015). Make no mistake, these missiles
are technically capable of carrying nuclear weapons,
which Iran has agreed not to develop. Therefore, those
activities must stop. The stability of the region and
international security depend on it.
With regard to the allegations of transfers of
ballistic technology to the Houthis in Yemen, it will
be important to ensure that the relevant information is
rigorously examined by the Secretariat. In that regard,
France supports the holding of a joint meeting with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014). We are also gravely concerned
about the reports, suspected or confirmed, of seizures
of arms originating in or destined for Iran, and which
have been reported or confirmed by the Secretariat.
Such transfers are violations of resolution 2231 (2015)

17-4499011/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

and foment mistrust in a delicate regional context.
Finally, we are also worried by the reports that General
Soleimani has been abroad, when he is still subject to
a travel ban. All States Members of the United Nations
must comply with their obligations, which in this case
are an assets freeze and a travel ban.
The Council deals regularly with the North Korean
and Syrian dossiers and the immense and serious
challenges of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. The case of Iran represents confirmation
that the will of the international community, expressed
through pragmatic and realistic multilateralism, can
lead to solutions. The sustainability of such a solution, as
with the other instruments I mentioned, requires a joint
and sincere commitment to rigorously implementing the
agreed provisions. I would like to assure the Council of
France’s commitment in that regard.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing the new semi-annual report (S/2017/1030)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
we would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
We note the effective work done by Ambassador Cardi,
the Permanent Representative of Italy, the Council’s
facilitator for the implementation of the resolution,
and since he is speaking before the Council in that
capacity for the last time, we would like to thank him
and the Italian delegation for their effective efforts in
this important area of the Council’s work. He and the
Italian team have made a constructive contribution to
our work.
In our view, preserving the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) for regulating the Iranian
nuclear programme is one of the international
community’s major tasks. The Plan of Action is a
foundational achievement of the work of the past few
years in nuclear non-proliferation and diplomatic efforts
for regional and international peace and security. It
was the outcome of a joint and collective effort. The
Secretary-General’s report is a clear testament to Iran’s
unconditional compliance with its commitments under
the JCPOA. That has been consistently confirmed by
both the International Atomic Energy Agency and
the Secretariat of the United Nations, which, as the
report indicates, has no reason to believe that Iran has
made transfers either of goods or technology, whether
nuclear or dual-use, which would be in violation of
paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Unfortunately, despite this positive evidence for the
12/21

19/12/2017

implementation of the JCPOA, we are obliged to note
that some countries are attempting to torpedo this
breakthrough collective agreement. We hope that
reason will nonetheless ultimately prevail, that issues of
international security and stability will cease to be held
hostage to domestic political processes and that JCPOA
will finally be allowed to function at full force and
demonstrate its unique potential. The best guarantee of
that is every State party’s good-faith fulfilment of its
voluntary commitments.
We support the Secretary-General’s call to the
JCPOA participants to comply fully with its provisions,
including the importance of ensuring that Iran’s
compliance with the agreement brings it concrete
dividends, as well as the appeal to all countries and
organizations to act in full accord with the JCPOA and
to support its implementation in every possible way.
We feel once again compelled to draw attention
to the Secretariat’s continued practice of conducting
investigations for which it has neither the authority nor
the expertise. Such actions, undertaken without the
Security Council’s prior consent, are not legitimate,
and any information obtained through them cannot
be considered reliable and should not be included in
the report. Information based on such visits should
not be considered equivalent to normal consultations
conducted with Member States. Since we are worrying
about budgets, I would like to point out that such
trips are paid for with budget resources allocated
under resolution 2231 (2015) exclusively for the
implementation of its mandate. We continue to believe
that the report should not include information obtained
from open sources or references to information provided
by individual countries that is unverified or clearly
unverifiable. Such information must first be submitted
to the Security Council, which has the authority to take
decisions on further steps, including on conducting
investigations. Independent action in that regard cannot
be considered legitimate.
Similarly, without the Council’s unanimous
agreement it is impermissible to hold 2231 format
meetings jointly with subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and expert groups. We would also like to recall
paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), which
states in black and white that Iran is called upon not
to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
designed to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons.
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

We would like to draw the attention of Council
members to the fact that regional issues and the
situation in the Middle and Near East do not generally
have to be discussed in the context of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). Discussions on those topics
should be held in other formats and should be conducted
on a basis of mutual respect with the aim of eliminating
existing differences and suspicions exclusively through
direct, political dialogue. A few years ago, the Russian
Federation developed an initiative aimed at establishing
a collective security system and confidence-building
measures in the region that is still relevant. We should
also be implementing resolution 598 (1987), which
asked the Secretary-General to present to the Security
Council measures to enhance the security and stability
of the region. That request was not implemented
and the time has come to do so, since this type of
methodology would be more effective than the recent,
punitive decisions.
Two years of the JCPOA in action have demonstrated
its effectiveness and that it is fully capable of carrying
out its tasks. We believe firmly that there can be no
alternative to the Plan of Action nor any justification for
revising it. The Russian Federation is committed to the
unconditional and comprehensive implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA,
which represents an outstanding accomplishment
for global diplomacy and has enabled us to resolve a
crucial regional issue. The importance of the nuclear
deal is recognized by an overwhelming majority of the
members of the international community. We can use it
as a model for dealing with other current problems and
serious regional crises. We have the power to ensure
its successful implementation, but we must first refrain
from the language of threats and sanctions, instead
using instruments of dialogue and concentrating on
broadening cooperation and mutual trust.
In that regard, we note that during the Joint
Commission’s most recent meeting, on 13 December
in Vienna, all the participants — I repeat, all the
participants — affirmed their commitment to
implementing their obligations under the JCPOA.
That creates a solid foundation for the future, and we
hope that our countries will continue sticking to this
line in strict accord with the letter and spirit of this
historic agreement.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman, Ambassador Adamson and,
of course, Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi for his report,

S/PV. 8143

as well as for his excellent work as Facilitator. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/1030)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The
continued implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) is of crucial importance. The
agreement has ensured the exclusively peaceful nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme, which contributes
to stability in the region and indeed beyond. It also
contributes significantly to strengthening the global
non-proliferation architecture.
We welcome Iran’s continued compliance with its
nuclear-related obligations, as verified by International
Atomic Energy Agency reports. It is important that Iran
continues to provisionally apply the Additional Protocol
to its Safeguards Agreement and we look forward to
its early ratification of the Additional Protocol. It is
promising that the Procurement Channel process is
working according to plan. We also agree with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that more efforts
be made to engage various actors, including the private
sector, in efforts to increase the economic benefits
of the agreement, especially for the Iranian people.
Despite those positive trends, however, we continue
to be concerned about the reports of violations by Iran
of the arms embargo and the travel ban. We are also
concerned about previously reported ballistic-missile
launches, which we believe to be inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).
Regarding information on possible transfers by
Iran of missiles or missile technology, we note that
the Secretariat is still analysing the information and
that it should verify any new information pertinent to
these cases. We expect the Secretariat to report back
to the Council as soon as possible and we welcome the
suggested joint meeting in the 2231 format between
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014) and the Security Council.
The agreement on the JCPOA represented a
milestone and illustrated the potential of dialogue
and diplomacy in advancing global non-proliferation
efforts. We echo the Secretary-General’s call on all
States to act in accordance with the agreement and to
avoid provocative actions and rhetoric. We also welcome
his clear call to all participants to remain committed
to the JCPOA in a spirit of cooperation, compromise,
good faith and reciprocity. All actors must now work
to find peaceful solutions to the ongoing conflicts and
crises in the region. We urge them all to act responsibly
and to refrain from exacerbating the tensions in the

17-4499013/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

region. It is important to separate discussions on
challenges in the broader region from those concerning
the implementation of the JCPOA.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank UnderSecretary-General Feltman for his briefing on the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/1030). We also
commend Ambassador Cardi, as the Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for his
briefing on the Facilitator’s report (S/2017/1058), and
express our appreciation for all that he has done as he
comes to the end of his term. We also appreciate the
statement by Ms. Adamson on behalf of the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
“constitutes a major achievement in nuclear
non-proliferation and diplomacy in addressing
issues that could have an impact on regional and
international peace and security” (S/2017/1030,
para. 1).
Through the JCPOA, the participating States
managed to establish a framework that so far has
continued to ensure the peaceful nature of the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s nuclear programme, with the
necessary verification and monitoring of Iran’s nuclearrelated commitments.
We note from the reports of the Secretary-General
and the Facilitator that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to implement its nuclear-related commitments
under the JCPOA, as verified by the International Atomic
Energy Agency. The continued provisional application
of the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement
by the Islamic Republic of Iran is encouraging. It is
also noteworthy that the Secretary-General and his
predecessor have not received any report on the supply,
transfer or export to Iran of nuclear and dual-use items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology.
However, we note the challenges in the broader
implementation of the JCPOA by the participating
States, as indicated in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral and the Facilitator. In that regard, Iran’s ballistic
missile tests, although not strictly an integral part of
the JCPOA, do affect mutual understanding, which is
so critical to ensuring the successful implementation
of the JCPOA. Reports of arms seizures by the United
States in the vicinity in the Gulf of Oman also affect
mutual understanding, and we await the outcome of
14/21

19/12/2017

the investigation on the matter. Such activities could
impact the overall implementation of the JCPOA and
increase tension among countries of the region and
beyond. Those are all matters that affect stability and
security in a region that is already very sensitive.
That notwithstanding, the JCPOA continues
to provide a very good framework for addressing
some of the most pressing proliferation-related
issues related to nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction through political and diplomatic means.
We hope that all participating States will address any
challenges and difficulties, particularly in relation to
implementation, through cooperation in good faith
within the proper format, and we echo the call made
by the Secretary-General in that regard. We also
believe that all participating parties need to continue to
maintain an attitude conducive to confidence-building
among the JCPOA participants, as indicated in the
Facilitator’s report.
It is important that the Islamic Republic of Iran
refrain from acts that could undermine the overall
implementation of the JCPOA, such as ballistic missile
tests, and continue to fully implement its commitments
under resolution 2231 (2015), including the travel bans
and restrictions on arms transfer. On the other hand, it
is imperative that all the JCPOA participating States
continue to fully implement their commitments in all
their aspects. As we stated during the meeting under
the format of resolution 2231 (2015), we will await the
outcome of the independent investigation on reports
of ballistic missiles launched by the Houthis, as well
as information received by the Secretariat in relation
to the use of unmanned surface vessels allegedly used
against the Saudi-led coalition.
Finally, while expressing appreciation to all
dedicated efforts by Facilitator Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi and his team during the past year, we hope
the incoming Facilitator will further strengthen his
engagement with, and outreach to, Member States
in order to address issues raised in the report of the
Secretary-General in relation to the general lack of
understanding of resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
Ambassador Cardi and Ms. Anderson for their briefings
and to express its appreciation for their work.
Since the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iran’s nuclear programme came into
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

effect, nearly two years ago, its overall implementation
has been making steady progress with expanding and
increasingly visible positive results. The International
Atomic Energy Agency has reported nine times that the
Islamic Republic of Iran is implementing its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA. Thanks to
the efforts of all parties, the coordination between
the Security Council and the Procurement Channel is
working as planned. The JCPOA is a success story in
addressing international and regional hotspot issues
through political and diplomatic means and has played
an important role in consolidating the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and maintaining
peace and stability in the Middle East.
At the tenth meeting of the Joint Commission of
the JCPOA, held on 13 December, all participants noted
their continued adherence to the JCPOA commitments
and stressed the need to ensure the effective
implementation of all its aspects in good faith and in
a constructive atmosphere. The JCPOA was achieved
through arduous efforts and difficulties, and challenges
will inevitably be encountered in its implementation.
The parties should remain steadfast in their political
will, enhance mutual trust and have greater confidence
in the future of the implementation of the JCPOA. China
commends the efforts by all the parties concerned,
including Iran, in implementing the JCPOA and calls
on them to continue to follow the JCPOA guidelines,
fulfil their respective commitments and promote the
steady and sustained implementation of the JCPOA.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1030)
is an important component of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. As such, it
should be considered in connection with the overall
implementation of the resolution and the JCPOA. In the
current situation, the report of the Secretary-General
should reflect the implementation efforts by all parties,
including Iran, in an objective and balanced manner.
China noted that the Secretary-General’s report
stressed the great importance of the JCPOA, objectively
noted the relevant conclusions of the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, encouraged
all Member States and regional and international
organizations to act in accordance with the historic
JCPOA agreement and support its implementation, and
signalled the need to continue to actively advance the
implementation of the resolution of the JCPOA, which
China welcomes.

S/PV. 8143

With regard to issues related to Iran’s ballistic
missile launches, the parties should accurately interpret
the relevant resolution and take a prudent approach
to addressing such questions in order to avoid any
negative effect on the implementation of the JCPOA.
China hopes that the legitimate concerns of Iran with
regard to the content of the report can be addressed.
China appreciates the work done by Ambassador
Cardi and his team as Facilitator for the implementation
mechanism of resolution 2231 (2015). China has taken
note of the report submitted by the Joint Commission on
the work of the Procurement Working Group and will
continue to take an active part in the work of the Joint
Commission and the Procurement Working Group.
China hopes that the various working mechanisms
will act in accordance with their mandates and
generate synergy in their joint efforts to advance the
implementation of the resolution on the JCPOA.
China consistently advocates for the settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue via political and diplomatic
means and is committed to the strengthening of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and the
maintenance of international and regional peace and
stability. China firmly supports and defends the historic
JCPOA. We will continue to actively participate in
the implementation of the resolution and the JCPOA,
promote the sustained release of JCPOA dividends to
benefit all parties, and contribute to the comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate settlement of the Iranian
nuclear issue.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey
Feltman and Ambassador Adamson for their briefings
today. We would also like to thank Permanent
Representative of Italy Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi
and the team working with him this year for the
impeccable work they have carried out as Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Bolivia echoes the statement of the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2017/1030) that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is the best
way to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of the
nuclear programme of the Islamic Republic of Iran. We
are pleased to learn about the progress detailed in this
fourth report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), in particular that the Islamic Republic of Iran
has been fulfilling its nuclear-related commitments

17-4499015/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as
confirmation that Iran continued to provisionally apply
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement.
Bolivia underscores that, since the JCPOA is
recognized as a genuine success story of multilateral
diplomacy and cross-cutting dialogue among the parties
involved, it should be implemented in a constructive
environment based on mutual respect. Likewise,
the parties must refrain from unilaterally applying
sanctions outside the scope of the JCPOA, since such
sanctions could directly affect the implementation of
the agreement.
Moreover, the delegation of Bolivia is pleased
to learn that the European Union is upholding its
commitment with regard to the full and effective
implementation of all parts of the JCPOA, which is a
positive addition to the statements by other Member
States in support of the Plan.
It is encouraging that since 20 June — the date when
the previous report (S/2017/515) was submitted — eight
new proposals have been put forward to undertake or
allow initiatives with the Islamic Republic of Iran for
civilian purposes, both nuclear and non-nuclear, in
compliance with the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General. Therefore, we urge Member States to
make greater efforts to promote appropriate information
on the procedures of the Procurement Channel.
Bolivia is convinced that, in order for the JCPOA
to fulfil all of its intended objectives, all parties must
diligently comply with their obligations, especially to
foster trust among the parties involved. Non-compliance
by any of the parties to the Plan will set a negative
precedent and could undermine the chances for
reaching any agreement on non-proliferation in future.
As on previous occasions, Bolivia expresses its desire
for future reports to also make reference to annex A,
since both annexes are integral and complementary in
effectively implementing resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, as a pacifist nation, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism, non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States, based on the understanding that
those are universal principles recognized by the
international community.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing this
16/21

19/12/2017

briefing on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, as well as Ms. Joanne
Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, and Ambassador
Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy
and Facilitator of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for their briefings.
By adopting, on 20 July 2015, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action through resolution
2231 (2015), the Security Council confirmed an
agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme, marking the
culmination of 12 years of intense diplomatic efforts
made collectively by the United States of America,
the Russian Federation, Germany, France, the United
Kingdom, China, the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/1030) on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) that we are discussing today — the fourth
of its kind submitted under the provisions set out in
annex B of the resolution — provides a comprehensive
outline of the provisions relating to the nuclear field,
ballistic missiles, weapons, travel bans, the freezing
of assets, and accompanying measures to promote the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
On nuclear-related provisions, it is encouraging that
the report makes it clear that the Islamic Republic of
Iran continues to respect its obligations, as confirmed
in the reports issued by the International Atomic
Energy Agency on its verification and monitoring
activities in the country, as well as the monitoring of
Iran’s implementation of its commitments related to the
Plan of Action. It is an equally reassuring and positive
evaluation that the Procurement Channel continues to
consider the various proposals under its consideration,
as illustrated by the various notifications on the supply,
sale and transfer activities that involve the Islamic
Republic of Iran, thereby guaranteeing visibility,
inclusiveness and transparency. The delegation of
Senegal also welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat and
the Facilitator in the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), including the practical information provided
on the Procurement Channel, which merits our full
support and cooperation.
Despite all of those encouraging efforts, it is clear
that many challenges remain to be solved, not least
in ensuring that the private sector fully understands
resolution 2231 (2015). We must address the relationship
between the business world and the Security Council,
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

particularly with regard to the pre-approval procedure.
We also agree with the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that Member States should make greater
efforts to ensure that they understand the restrictions of
the Procurement Channel, including the procedures for
submitting proposals and their review process.
The delegation of Senegal is very concerned
about the information regarding the possible transfer
of ballistic missiles, component parts and related
technologies by the Islamic Republic of Iran, to the
benefit of the Houthis in Yemen, who may have used
them in firing on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. My
delegation will therefore remain very attentive to
the results of the Secretariat’s investigations into
those allegations.
My delegation supports the idea of a joint meeting
in due course between the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the
2231 format on their respective conclusions.
In conclusion, the delegation of Senegal is of the
view that the situation is generally positive with regard
to the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
encourages the Facilitator, as well as all the parties
to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and States
Members of the United Nations, to persevere along
that path.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would first like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Chargé
d’affaires Adamson and Ambassador Cardi — the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) — for their valuable briefings. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to commend
the dedicated and practical work of the Facilitator.
Throughout the year, much work has been done
on organizational and technical assistance for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Kazakhstan
welcomes
the
fourth
report
(S/2017/1030) of the Secretary-General, in which there
is strong support for the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We attach
great importance to that historic agreement, which
not only ensures the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme but also represents a major
achievement in nuclear non-proliferation. Kazakhstan
made a significant contribution to the negotiation
process that led to the agreement. We stand for the
further and full implementation of the JCPOA by
all parties.

S/PV. 8143

The majority of the international community
demands the preservation and continuation of the
hard-earned achievement of multilateral diplomacy.
It is necessary to acknowledge that the agreement has
put Iran on a nuclear-free path, with the International
Atomic Energy Agency confirming that Islamic
Republic of Iran is fulfilling all its obligations with
regard to the nuclear aspects of the deal.
As for the conclusions and recommendations of
the fourth report of the Secretary-General, Kazakhstan
takes a constructive approach in assessing the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the
JCPOA. With regard to the worrying violations of the
provision of ballistic missiles and the alleged transfer
of missile technology to Yemen, a transparent and
impartial investigation of all reported cases requires
greater and closer interaction and cooperation among
the Secretariat, Iran and other countries concerned. We
will expect more detailed information, as promised in
the report of the Secretary-General.
We should be careful not to discredit the other
achievements that have been made within the
framework of resolution 2231 (2016) and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. Implementing the
JCPOA has had a significant impact on normalizing the
situation in the region and beyond. Its positive effects
on the revitalization of economic activities in the region
will definitely strengthen the atmosphere of trust and
confidence, which are very crucial to ensure regional
stability and peace.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Kazakhstan will continue to fully support and strictly
implement resolution 2231 (2015). We also express
our readiness to cooperate with Iran and others in
the framework of implementing the JCPOA. We
are firmly convinced that the Security Council, as
a guarantor of international peace security, should
always oversee its full compliance. The Council can
rest assured that Kazakhstan will play its full part in a
responsible manner.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I also thank all the
briefers for providing factual and substantial reports on
the status of the implementation of both resolution 2231
(2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA).
We highly commend the professional and impartial
efforts of the Secretariat, the European Commission, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the

17-4499017/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

Facilitator to ensure the full and proper implementation
of those crucial instruments, which have contributed
to easing tensions around the Iranian nuclear issue and
to strengthening non-proliferation and export control
regimes in general. We welcome the continuation of the
smooth and effective functioning of the Procurement
Channel mechanism, with the approval of more
proposals to supply relevant goods and technologies
to Iran.
Let me reiterate that the JCPOA fully respects the
balance between the legitimate right of a State to develop
nuclear energy and the need to halt the proliferation of
nuclear weapons, in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. As we approach
the second anniversary of implementation day, Ukraine
welcomes the fact that, according to the IAEA reports,
Iran’s nuclear programme remains peaceful. Moreover,
Teheran’s constant compliance with the transparency
measures set out in the Plan significantly fosters the
sustainable implementation of this historic deal. At the
same time, we also acknowledge that, after two years
of the JCPOA’s existence, different interpretations
regarding the applicability of resolution 2231 (2015) to
the Iranian ballistic missile activities remain.
With regard to the fourth report (S/2017/1030)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation the
resolution, Ukraine is concerned about the incidents
of non-compliance with restrictions on arms-related
transfers, as well as the assets freeze and travel ban
provisions, stipulated by annex B to resolution 2231
(2015). Taking into account the risks posed by the
current tensions, Ukraine fully supports the intention
of the Secretary-General to continue examining all
cases of concern and to obtain additional substantial
information. Formalistic responses from Member
States involved regarding the confirmed cases of
non-observance lead only to a further exchange of
accusations and undermine the future of the JCPOA.
As to the alleged cases of transfers of arms and
missiles from Iran to conflict zones, we consider
the proposal of the Secretary-General to hold a joint
meeting of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the Council in
the 2231 format as a useful and timely initiative that
could shed light on this worrying but sensitive issue.
In addition, we find it essential to further raise
public awareness on the JCPOA and resolution 2231
18/21

19/12/2017

(2015), thereby contributing to their comprehensive
understanding and diligent implementation.
Having stressed the imperative of full compliance
with the relevant obligations, I would like again to
emphasize the importance for all the parties concerned
to interact constructively in order to resolve all
outstanding issues for the sake of the this overarching
nuclear agreement. Preserving the JCPOA as a major
achievement in nuclear non-proliferation and diplomacy
is a crucial contribution to regional and global security
and stability. It is even more important at a time when
the preparatory process for the 2020 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons has already commenced.
In conclusion, let me express my sincere gratitude
to Ambassador Cardi, as the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and his entire
team for their concerted and devoted efforts in ensuring
the proper implementation of the resolution during
2017. Their outstanding dedication and commitment
earned wide respect and recognition.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank our
briefers: Under-Secretary-General Feltman, for
his comprehensive presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s fourth report (S/2017/1030); Ms. Adamson,
for her update on the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA); and Mr. Cardi,
for his summary as Facilitator of the format under
resolution 2231 (2016), as well as for his and his team’s
excellent work.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is one of
the greatest diplomatic successes in recent memory. The
continued endorsement of the deal through resolution
2231 (2015) is another considerable achievement, and
also a responsibility for all of us. We remain committed
to its full and equitable implementation by all parties.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report demonstrates,
the nuclear components of the deal are working. Iran
is complying with its nuclear commitments. For our
part, we are committed to ensuring that the Iranian
people see tangible benefits, including from sanctions
relief. I encourage all Member States to uphold
their commitments.
We welcome the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to promote further understanding of resolution
2231 (2015) and of the Procurement Channel. We are
committed to supporting those efforts. However,
despite that progress, four elements of the report are
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

of concern. They relate to provisions of annex B. They
hinder the full realization of the reciprocal benefits of
the deal and they undermine faith in Iran’s long-term
commitment to regional stability.
First, we are deeply concerned by reported transfers
of Iranian ballistic missile parts and related technology
to the Houthis in Yemen. Such transfers would be a
violation of resolution 2231 (2015), which prohibits the
transfer to and from Iran of ballistic missile technology
and related material. Such transfers would also violate
resolution 2216 (2015), which prohibits the sale or
transfer of arms and related materiel to the Houthis.
The Houthi missile attack on Riyadh on 4 November
deliberately targeted a civilian area, and earlier today
we heard reports of a further missile attack on Riyadh,
this time aimed at the Al-Yamama Palace. Both would
have caused suffering and chaos had they landed
as intended. That is clearly unacceptable, and risks
escalating the situation. The transfer of weapons to
the Houthis threatens regional security and stability.
Their use is prolonging the conflict in Yemen and
contributing to heightened regional tensions. It is
essential that the United Nations conduct a thorough
investigation and inform the Security Council of its
conclusions as soon as possible. We strongly support
the Secretary-General’s call for a joint meeting of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) and the Council under the 2231
format. That will allow for a coherent discussion of the
use of ballistic missiles against the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, while also considering next steps to address
that threat.
Secondly, we are concerned by the continued
reported violations of restrictions on arms-related
provisions. Evidence of those activities is mounting.
The latest report indicates that the arms seized from
a dhow near the Gulf of Oman and an unmanned
surface vessel recovered in Yemeni waters are both of
Iranian origin. Those activities, which are contrary to
the resolution, give us further cause for concern about
Iran’s involvement in that conflict.
Thirdly, we are concerned by evidence relating to
Iranian ballistic missile-related activities. Paragraph
3 of annex B calls on Iran not to undertake any
activity related to ballistic missiles that are designed
to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using such technology. The launch of the
Simorgh space launch vehicle on 27 July made use of

S/PV. 8143

such technology and, as such, was inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, we are concerned about reports of multiple
violations of the travel ban provisions, including new
infringements by Major General Qasem Soleimani.
That is particularly disturbing given the public nature
of the violation.
Putting all those issues together, it is clear that
such activities have a detrimental impact on regional
security and undermine Iran’s integration with the
international community. We remain committed to
the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in
order to uphold the historic agreement and to working
with all parties to make that a reality. But we cannot
stand by and allow a Security Council resolution to be
ignored and the situation in the region to be further
destabilized. We urge Iran to respect all provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) and we are prepared to work
with Council members to ensure that those responsible
are held accountable for any proven violations.
The JCPOA and its implementation through
resolution 2231 (2015) are important elements of
the international community’s non-proliferation
architecture and are essential to supporting regional
and global security. We are all responsible for ensuring
its success. We must all honour our commitments. Iran
is no exception.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): In my national capacity, I would
once again like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman and Ambassador Adamson for their briefings
on the activities of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). I thank all
members for the kind words addressed to me and
my team after the European mandate and the year of
chairing the facilitating mechanism.
Once again, we have before us a very comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1030). Italy
believes that every effort should be made by the
relevant parties, and the international community as a
whole, to ensure that the JCPOA continues to represent
a success story in the global effort to uphold the
integrity of the non-proliferation regime. It is crucial
to us that the Security Council display unity on such
a significant topic, and the accurate and thorough
report of the Secretary-General provides a good basis
to work towards that important objective. We strongly
appreciate the reference in the report to the JCPOA
as “a major achievement in nuclear non-proliferation

17-4499019/21

S/PV.8143

Non-proliferation

and diplomacy in addressing issues that could have
an impact on regional and international peace and
security” (S/2017/1030, para. 1). We are convinced that
all participants, including the Iranian people, should
continue to benefit from the JCPOA. Certainly, we
strongly support the Secretary-General’s call on all
participants to remain steadfast in their commitment to
the full implementation of the agreement.
At the same time, Italy believes in the importance
of the full and comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) in all its aspects. In that respect,
we also take good note of the preliminary findings of the
Secretary-General, contained in the report, regarding
ballistic missile-related issues. We look forward to the
outcome of the investigation that has been announced.
The implementation of the JCPOA and of
resolution 2231 (2015) has made significant progress
to date. We wish to echo the appeal of the SecretaryGeneral to work through differences and challenges
in a spirit of cooperation, compromise, good faith and
reciprocity. We encourage all stakeholders to promptly
resolve issues of concern by exploiting all the relevant
mechanisms set out in the JCPOA. The Security Council,
of course, plays a key role within its competencies and
responsibilities in that respect.
Italy reiterates its full trust in, and support to, the
International Atomic Energy Agency in discharging its
verification task in relation to the JCPOA, and commends
Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for her leadership in coordinating the Joint
Commission established by the JCPOA.
Finally, as this is my last national intervention on
this issue, let me thank all members of the Security
Council for the kind words and cooperation that they and
their teams, who worked very professionally within the
2231 format, for the support and the full collaboration
that we experienced and that they extended to me and
my colleagues during the year. That, I must underscore,
allowed for a constructive atmosphere of cooperation to
prevail in all our meetings. I and my team are grateful
for that.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank the three briefers for their reports on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I, too, would
20/21

19/12/2017

like to commend the work of Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi as Facilitator of the 2231 format.
Japan welcomes the fourth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/1030), which provides concrete and
vital information concerning the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). The Secretariat is responding
ably to the Security Council’s request to undertake
extensive data collection, analysis and reporting.
Members of the Council should continue to support
the work of the Secretariat so that it can continue to
do its work to a high standard, while maintaining
independence, impartiality and expertise.
We agree with paragraphs 4 and 5 of the report
of the Secretary-General, which, respectively, call
on participants in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and on all Member States to support
the implementation of the resolution. In that regard,
we positively note the recent statement by Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), that the nuclear-related
commitments undertaken by Iran under the JCPOA are
being implemented, and underline that Iran is subject
to the world’s most robust nuclear verification regime
to ensure that that continues. Japan is committed to
working closely with the IAEA, the Council and the
signatories to the JCPOA to enable the most effective
implementation possible of resolution 2231 (2015).
Japan is concerned about some alleged violations
of the arms embargo and the travel ban provisions,
referred to in more depth in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. Ballistic missile-related transfers or activities
are subject to further analysis by the Secretariat, and
Japan awaits those results. Nevertheless, we can say
that the positive outcome of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015) will be shared by the Middle East and the
international community as a whole only when they are
fully and robustly implemented. Japan strongly calls on
all Member States, including Iran, to fully implement
resolution 2231 (2015).
Japan has repeatedly underscored the importance
of the close coordination between the 2231 format and
other subsidiary organs of the Security Council, such
as the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), concerning Yemen, and the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009),
concerning Somalia and Eritrea. The most recent report
of the Secretary-General calls for a joint meeting of
2140 Committee and the Council in the 2231 format so
17-44990

19/12/2017

Non-proliferation

that Council members can receive respective findings
simultaneously. As Chair of the 2140 Committee, Japan
fully supports that idea.
Japan hopes that the incoming Facilitator and
the Secretariat will continue outreach activities
such as those that Italy has undertaken this year. For
non-members of the Council, the information and
updates provided by the Facilitator and the Secretariat
through outreach meetings are extremely useful. This
issue goes beyond the interests of only the signatories
to the JCPOA and the Council. It is an issue that all
Member States should strive to see fully implemented.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I greatly appreciate
being included in the discussion today, since Germany
participated in the P5+1 talks, or, as Germany
would say, the E3/EU+3 talks, which led to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). I would
also like to commend Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi
for his work as Faciliatator and to warmly thank
Ms. Joanne Adamson for her statement. Germany
fully supports the work of the European External
Action Service and that of not only Ms. Federica
Mogherini but also Secretary General Helga Schmidt,
who was instrumental in negotiating the JCPOA and
also oversees its implementation. I will be brief on
substance. Along with most speakers, I think there are
two points to make.
First, the JCPOA continues to hold following
the ninth verification round, and, in my opinion,
continues to represent a huge success in terms of
international diplomacy and the strengthening of the

S/PV. 8143

non-proliferation regime. When the non-proliferation
regime is under threat, I believe that strengthening
and maintaining the JCPOA is very important, but that
has to be done in every aspect. By that I mean that the
people of Iran, who have suffered a great deal under the
regime and because of sanctions, also have to benefit
from the lifting of the sanctions so that they can live in
better conditions.
Secondly, of course, we must look at the full
picture concerning resolution 2231 (2015). To say the
least, Iran’s activities are inconsistent with what that
resolution called for. The list is long, and I thank Jeff
Feltman very much for his presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/1030), which lists a number of
areas in which Iran is not in compliance. First and most
important, there is the issue of the ballistic missile tests
that are being conducted, and the transfer of arms to
the Houthis. Given how many times that was mentioned
around the table today, I believe that it is very urgent
that the Secretary-General continue to work on that
and subsequently present all the evidence before the
Council so that the recommended actions may be taken.
As I said, we continue to support the JCPOA, but
we are not blind. We see the role that Iran is playing.
The leaders of Germany, France and Britain have
underlined that the regional role of Iran and its ballistic
missile programme give rise to serious concerns, as
they directly affect European security interests. Any
alleged activity involving uranium warrants our utmost
attention. We call on Iran to cease all activities that
might be inconsistent or violate the terms of resolution
2231 (2015) and to ensure its full compliance with
the resolution.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

17-4499021/21
