S/2020/397

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 14 May 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the videoteleconference convened on Tuesday, 12 May 2020. A statement was also delivered
by the representative of Iraq.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-06757 (E) 230520 280520

*2006757*

S/2020/397

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Iraq, Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
One can hardly overstate the magnitude of the challenges facing Iraq. The deep
existing political, social, economic and security crises have now been compounded
by the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and a dramatic drop in
oil prices.
As the Iraqi health system was already near breaking point before the
COVID-19 outbreak, the first priority was, and remains, to prevent a rapid spread of
the virus. Within that context, I wish to reaffirm our support to the Iraqi authorities
and to reiterate that no amount of Government response can succeed without the
active involvement of the entire population.
I recently joined my voice to those of my fellow Special Envoys in the Middle
East in echoing the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire in the broadest
sense, not only militarily but also politically. Surely, at this time of acute crisis,
partisanship and narrow interests must yield to the greater national cause and the
good of the Iraqi people.
Unfortunately, as Iraq’s economic situation worsened daily, we witnessed
continued political infighting and saw three Prime Ministers-designate in just
10 weeks. However, at long last, a new Government was formed last week. The
Council of Representatives confirmed Mustafa Al-Kadhimi as the new Prime
Minister and approved his Government programme, as well as 15 out of 22 ministers.
That is a long overdue but very welcome development. The swift completion of the
remaining vacant positions, including the appointment of more women and minority
representatives, is now necessary.
The new Prime Minister’s stated priorities include addressing the COVID-19
health crisis, developing and reforming the security sector, limiting the control of
arms to the State, strengthening the economy, fighting corruption and advancing
accountability and justice. They also include holding a national dialogue, balancing
external relations, safeguarding Iraqi sovereignty, promoting the return of internally
displaced persons to their places of origin and working towards the conduct of early
elections. These worthy aspirations must urgently be turned into action. Let me
emphasize that Iraq does not have the luxury of time, nor can it afford destructive
petty politics.
While the new Government entered office only a few days ago, its first
decisions are promising. However, one does not need a crystal ball to understand
that the road ahead will be fraught with many complex challenges. As I have stated
many times, Iraq’s challenges did not arise overnight. Moreover, they are larger than
any single Government.
It is therefore most important to manage public expectations. There will be
no sudden miracles. Equally important is a broad-based response that involves the
entire political class and all communities, acting with a clear sense of unity and
urgency, focused on building domestic strength and prioritizing the national interest.
The COVID-19 pandemic forced the streets to calm down but, with public
trust at an all-time low, the Iraqi people, calling for a more prosperous and inclusive
Iraq, will not let go. Iraq is facing a long list of urgent unfinished domestic business
and, in order to regain public trust, the Government must prove itself able to carry
out such essential functions as law and order and public service delivery.

2/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

On the issue of early elections, although they are a top priority for many,
Parliament has not yet completed its work on the electoral framework, in particular
the contentious issues of constituency delineation and seat apportionment.
I also wish to reiterate the pressing need for accountability and justice for
the many deaths and injuries of innocent protesters. Allow me to say that we are
encouraged by the early actions taken by the new Prime Minister, which demonstrate
eagerness to move these important files forward.
The current economic situation has once again laid bare Iraq’s vulnerability
due to the grave lack of economic diversification. Iraq’s monthly oil revenues
dropped from $6 billion to $1.4 billion between February and April. At a time when
the global financial system is being drained from all sides, it will be harder than ever
to access international funds.
On top of this, the necessary curfews to contain the COVID-19 pandemic have
brought commercial activity to a near standstill, imperilling the already problematic
livelihoods of many Iraqis who rely on daily earnings to feed themselves and
their families.
The need to broaden Iraq’s revenue base could not be more apparent. Time
and again, it has been made clear that Iraq should reduce its oil dependency, repair
and upgrade critical infrastructure, tackle its ballooning, inefficient public service
and build viable and responsive State institutions. It should also fight corruption,
combat patronage and clientelism and incentivize the domestic private sector, while
attracting foreign investment.
Iraq has clearly and repeatedly been encouraged to build a healthy environment
that is conducive to broad-based, fairly distributed growth and employment
generation, with the assistance of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
the United Nations and other partners. However, without adequate follow-up, the
country will sadly remain ill-prepared to manage these acute shocks.
The economy is projected to contract by 9.7 per cent in 2020, with poverty
rates increasing to approximately 40 per cent. Considerable losses in labour income,
as well as a decrease in economic opportunities, are foreseen.
It is essential to restate that corruption is perhaps the greatest source of
dysfunction in Iraq. It works against the average Iraqi woman and man and also puts
off donors and potential investors, who are increasingly fed up with fighting the
system for a chance to help the country.
Domestic, regional and international security developments continue
to take their toll on the country. Inflammatory rhetoric and a pattern of attacks
and counterattacks on Iraqi soil are obviously unproductive and most regrettable.
Although these appear to have tapered off in recent weeks, they remain a constant
threat to the stability of Iraq.
I can only emphasize that the way in which armed elements, with differing
ties to the State, choose to act at this time will determine how Iraqis, and indeed
many others, perceive them. Once again, Iraq cannot afford to be used as a theatre
for different power competitions and/or proxy conflicts.
Also critical is the prevention of any attempted resurgence of violent
extremism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) must not be given room
to step up its activities. The best form of counter-terrorism is for the Government
to provide for its citizens, addressing the root causes that continue to allow groups
such as ISIL to exist.

20-067573/31

S/2020/397

Turning to humanitarian concerns, we cautiously welcome the ongoing
efforts to improve access authorization for humanitarian workers, especially
the non-governmental organizations in Iraq that provide life-saving services.
Humanitarian partners need access letters to pass through the multiple security
checkpoints in their areas of operation. Unfortunately, many access requests
remain unapproved.
Currently, access is even more constrained due to the COVID-19-related
movement restrictions, adding another layer of complexity. A practical, long-term
solution is urgently required, with an empowered focal point to regularly engage with
humanitarian partners on access matters. I sincerely hope that the Iraqi authorities
will now act without any further delay.
With regard to relations between Baghdad and Erbil, we still cannot point
to a final, fully agreed and implemented deal on critical issues such as the federal
budget, as well as oil and revenue-sharing. On the contrary, we recently witnessed
movement in the opposite direction, as the previous federal Government announced
it would halt payments to the Kurdistan region, affecting the salaries of civil
servants. Regardless of the merits of that decision, the timing was most inopportune.
Negotiations between Baghdad and Erbil are ongoing. I can only emphasize that a
long-term sustainable approach is urgently needed. Of course, for any sustainable
solution, it takes both parties.
With regard to Sinjar, there have been many promises but so far no signatures,
let alone implementation, with the Yazidis notably paying the price. In the Kurdistan
region, as elsewhere in Iraq, transparency, freedom of expression, fundamental
reform and fighting corruption are of critical importance, as is political unity. Recent
internal tensions do not serve the interests of the Kurdish people — far from it.
I now turn to the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. Notwithstanding
significant advances of late, the most recent being the discovery of human remains
in a third grave at the Samawah site in January, COVID-19 has also impacted this
file. The 113th meeting of the Technical Subcommittee, planned for 20 April, as well
as other activities, had to be postponed. The Kuwaiti authorities were nevertheless
able to carry out excavations of burial sites in Kuwait, as planned during the
previous Technical Subcommittee meeting in February. I would like to encourage
all members of the Tripartite Committee to follow this example, working together to
identify other innovative ways to overcome the current constraints and adapt to the
new reality.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the courageous conviction expressed
by countless Iraqis in recent months. Their hopes and demands remain burning
issues and should guide the new Government. I sincerely hope that no party, person
or entity will be allowed to hijack the legitimate demands of the Iraqi people.
With that in mind, I wish to salute Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani, whose calm
wisdom serves as an example to us all. I remain convinced that a more just, prosperous
and resilient Iraq can emerge from the current compounded crises. However, for that
to happen, political will is fundamental.
As I said last time (see S/PV.8676), Iraq must move away from endless crisis
management towards a more productive approach, building resilience at both the
State and the societal level. Short-term political and private calculations do not serve
Iraq’s long-term interests — on the contrary. The challenges are many, but so are the
opportunities. I would like to reaffirm the continued support of the United Nations
to the people of Iraq as well as Iraq’s new Government.

4/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex II
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of
China to the United Nations, Yao Shaojun
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for the informative briefing. We appreciate the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, in line with its mandate. I also welcome the
Ambassador of Iraq, who is participating in this meeting.
We welcome the formation of a new Government of Iraq, led by Prime Minister
Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. The Iraqi people have demonstrated once again that they have
the will, wisdom and capability to find solutions to the challenges that they face.
The international community should fully respect and support the Iraqi people in
pursuing the peace and development of their country. In that connection, I would like
to emphasize the following three points.
First, we should fully respect Iraq’s sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity. At this critical time, we should endeavour to create an enabling
environment for the Government and people of Iraq to move forward the Iraq-led
and Iraq-owned reconstruction process. In giving a helping hand, the international
community must listen first to the views of Iraq, refrain from imposing solutions and
never interfere in Iraq’s internal affairs.
China is concerned about the negative impact of regional tensions on the
peace and security of Iraq. We call on the relevant parties on the ground to follow
the Secretary-General’s appeal of a global ceasefire, exercise restraint and pursue
immediate de-escalation. As the Secretary-General and the Special Representative
have emphasized, Iraq should not become an arena for external conflicts. Any military
action on Iraqi territory must be subject to the consent of the Iraqi Government.
We welcome the continued efforts of Iraq to strengthen relations with its
neighbours, and commend the collaboration between Iraq and Kuwait in resolving
the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property.
Secondly, we should support Iraq in consolidating its counter-terrorism
achievements. In his recent report (S/2020/363), the Secretary-General notes the
increased activities of terrorist groups in Iraq, which have claimed 370 incidents
since January compared with 187 incidents during the same period last year. That
is a worrisome and clear reminder that an immediate threat of terrorism still exists.
The international community must continue its support to Iraq in the fight against
the remnant forces of terrorism and assist the country in addressing the problem of
foreign terrorist fighters.
We should also support Iraq in bringing terrorists to justice in accordance with
the relevant domestic laws and with full respect for its sovereignty and jurisdiction.
China recognizes the important work done by the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, in accordance with its mandate, and encourages it to closely engage
with the Iraqi Government.
Thirdly, we should support Iraq’s efforts to address the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and foster economic and social development. The threat of
the pandemic compounds the economic and security difficulties in Iraq. We call on
international partners, including the relevant United Nations bodies and agencies,
to provide more assistance to Iraq so as to enhance its preparedness and response
to COVID-19.

20-067575/31

S/2020/397

China values its strategic partnership and friendly cooperation with Iraq. We
stand with Iraq in this public health crisis. Last month, a team of Chinese medical
experts just finished its mission in Iraq in combating COVID-19. The experts spent
50 days in Iraq, visited nine provinces, conducted 27 training courses for more than
1,000 medical staff and helped to launch a testing laboratory.
Measures to mitigate the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic should be in
parallel with the efforts on sustainable development, which is key to sustaining peace
and stability. China therefore welcomes the commitment of the new Government of
Iraq to boosting the economy, reducing unemployment and improving public services.
China believes that the international community has an important role to
play in helping Iraq to rebuild its critical infrastructure, eradicate poverty, ensure
better access to health care and quality education and improve the livelihoods of the
ordinary people. We have been doing our part actively and constructively during the
past years, including through the Belt and Road Initiative.
It is our sincere hope that, with the strong support of the international
community, the Government and people of Iraq will succeed in building a peaceful
and prosperous nation.

6/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex III
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
We wish to start by expressing our deepest condolences to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and to Chad, as well as
our condemnation of the recent attack against Blue Helmets in Mali.
We would like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for
her leadership.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in supporting the measures implemented by the Government of Iraq
and the Kurdistan Regional Government to address the current health crisis and to
prevent a larger outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
The Dominican Republic expresses its support to the recently elected Prime
Minister, Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, and notes with satisfaction his aspirations to
strengthen the economy, tackle corruption and restore State sovereignty, as well as
his willingness to take a new approach to the social unrest by meeting and consulting
with protesters.
With regard to relations between Baghdad and Erbil, we commend the
cooperation between the federal Government and the Regional Government on
issues relating to security, especially the fight against the remnants of the Islamic
State, as well as the continued engagement to resolve pending issues, including an
agreement on oil-revenue sharing.
Similarly, we welcome the efforts of Iraq to foster relations with other countries
on regional stability, cooperation to counter the Islamic State, the reconstruction of
Iraq and bilateral relations, including the opening of a dialogue between the United
States and Iraq based on the Strategic Framework Agreement of 2013.
On a different note, it is of great concern that the Islamic State is gradually
gathering strength and increasing its activity. We therefore urge the international
community to make greater efforts and collaborate closely with Iraq to prevent the
resurgence of the Islamic State and its heinous crimes.
On the issue of human rights, we condemn the recent acts of violence,
disappearances and killings perpetrated against journalists, demonstrators and
activists by unidentified men amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, we
encourage a thorough investigation of these incidents with a view to identifying the
perpetrators and establishing accountability.
In relation to the humanitarian situation, we encourage the federal Government
and the Regional Government to work closely with the Humanitarian Coordinator’s
leadership to streamline communication and processes across governorates to
facilitate the provision of aid, as well as to ensure coherent preparedness for the
COVID-19 outbreak.
Considering recent data related to the steady increase of gender-based violence
cases, including domestic violence, following the implementation of measures to
prevent the spread of COVID-19, we urge UNAMI to actively engage with civil
society organizations dealing with gender-based violence to find ways to better
address the issue and assist the Government in this task.
Regarding the unresolved issue of Kuwaiti and third-country missing persons,
we welcome the progress achieved thus far by members of the Tripartite Mechanism

20-067577/31

S/2020/397

in the search for prisoners and missing persons reported by Kuwait, the recent
discoveries of human remains and the devolution of assets and federal files.
In conclusion, we look forward to the prompt formation of an inclusive
Government that ensures the participation of women and youth and that tackles, with
due diligence and responsibility, the major challenges facing the country. Moreover,
we are hopeful that all parties can foster reconciliation and political dialogue with a
view to ending the political deadlock that has persisted and consequently prevented
authorities from making the necessary social and economic reforms.

8/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing and for the excellent work that she and her team are doing in support of
the Iraqi Government.
As indicated by the Special Representative, Iraq is facing a series of significant
challenges, including in the political, economic and security fields. In addition,
the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated the
situation even further. We welcome the measures taken by the Government of Iraq
to contain the spread of the virus.
Considering the urgency of effectively addressing these multiple challenges,
and in order to respond to the needs of the people, it is crucial that all political actors
put their differences aside and that national unity and solidarity prevail.
We welcome last Thursday’s development, with the Iraqi Parliament’s
approval of the new Government led by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. We
hope that the remaining ministerial seats will be filled promptly and that women will
be included when assigning the remaining posts as part of efforts to ensure their full
participation in the political process. This is an important step towards responding to
the legitimate aspirations of the Iraqi people. We call on the international community
to support Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi in his efforts to realize a democratic, peaceful
and prosperous Iraq.
We call on the new Government to accelerate structural reforms, including
economic reforms, improve governance and take effective measures to counter
corruption and implement the rule of law. To improve the stability of Iraq, it is
essential to implement security-sector reform and bring all armed forces under
State control.
As set out among the priorities of the new Government, we encourage Iraq to
complete the electoral reform process, to hold free, fair and credible elections, and
to continue engaging with the United Nations for technical assistance and support.
As regional tensions continue to affect stability in Iraq, we reiterate that all
actors must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. We fully support
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire and call on all actors to refrain
from all military action, which would threaten the stability of Iraq. It is also crucial
not to allow the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to make gains from the increased
challenges, including those caused by COVID-19. The continued support of the
international community to the security and reconstruction of Iraq remains crucial.
The continued reports of human-rights violations against protesters, civilsociety activists and human-rights defenders are deeply worrying. As the restrictive
measures related to COVID-19 will soon be lifted, it is crucial that the authorities
secure freedom of speech and assembly, protect peaceful protestors from violence,
investigate all violations and ensure accountability.
Unfortunately, the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic has the greatest impact
on vulnerable populations. This calls for additional measures to prevent genderbased violence, including support to victims of domestic violence. We also urge the
Government of Iraq to engage with the United Nations in finding lasting solutions for
the large number internally displaced persons and to secure their safe and dignified
return to their places of origin.

20-067579/31

S/2020/397

In conclusion, I would like to express Estonia’s full solidarity with Iraq in
these difficult times and call on the new Government to work together with the
United Nations and its international partners towards stability, prosperity and peace.

10/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Anne Gueguen
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her presentation and for the outstanding work the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) is doing under her leadership. She
has the full support of France in her mission.
France congratulates the new Prime Minister, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, on
his nomination and the formation of the Iraqi Government. We are confident that the
remaining governmental positions will be filled promptly, and with the participation
of women.
As the Special Representative underlined, Iraq is facing many internal, regional
and economic challenges, and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is
adding to that already difficult situation. It is essential that we all provide our support
to Iraq at this crucial moment to contain and mitigate the pandemic, which could
have tragic consequences, especially for the most vulnerable, and to consolidate the
national democratic project of the country. There are four main elements that I would
like to underline in this regard.
First, it is essential that the new Iraqi Government challenge the status quo
in the country to live up to the expectations of the Iraqi people. Meaningful reforms
are needed in fighting corruption, promoting sustainable economic growth and
diversification, streamlining bureaucracy, improving public services and ensuring
gender equality. Iraqi women have also courageously participated in the protests
and the full diversity of their voices and demands must be taken into account in any
political and decision-making processes.
The first measures announced by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi are encouraging,
in particular the commission charged with identifying those responsible for the
repression of protesters. Indeed, accountability is crucial to ensuring a stable and
democratic Iraq in the long term. The inclusion of members of civil society in the
commission is a positive sign, and we encourage the Iraqi Government to continue
such engagement with civil society in all areas.
Free, fair, inclusive and transparent elections will also be a major milestone in
the path towards a sovereign and democratic Iraq.
Secondly, it is crucial that Iraq stay away from regional tensions, in line with
the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. This is essential for the stability
of the country and to facilitate the fight against COVID-19. It is also indispensable
for the ongoing fight against Da’esh, in which the international coalition plays a
crucial role in support of the Iraqi Government. In this regard, it is also essential that
all armed groups be effectively under the control of the State authorities.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation remains of great concern, in particular
in the context of the pandemic. We are deeply concerned by the situation of the
1.4 million internally displaced persons, who are extremely vulnerable. Efforts to
prevent and respond to COVID-19 must be scaled up, notably in camps for displaced
persons and refugees. Swift, safe and unhindered humanitarian access, which has
become more difficult over the past few months, is more necessary than ever. In
this context, France will continue its assistance efforts, in particular in the fields of
humanitarian assistance and health — long-standing priorities for us — including
the rebuilding and development of the Faculty of Medicine in Mosul and the
20-0675711/31

S/2020/397

construction of a hospital in Sinjar. France will, in particular, support the survivors
of sexual violence in Sinjar in the context of the work of the Global Survivors Fund.
Fourthly, in this context, it is essential that UNAMI continue to be equipped
with a robust mandate in support of the Iraqi people and Government. It plays an
indispensable role in favour of inclusive political dialogue, reconciliation, electoral
assistance, human rights and accountability. We also strongly encourage UNAMI to
continue its engagement with civil society.
Finally, I wish to make some remarks on the developments pertaining
to missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. Progress is being made monthly on this important
issue despite some inevitable delays due to the pandemic. It is important that the
cooperation among all actors involved remain strong.
Let me conclude by stressing our conviction that a sovereign, inclusive and
prosperous Iraq is crucial for a stable and peaceful Middle East. My country is
committed to standing firmly alongside the Iraqi people and their Government
during these challenging times.

12/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations, Juergen Schulz
We continue to fully support the efforts of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq in support of the people and the Government of Iraq.
Germany welcomes the formation of the new Government, led by Prime
Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. We hope that the Government-formation process will
be concluded swiftly, including the appointments of women to cabinet positions.
Since October 2019, peaceful protesters in Iraq have raised, and continue
to raise, serious and legitimate demands, addressed to Iraq’s political leaders and
parliamentary actors. We have taken note that the declared priorities of Prime
Minister Al-Kadhimi’s Government, and indeed the initial measures announced
by his cabinet, reflect those demands. Those priorities include preparation of
early elections, addressing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the
economic crisis, concentrating State control over arms, adopting the federal budget
for 2020, conducting a national dialogue, investigating violence against protesters,
safeguarding Iraqi sovereignty, continuing the fight against corruption and securing
the return of internally displaced persons.
We call on the new Government and all Iraqi political leaders to take swift
and effective action with a view to implementing these urgently required reforms in
order to meet the legitimate needs and demands of the Iraqi people, to regain public
trust and to improve the lives of Iraqi citizens.
We join the Secretary-General in his call for a political process in which
women, youth and all of Iraq’s diverse communities, including ethnic, religious and
other minorities, can actively participate.
The implementation of substantive reforms has become even more urgent in
light of the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting political, economic, security, social
and health challenges. Germany, as one of Iraq’s leading donors, stands ready to
continue its substantial support to Iraq and to work closely together with the new
Iraqi Government in addressing these challenges and building a prosperous and
stable Iraq.
In this context, we remain concerned about the difficulties facing national and
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) since December 2019, which
affect their critical work on humanitarian, stabilization and development efforts.
The absence of an efficient access procedure for NGOs is also now, regrettably,
affecting the response to COVID-19.
We remain deeply concerned by reports of arrests and violence against
protesters, civil society activists, human-rights defenders and journalists. In response
to popular protests, serious human-rights violations and abuses against peaceful
protesters have occurred. Systematic attempts to threaten and prevent people
from exercising their fundamental right to peaceful assembly and their freedom of
expression are unacceptable.
The Iraqi Government has an obligation to protect all peaceful protesters,
civil-society activists and human-rights defenders and their fundamental rights. We
welcome Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi’s personal commitment to that effect.
All incidents in which excessive use of force by security forces or other armed
groups have resulted in the death or injury of protesters, as well as all other acts
of violence, including those against security forces, and unlawful detention should
20-0675713/31

S/2020/397

be investigated independently and transparently. Accountability for all crimes
committed remains of utmost importance. In this respect, we are encouraged by the
initial steps of the Al-Kadhimi Government to release detainees arrested during the
protests and push forward with investigations.
We are also concerned by reports of increased levels of domestic violence
during the current COVID-19 curfew and call on the Iraqi Government to take
concrete steps to ensure that victims of domestic violence have access to appropriate
protection and that the perpetrators of domestic violence are held accountable. We
welcome the continued dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil and encourage both
sides to resolve all outstanding issues, including those related to natural resources,
revenue-sharing and security arrangements.
We remain concerned by the impact of regional tensions on Iraq and call for
continued de-escalation and restraint by all regional and international players.
Iraq should neither be dragged into nor become an arena for a regional
confrontation. Instead, Iraq should be able to enjoy amicable relations with all its
neighbours and partners.
We condemn the repeated rocket attacks in Iraq on coalition troops countering
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Such attacks are unacceptable and put
the successes achieved in the fight against the Islamic State at risk. It is crucial
that cooperation between the Government of Iraq and its international partners
in the fight against terrorism be continued. Otherwise, Iraq and the international
community will face a high risk of the resurgence of the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and in the region.

14/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Indonesia to the United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by expressing our deepest condolences in connection with the
fallen Blue Helmets in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
I also would like to express our appreciation to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her important update. Following
her most recent briefing, in early March (see S/PV.8739), we were pleased to learn
that Iraq is on the path of recovery and reconstruction and that there are signs of
progress towards stable nation-building.
Indonesia further reiterates its support for Iraqi sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. I would also like to underscore, as mentioned by Jeanine,
that attacks and counter-attacks on Iraqi soil remain a constant threat to the stability
of the country.
I should also like to underscore the following.
First, on the political situation, we would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
welcome of the new Government of Iraq, led by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi.
As Iraq is a young democracy, its journey will not be easy; however, if we always
put the interests of the people first, the efforts made will yield the desired results. In
particular, during a challenging time such as this Iraq needs a stable and effective
Government, and the authorities need to work in unison in the spirit of national
unity in addressing the challenges confronting the Iraqi people. That will enable
the Government to deliver basic services and to address the immediate needs,
demands and interests of Iraq’s diverse communities, including ethnic and religious
minorities, women and youth.
We also welcome Prime Minister’s Al-Kadhimi’s priorities in tackling the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and on accountability, as mentioned
by Jeanine. Also, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/363), the
COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the overall situation in Iraq and
is compounded by political, security, economic, humanitarian and other challenges.
In that connection, to improve the economic situation, which has also been
affected by the pandemic, and compensate for the fall in global oil prices, there is
a need to undertake structural reform, combat corruption and promote sustainable
economic growth and diversification. It is easy for us to say all these words, but it is
more important that we translate them into reality by supporting Iraq, as it is in the
interest of the international community to support the country’s economic growth
and stability. A stable and prosperous Iraq will contribute to peace in the region.
Secondly, concerning the security situation, Indonesia is concerned that the
remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have continued to launch frequent
attacks against civilians and security forces in some areas, doubling their claimed
activities to 370 incidents since January 2020, as compared with 187 incidents during
the same period last year. We express our support for the efforts of the Government
and the security forces in combating terrorism.
Security and stability are crucial to nation-building and economic development.
The same goes for support by the countries of the region and key countries aimed at
achieving a stable and prosperous Iraq, which in turn will bring benefits regionally
and globally.

20-0675715/31

S/2020/397

Thirdly, concerning the humanitarian situation, we welcome the efforts of the
Government, supported by the United Nations, to address the humanitarian situation,
particularly in providing durable solutions for the internally displaced. We also note
that efforts concerning the missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals,
as well as the return of Kuwaiti property, are being delayed because of constraints
relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, we have confidence that with
continued collaboration within the Tripartite Commission, progress is attainable.
To conclude, Indonesia supports the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) as well as the renewal of UNAMI’s mandate this month.
We are certain that the work of UNAMI in supporting the Government and the people
of Iraq, particularly in terms of the COVID-19 response, will be of monumental
importance to the well-being of the people of Iraq and the region.
As mentioned earlier, Iraq does not have the luxury of time, and thus it is
incumbent for us in the Council not to forget the Iraqi people, who rely on the
international community, in particular in this time of COVID-19. Let the Iraqi people
have a peaceful Ramadan month.

16/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
The Niger is horrified by the senseless attacks on peacekeepers in Mali and on
innocent mothers and children in Afghanistan.
I wish to thank Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the hard
work she is doing with her team in Iraq’s complex environment. We also welcome
the representative of Iraq to this meeting.
The Niger welcomes the formation of a new Government in Iraq. We look
forward to working with Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi and his Cabinet
members. We take note of the new Government’s reform agenda, which includes
“addressing the COVID-19 health crisis, bringing arms under State control,
strengthening the economy, protecting demonstrators, balancing external
relations, safeguarding Iraqi sovereignty from external interference and
securing the return of internally displaced persons to their places of origin”
(S/2020/363, para. 9).
We wish them luck in this new endeavour.
We also reiterate our encouragement to the Iraqi authorities for their
continuing efforts to develop friendly relations with neighbouring countries and to
expand their partnership at the regional and global levels. Along the same lines, we
appeal to all stakeholders inside and outside Iraq to exercise maximum restraint for
the sake of the Iraqi people. As Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert noted in the Chamber on 3 March (see S/PV.8739), Iraq
has come a long way. The efforts made, however minimal, must be appreciated,
supported and encouraged.
The Niger supports the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) to find a lasting solution in Iraq by promoting dialogue among the
political parties and regional Governments, strengthening State institutions and in
particular providing assistance for electoral processes per its mandate. UNAMI’s
support for the Independent High Electoral Commission to rebuild its institutional
and electoral operational capacities is at its most important point, with the Iraqis
taking the step of forming a Government.
Furthermore, the political process must be part of a quest for solutions to the
multiple challenges facing Iraq today. The Niger remains convinced that a sustainable
process must include Iraqi women, and, in that regard, we welcome the UNAMI
consultations with the Women’s Advisory Group, whose demands for representation
at all levels of political participation and protection remain legitimate.
The Niger commends the determination of UNAMI, the Tripartite Commission
and the International Committee of the Red Cross with respect to the issue of Kuwaiti
and third-country missing persons, property and archives from the first Gulf War.
We also welcome the recent discoveries made, as this will bring closure to some
Kuwaitis and further the relationship between the two countries.
The Niger remains gravely concerned about the ongoing acts of violence
against peaceful protesters and journalists. We call on the new Government to
accelerate the process of finding those culpable and holding them accountable for
their actions in accordance with the rule of law and Iraq’s Constitution.

20-0675717/31

S/2020/397

We also join the Secretary-General’s call in urging the Government of Iraq to
find tangible measures to protect all peaceful protesters, civil-society activists and
human right defenders.
Iraq, like all other countries, is not immune to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). In fact, we just learned that COVID-19 had halted activities on many
fronts. My delegation commends the early and active engagement of the Government
of Iraq in joining global efforts to contain the rapid spread of the pandemic with the
help of the World Health Organization and UNAMI. In the same spirit of containment,
we appeal for a special pardon; the halting of mass arrests for persons breaking the
curfew; and measures to prevent potential violence, including alternatives to family
visits and timely information for detainees.
In addition to the threat posed by COVID-19, terrorism represents another,
equally dangerous menace. We commend the continued support of the United Nations
in stabilizing the five governorates in Iraq that were previously under the control of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Nonetheless, that terrorist group continues
to operate in, and attack the population of, Iraq and foreign troops in the country. We
call on the Iraqi authorities, with the support of their partners, to continue the fight
against terrorists while ensuring respect for international human rights law.
My last point relates to the humanitarian access issue. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, an estimated 4.1 million people in
Iraq require some form of humanitarian assistance this year. The Niger calls on the
Government to take immediate steps to facilitate safe, timely and unhindered access
for humanitarian organizations to deliver humanitarian assistance and protection to
the people affected.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the Niger’s support for UNAMI’s work
in accordance with the mandate assigned to it by the Security Council. Lastly, I call
for the international community to support the new Government and its reforms so
that Iraq does not fall back into dark days.

18/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vladimir Safronkov
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine HennisPlasschaert for her tireless efforts and express our thanks and support to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its efforts in that very complicated
environment. We deeply appreciate what the Mission is doing in the country. We also
welcome the participation of the Permanent Representative of Iraq in this meeting.
We welcome the appointment of the new Prime Minister and emphasize with
satisfaction that his Cabinet’s programme has been approved by the Parliament.
We are aware of the Government’s priorities, which include holding free and fair
elections, mobilizing all resources to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, launching a national dialogue, protecting the sovereignty of the country,
fighting terrorism and other goals. We are ready to support — and indeed already
support — all efforts aimed at improving the situation in friendly Iraq.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on the overall situation
in Iraq and has multiplied the political, economic and humanitarian challenges there.
In that context, it is important that the international community support Baghdad as
it develops comprehensive measures aimed at responding to the COVID-19 outbreak.
We are strongly convinced, and we continue to reiterate, that only inclusive
dialogue and reconciliation will help overcome the internal disputes in Iraq and
restore mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil. Further improvement of
their relations will help Iraq promote security and the effective use of its economic
capacity. We therefore encourage both sides once again to reach and implement a
comprehensive agreement on all outstanding issues.
We note that the COVID-19 outbreak has led to a suspension of demonstrations
across the country. In that regard, we call on all sides to continue to act in a reserved
manner. However, we believe that it would be unacceptable for external players to
instrumentalize the domestic situation.
Iraq should not be dragged into a regional confrontation or become an arena
for regional disputes or the settling of scores. Such attempts would contravene
international law, violate Iraq’s sovereignty and damage the country’s national
interests. We highly value and encourage Iraq’s continued efforts to build constructive
and fruitful relations with all its neighbours and the region as a whole.
It is high time to begin implementation of resolution 598 (1987), to devise
measures to enhance the security of the region and to take a closer look at other
relevant initiatives, including the Russian security concept for the Gulf region,
France’s constructive ideas and Iran’s peace proposal. I am of the strong opinion
that UNAMI could significantly contribute to the normalization of the political
environment around Iran, since the Special Representative has an office in Tehran.
We have to use this potential to normalize the operative environment at this difficult
time. We are deeply concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is already
trying to exploit the pandemic and increase its activities. I would be grateful for the
Special Representative’s comments on that issue.

20-0675719/31

S/2020/397

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
We, too, thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative
briefing and her leadership under these extraordinarily difficult circumstances. I
wish also to recognize my friend and colleague Ambassador Mohammed Hussein
Bahr Aluloom, the Permanent Representative of Iraq.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the political progress made in
Iraq, including progress towards the formation of the new Government. Iraq is now
grappling with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and we recognize
and commend the Government’s early engagement to contain its spread. We also
acknowledge the coordination between the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) and the World Health Organization to support the Government’s
measures in this regard. We reiterate that the fight against COVID-19 is a shared one
requiring close cooperation.
We encourage the Government to keep human dignity at the centre of its
efforts to combat COVID-19, to protect the most vulnerable people, including
displaced persons, and to ensure that appropriate mechanisms and laws are in
place for the protection of victims of domestic violence. We also emphasize the
need for the unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance to persons in need.
Most persons targeted for humanitarian assistance under the humanitarian response
plan are displaced persons, and we take this opportunity to underscore the need
for the relevant authorities to facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return and
reintegration of displaced persons in accordance with international law.
In addition to fighting the pandemic, Iraq is still recovering from the war on
terror, and we remain concerned that remnants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant continue to launch frequent attacks against the Iraqi people.
We commend UNAMI for its constructive engagement in Iraq, including
its commitment to resolve the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property, and
recognize the commitment of Iraq’s Ministry of Defence and the support of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in that regard.
Regarding Iraq’s path to reconciliation and reconstruction, we stress that the
exclusion of any group within Iraqi society can have a crippling effect. Impunity
can also adversely impact the reconciliation process. To that end, we encourage
the Government to pursue accountability for violations of international law and
encourage UNAMI to support the Government in that endeavour, in accordance
with the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for UNAMI and encourage the
countries of the region and the international community to help strengthen Iraq’s
domestic capacities in order to promote its path to reconstruction.
Last but by no means least, I wish to extend our condolences to the families of
the Blue Helmets recently killed in Mali. May they rest in peace and may their good
work always be remembered.

20/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), for her insightful briefing.
South Africa supports the mandate renewal of UNAMI, in its current form,
as it partners with the Government of Iraq in its post-conflict reconstruction and
development efforts and provides much-needed humanitarian assistance throughout
the country.
South Africa would like to commend the Government of Iraq for the actions
it has taken to combat the threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The
pandemic has greater impact on countries emerging from conflict, like Iraq. We
appeal to the international donor community to continue providing the much-needed
humanitarian assistance and medical supplies to assist the Government of Iraq as it
addresses COVID-19.
One of the unfortunate negative consequences of the virus is the increased
in domestic violence. The Iraqi Government must ensure the protection of women,
provide the necessary support services and commit to prosecuting perpetrators of
domestic violence.
Regarding political developments, South Africa congratulates the Government
of Iraq and its people on the election of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Khadimi. We
look forward to the formation of a full Cabinet, with the hope that it will enable Iraq
to implement new programmes to improve the lives of all Iraqi citizens, balance
external relations, safeguard Iraqi sovereignty and secure the return of internally
displaced persons.
South Africa supports the initiative for an inclusive Government that will
bring together the diverse aspects of Iraqi society into governance structures.
National reconciliation and unity in Iraq are vital if it is to avoid future challenges
related to fractured Government policies and actions.
South Africa notes with appreciation the fraternal manner in which the central
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government reached an agreement
on oil production. Continued dialogue between them on oil and revenue-sharing
is also essential, especially in the light of the severe economic challenges. The
Secretary-General’s call to act now in order to boost the immunity of our societies
against the virus of hate could not be more relevant.
Iraq continues to face severe challenges that accelerate the spread of
extremism and finds itself entwined in regional rivalries that arise out of the
military misadventures of others. We wish to reiterate the Secretary-General’s
calls for international and regional partners to exercise restraint, pursue immediate
de-escalation, support Iraq in its efforts to maintain security and stability and
prevent Iraq from becoming an arena for external conflicts.
South Africa supports the consolidation of the Iraqi army’s full control over
its territories, as well as the efforts of its Government to eradicate the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
Peace and security are fundamental for Iraq to develop its infrastructure,
grow its economy and provide basic services to all of its citizens. South Africa
wishes to highlight the success of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting
20-0675721/31

S/2020/397

the Government’s inclusivity efforts, specifically in institution-building and postreconstruction development.
South Africa is encouraged by the collaborative efforts of the Governments
of Kuwait and Iraq to locate missing Kuwaiti nationals and others, as well as
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. We are encouraged by
positive developments in that regard, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/358). We urge both countries to work together with the relevant United
Nations institutions to resolve those outstanding issues.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and continues to support UNAMI in the implementation of its mandate.
South Africa echoes the sentiments of Special Representative HennisPlasschaert — that Iraq does not have the luxury of time. The Iraqi people must set
aside their differences and join hands to build an Iraq that belongs to all its people
and to ensure lasting peace.

22/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, James Roscoe
I join others in condemning the recent attacks on peacekeepers in Mali. The
people who carry out such attacks are the enemies of peace. All they do is encourage
us to redouble our efforts in that country.
I would like to begin by thanking Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert
for her thorough briefing. We also join others in welcoming the parliamentary
confirmation of Mustafa Al-Kadhimi as the new Prime Minister of Iraq and the
appointment of the majority of his Cabinet. As our Foreign Secretary conveyed
to Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi on 12 May, the United Kingdom is committed to
supporting this new Government in addressing the challenges facing Iraq.
We urge the Iraqi Parliament to swiftly appoint the remaining ministry posts
in order to enable the Government of Iraq to deliver for all the Iraqi people. We
encourage the new Government to work closely with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in the coming months.
As other members of the Council have said, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) poses a serious threat to Iraq, as it does to all countries. We commend
the actions taken by the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government
to ensure the safety of its citizens as they tackle COVID-19. We welcome the unity
that political and religious leaders have demonstrated during this time. The United
Kingdom supports Iraq’s efforts to combat the pandemic, including through the
provision of over $12 million in assistance for that purpose.
But as Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert said, the impact of
COVID-19 and the fall in global oil prices have only compounded the serious
economic challenges facing Iraq. To address those challenges, Iraq will need to
undertake difficult reforms and will require the sustained support of the international
community. In that connection, we look forward to the new Government’s early
engagement with international financial institutions. The United Kingdom has
contributed over $19 million to the World Bank’s Iraq Reform and Reconstruction
Fund, and we hope that others will look to do the same.
We urge both the Kurdistan Regional Government and the Government of
Iraq to continue to tackle Iraq’s security challenges. That includes making progress
on negotiations on the internally disputed territories. We join others on the Council
in expressing concern about the increasing frequency of attacks by Da’esh in recent
months, culminating in the deaths of a number of members of Iraqi federal police and
popular mobilization forces on 2 and 3 May. Like the other members of the global
coalition against Da’esh, the United Kingdom remains committed to supporting Iraq
in its efforts to prevent a Da’esh resurgence. That must be our priority.
In that regard, we condemn the actions of groups operating within Iraq,
which resulted in the death of Lance Corporal Brodie Gillon and two United States
service personnel on 11 March, and further attacks on 14 March that injured both
United States and Iraqi service personnel. We urge the Government of Iraq to take
swift action against those who caused the deaths of coalition and Iraqi troops and to
prevent future incidents.
The formation of the new Government is an opportunity to address the
legitimate demands expressed during the protests in recent months and to investigate

20-0675723/31

S/2020/397

and hold accountable those who used excessive force against the protesters. We
welcome the early steps taken by the Government in that regard.
We also welcome UNAMI’s readiness to support the Government of Iraq’s
efforts to make technical preparations for elections, including through the Mission’s
continued support of the Independent High Electoral Commission. The Government
of Iraq and UNAMI should work together on the provision of technical assistance
and support for future elections.
Also welcome is the continued engagement between the international
community and the Government of Iraq. We note the decision of the United States to
extend the waivers allowing Iraq to continue to import gas and electricity from Iran.
The United Kingdom notes the recent 112th meeting of the Technical
Subcommittee and regrets the postponement of the subsequent meeting. We note,
however, that the exhumation of a third mass grave site on 31 January will provide
long-needed closure to Kuwaitis.
We urge the international community to support the new Government in Iraq as
it addresses the pressing health, economic, security and political issues confronting
the country. The success of the new Government of Iraq is in the interests of all of us.

24/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I would like to begin by expressing our condemnation of the 10 May attack
against a convoy belonging to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and express our deepest condolences to the victims’
families in Chad. We underscore the importance of ensuring the safety and security
of peacekeepers, and we call on the Government of Mali to swiftly investigate the
attack and bring the perpetrators to justice.
It was my distinct pleasure to have had a conversation this morning with
Special Representative Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert. I agree with her that the
challenges are many. I can tell the Council that she is certainly up to the challenge.
After speaking with her, I echo her statement and feel more confident than ever
that Iraqi elections will be by and for the Iraqi people. I thank her so much for her
time with me this morning, because it has given me the confidence to go back to
the Trump Administration, which, as the Council knows, spoke with Iraq’s Prime
Minister yesterday. I feel very confident in our conversation.
Last week’s confirmation of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi by Iraq’s Council
of Representatives marks a tremendous achievement. In the face of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), low oil prices and long-standing economic and security
challenges, including State control of armed groups, Iraq could not have asked for a
more capable leader. With Al-Kadhimi as Prime Minister and Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert leading the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
Iraq is well-positioned to navigate its many challenges. The Trump Administration
looks forward to helping Iraq’s new Government realize its bold agenda and deliver
a life of dignity, security and prosperity to all Iraqis.
The COVID-19 pandemic is a global threat, the likes of which we have not
seen in 100 years. As we know all too well, this virus knows no borders and does
not discriminate based on communal or sectarian identities. Iraq’s new Government
will have to be vigilant and proactive to ensure that COVID-19 does not reverse our
hard-fought progress in restoring Iraqi stability. To help prevent any such reversal,
the United States has provided nearly $30 million in COVID-19 assistance for Iraq.
That funding is helping to implement a public-health emergency plan, prepare
laboratories for medical work and much more. It also builds upon my country’s longterm investment in Iraq — more than $70 billion of assistance over the past 20 years,
including nearly $4 billion for the health sector.
But funding alone will not be enough. And on that note, we must recognize
that many relief actors, including United States partners, continue to report access
constraints for the provision of humanitarian assistance on the ground. We commend
UNAMI’s advocacy to resolve that issue, and we urge the Iraqi authorities to find a
permanent solution to ensure the delivery of vital assistance.
We cannot and will not forget the Iraqi protesters from all walks of life
expressing their legitimate economic and governance grievances. We will also not
forget the human rights abuses perpetrated against them in recent months. UNAMI’s
work is invaluable in monitoring and documenting such human rights violations and
abuses. Iraq’s new Government must follow the paper trail and bring to justice those
responsible for human rights abuses.
The Special Representative highlighted UNAMI’s continued engagement on
the Kuwaiti missing persons and archives file. We once again welcome those efforts.

20-0675725/31

S/2020/397

Finally, I would like to reiterate our strong belief that credible elections
represent Iraq’s best opportunity to usher in structural change, genuine reforms and
a better life for all Iraqi citizens. We urge UNAMI to heed the call of Iraqis across
the political and social spectrum — a call demanding United Nations-supported,
Iraqi-led and Iraqi-owned elections that, as the Special Representative said, must be
free and fair. With UNAMI’s help, the Iraqi Government can restore public faith in
elections and can provide a credible vehicle for carrying out the people’s will.

26/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam to the United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I join my colleagues in extending our deepest condolences to the fallen Blue
Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), for her informative briefing. I would also like
to welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq at our meeting today.
Amid the continued complexities with respect to the situation in the country,
we very much welcome the appointment of the first formal Government of Iraq
since December, under the leadership of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi. We take note
of the recent decision of the Supreme Judicial Council to release protesters, and of
the Prime Minister’s statement that all pensions would be paid in the days ahead.
Given the difficulties over the last few months in reaching agreement on this critical
position, it is of the utmost importance that all parties in Iraq work closely together,
taking in account each other’s concerns.
We are also pleased to note that the measures that the Government has
undertaken to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic are working. As
with many other countries, the stringent steps taken, severe though they may be,
have helped limit the country’s number of COVID-19 cases and deaths, which is one
of the lowest in the region. While these achievements contributed to the easing of
curfew and lockdown in the last few days, it is necessary to continue applying the
required measures to ensure that a second wave of infections does not occur in the
weeks ahead.
While the pandemic is an immediate and severe challenge for Iraq, longstanding issues remain to be addressed. The pandemic has wreaked devastating
consequences on every single Iraqi. The collapsing price of oil has further limited
the scarce resources at the Government’s disposal. Such tools are now increasingly
overwhelmed by the magnitude of economic hardship and social instability that
have been roiling the governorates and regions of Iraq. These difficulties threaten
to reverse hard-won achievements in the country’s economic development over the
last few years. Recently, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast that Iraq’s
gross domestic product would fall by 4.7 per cent this year. The Government had to
ask IMF for debt deferment as budget deficit have grown exponentially.
Economic instability has been further compounded by political and security
uncertainties. As the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2020/363), there have
been an increasing number of incidents caused by terrorists, including by those from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The pandemic and the temporary
suspension by the global coalition to defeat ISIS of some of its activities has created
a breeding ground for the surge of terrorist acts. In this regard, we share the call for
continued resources, attention and political will so as to sustain counter-terrorism
efforts in Iraq.
We call upon all parties in Iraq to commit to sustained efforts aimed at achieving
national reconciliation and at working together to come up with a comprehensive,
long-term plan to address legitimate economic and political aspirations of the
Iraqi people. It is important to engage in sincere dialogue that takes into account
the interests and views of all parties, be they political or religious. Indeed, there
would be more political certainty if the electoral law were officially promulgated.
20-0675727/31

S/2020/397

We hope that efforts with regard to the return of Kuwaiti missing persons and
properties, including the national archives, will be resumed as soon as the pandemic
is properly addressed.
For the people and the Government of Iraq to address the aforementioned
challenges, the international community must remain committed to providing further
assistance and support to Iraq. Iraq’s sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity must be respected. We share the Secretary-General’s call for international
and regional partners to exercise restraint, pursue immediate de-escalation and
support Iraq in its efforts to maintain security and stability.
Addressing the humanitarian situation in Iraq also remains a priority. We
call for continued assistance by the United Nations, international organizations and
Member States in this regard. We welcome the valuable contributions of a number of
assistance partners and donors in the past few months.
Last but not least, we would like to express our appreciation for the efforts
made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI
in assisting the people and the Government of Iraq. Despite numerous difficulties,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and UNAMI have carried out
a range of much-needed activities. Given the continuing instabilities in Iraq, we
support the extension of the Mission’s mandate in the days ahead.

28/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Iraq to the
United Nations, Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom
At the outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Estonia, Sven Jürgenson, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also extend my sincere thanks
to the Dominican Republic’s Special Envoy to the Security Council, José Singer
Weisinger, for his able management of the Council’s work last month.
I would also extend my gratitude to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing.
Allow me now to deliver the following statement on behalf of the Prime
Minister of Iraq, Mustafa Al-Khadhimi.
“The challenges that Iraq faces in various fields, be they economic,
security, health or social, are great, but they are no greater than our willingness
to address them. All Iraqis, from Basra to Kurdistan, will work together to
achieve stability and overcome these challenges. In this regard, I would recall
our experience in fighting together to defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS), also known as Da’esh.
“Members of my Government are aware of the many difficulties we are
facing: a pandemic that could overwhelm a health system that had suffered
long years of neglect and maldevelopment, an economic crisis that has been
exacerbated by our dependence on oil, and a trust gap among several sectors
of Iraqi society, in particular young people and public institutions, which has
led to a large wave of protests since October 2019.
“We understand that taking up the responsibility to form a Government
and lead the country in conditions such as these is not a privilege, but a test
of our faith in our country and its people, and it is one from which we cannot
shy away. My Government was formed in response to a political crisis, but
it aspires to be a Government that brings about solutions. We will address
the urgent problems. As I stated when I first announced my Government’s
programme, which has since been approved by the Iraqi Parliament, we
believe that, in order to achieve the goal of finding solutions, some steps
should be taken in advance.
“First of all, the sovereignty of the State must be preserved and honoured.
Secondly, the rule of law must be strengthened, and the State must reclaim
full control over the country’s armed forces. Thirdly, we must work to prevent
foreign Powers from transferring their conflicts and rivalries into Iraq, which
has threatened our stability, and from using Iraq as a base to attack other
countries. Iraq’s sovereignty and independence are crucial to the stability
and security of the region, which we think can be enhanced by establishing
friendly relations with all countries.
“I believe it is important to briefly expand on the other priorities of my
Government, as follows. The Government pledges to use all of the State’s
capabilities to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
including supporting the specialized task force and providing medicines and
medical equipment to the public, in addition to being open to international
support and experience in this regard, as well as establishing a modern healthcare system with a forward-looking vision.
20-0675729/31

S/2020/397

“The Government pledges to enforce State authority by controlling the
possession of arms and restricting possession of arms to Government and
military institutions, and by enforcing the rule of law.
“The Government pledges to draft a special budget law that will tackle
the current economic crisis and the plummeting of oil prices. This law should
address the problems of all governorates, including those in the south, which
have suffered deprivation, and those that have been destroyed by Da’esh,
as well as in the Kurdistan region, focusing in general on the diversity of
income sources.
“The Government pledges to initiate a frank and responsible national
dialogue with all components of society in order to address the demands
set forth by the peaceful protest movement and apply its national priorities.
In addition, the Government will launch a comprehensive fact-finding and
accountability campaign with respect to the violent incidents that accompanied
the protests, so that those involved in shedding Iraqi blood may be prosecuted
and so that martyrs’ families and the wounded may receive due care.
“The Government pledges to protect Iraq’s sovereignty and security
and formulate a shared national vision to negotiate the presence of foreign
forces in Iraq. This vision will operate within the framework of protecting the
country’s security and continuing the fight against terrorism.
“The Government pledges to combat corruption by adopting legal
mechanisms and practical steps to ensure protecting public assets, promoting
the role of judicial institutions and recovering public funds inside and
outside Iraq.
“The Government pledges to promote the values of citizenship and
respect for religious, ethnic and national diversity in Iraq, rejecting any kind
of religious, sectarian or nationality-based discrimination among citizens.
“With the intention of taking action on the aforementioned priorities,
the Government, at its first Cabinet meeting, which took place on 9 May,
adopted the following orders: to immediately release pension payments; to
establish a truth-finding committee to investigate the violence perpetrated
against peaceful demonstrators and bring redress to those who were harmed,
hold perpetrators accountable and compensate the families of the martyrs
and wounded persons; to release, in coordination with the Supreme Judicial
Council, all detainees who participated in the demonstrations of October; to
establish an experts committee to evaluate and provide recommendations on
developing a legal framework for elections, present recommendations on the
completion or amendment of the national electoral law and the best practices
for supporting the Independent High Electoral Commission in organizing an
early election; and to establish a special committee to prepare for the strategic
dialogue with the United States of America in line with the goal of preserving
Iraq national sovereignty.
“Fighting and countering terrorism is at the core of my Government’s
security strategy as well as its purpose in paving the way for the reconstruction
of liberated cities and the return of displaced citizens. To this end, we will
lead negotiations with the global coalition to Defeat the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham on the presence of the international troops in Iraq, based on a
shared and inclusive national vision.
“Iraq welcomes all efforts undertaken so far to repatriate family members
of foreign terrorist fighters and urges other countries to accept the return of
30/31

20-06757

S/2020/397

their non-convicted citizens. There is an urgent need for concerted efforts to
be made to rehabilitate and integrate victims of terrorism, especially in the
areas that have been recovered.
“Iraq confirms its strong commitment to establishing friendly relations
and cooperation with our neighbours and the international community as a
whole. In this context, cooperation with Kuwait remains one of Iraq’s top
priorities. A large part of our effort centres around finding the missing
Kuwaiti persons as well as finalizing and fulfilling our obligations towards
their bereaved families. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence continues its efforts
to excavate the remains at the sites at Samawah, Khamisiyah, Al-Radhwania,
Karbala, Salman Pak and Al-Burjusiya. At the same time, Iraq calls on the
Tripartite Commission and the State of Kuwait to accelerate the process to
announce the results of the DNA tests of the remains of 47 missing persons
found and handed over in August 2019.
“The ongoing and painstaking search efforts have led to the discovery
of a new set of Kuwaiti archives. The Iraqi Ministry for Foreign Affairs was
supposed to deliver those archives by April but, owing to the conditions
occasioned by the COVID-19 pandemic, the delivery has been postponed.
“With regard to compensation, a payment of $440 million was made on
28 April, which leaves an outstanding balance of $2.8 billion. This precarious
situation puts Iraq in an extremely difficult position that no Government can
maintain without international cooperation and solidarity. In these difficult
circumstances, the formation of the new Government is further proof of the
success of democracy in Iraq, where power was peacefully handed over in
line with the Constitution.
“Accordingly, we aspire to having the Security Council support Iraq
by helping the new Government achieve its priorities in the following ways:
condemning violations of Iraq’s sovereignty by any Member State and
preventing such acts in future; supporting the newly formed Government to
address its principal challenges, especially with regard to COVID-19 and the
economic and financial crisis; and actively cooperating with Iraq in the war
against terrorism, in which Iraq still stands at the front line.
“Iraq commends the support being received from the international
community and reiterates that helping the country preserve its national
sovereignty will be a cornerstone of the success of the new Government.
“I extend my special appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
supportive positions towards Iraq, and we hope that the international
community will continue to support the people of my country in achieving a
stable and prosperous Iraq. I offer special thanks to the Head of UNAMI and
her team for their tireless efforts over the last 12 months. We look forward to
the Security Council renewing the UNAMI mandate for another year.”

20-0675731/31
