V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Having examined the note by the Secretary-General of
the International Telecommunication Union concerning the
mobilization of voluntary resources for the World Communications Year, 2
Recognizing the fundamental importance of communications infrastructures as an essential element in the economic and social development of all countries,
Convinced that the World Communications Year will
provide the opportunity for all countries to undertake an indepth review and analysis of their policies on communications development and stimulate the accelerated development of communications infrastructures,
1. Endorses the proposal made by the Economic and
Social Council in paragraph 1 of its resolution 1981/60 and
proclaims the year 1983 World Communications Year: Development of Communications Infrastructures, with the International Telecommunication Union serving as the lead
agency for the Year and having responsibility for co-ordinating the interorganizational aspects of the programmes
and activities of other agencies;
2. Requests all States to participate actively in the attainment of the objectives of the World Communications
Year;
3. Invites the competent organizations and agencies of
the United Nations system to co-operate closely with the
Secretary-General of the International Telecommunication
Union, within their respective terms of reference, for the
implementation of the programme for the World Communications Year;
4. Invites non-governmental organizations and users of
communications services to participate actively in the World
Communications Year and to secure the fullest possible coordination of their programmes for the Year, particularly
at the national level;
5. Invites Governments and interested organizations to
make voluntary contributions to the World Communications
Year through the Special Fund for the World Communications Year co-ordinated by the International Telecommunication Union, in order to ensure increased financing
of projects at the national, regional and global levels;
6. Appeals to governmental authorities and appropriate
organizations to make circuits available for reporting on the
activities of the World Communications Year through existing means of information, including radio and television
broadcasts, in collaboration with those authorities;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the International
Telecommunication Union to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, through the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1982, on the
state of preparations for the World Communications Year.
64th plenary meeting
19 November 1981

36/41.

World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/157 of 19 December 1977
and 33/122 of 19 December 1978, concerning the World
Tourism Organization,
Recalling also its resolution 34/134 of 14 December
1979, concerning the convening of the World Tourism Conference in September and October 1980 at Manila by the
World Tourism Organization,
Recalling further its resolution 35/56 of 5 December
1980, by which it proclaimed the Third United Nations
2

A/36/585, annex.

99

Development Decade and adopted the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Decade,
Taking note of paragraph (c) of Economic and Social
Council decision 109 (LIX) of 23 July 1975, in which the
Council designated the World Tourism Organization top~ticipate, on a continuing basis, in the work of the Council,
Noting with satisfaction the report of the SecretaryGeneral of the World Tourism Organization on the World
Tourism Conference, 1 prepared in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 34/ 134,
Noting with appreciation the statement made by the Minister of Tourism of the Philippines and President of the
World Tourism Conference before the Second Committee,
on 8 October I 981, 4 on the results of the Conference, as
embodied in the Manila Declaration on World Tourism 5
adopted by the Conference,
Recognizing the new dimension and role of tourism _as
a positive instrument towards the improvement of the quahty
of life for all peoples, as well as a vital force for peace and
international understanding,
I. Welcomes the Manila Declaration on World Tourism,
which provides guidelines for the harmonious, balanced and
equitable development of national and international tourism;
2. Urges States to give due attention to the principles
of the Manila Declaration while formulating and implementing, as appropriate, their tourism policies, plans and
programmes, in accordance with their national priorities and
within the framework of the programme of work of the
World Tourism Organization;
3. Requests the World Tourism Organization to continue its efforts towards the future development and promotion of tourism, especially in the developing countries,
bearing in mind the implementation of the principles and
guidelines contained in the Manila Declaration;
4. Requests international, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations directly or indirectly interested
in tourism to extend their assistance, in consultation and cooperation with the World Tourism Organization, towards
the implementation of the Manila Declaration;
5. Decides that the World Tourism Organization may
participate, on a continuing basis, in the work of the General
Assembly in areas of concern to that Organization;
6. Requests the Secretary-General of the World Tourism
Organization to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session, through the Economic and Social Council,
a report on the progress made in the implementation of the
Manila Declaration.
64th plenary meeting
19 November 1981

36/42.

Mobilization of personal savings

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
' A/36/236, annex.
Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirty-sixth Session, Second
Committee, 9th meeting. paras. 11-15.
' A/36/236, annex, appendix I.
4
