A /67/PV.62

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Ofﬁcial Records

Sixty-seventh session

62

nd plenary meeting
Friday, 21 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Statement by the President
The President: Standing before this greatest of
parliaments more than three months ago, I pledged to
faithfully serve the cause of the United Nations and to
exercise my authority in a forthright and even-handed
manner, with the utmost respect for the sovereign
equality of Member States. Now that the main part of
the sixty-seventh session is drawing to a close, I can
only hope that I have fulfilled most of Member States’
expectations. I truly look forward to the start of the
resumed part of the session in a few weeks’ time and to
joining participants again in this Hall after the holiday
break.
Allow me to thank all speakers, who, in expressing
their countries’ positions, have made substantial
contributions to the work of the plenary. In addition,
I would like to express my most special and sincere
appreciation to the Vice-Presidents for their selfless
assistance and cooperation. I am also deeply grateful for
the leadership and guidance of the Secretary-General
and for the institutional support of the Secretariat,
particularly the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management.
As of this morning, the plenum has adopted 231
resolutions and 63 decisions, and there remain many
more to conclude. The highlights include the so-called
humanitarian omnibus resolution, human rights and
freedom of religion or belief improvements, combating
intolerance and strengthening the disarmament
machinery, among others.

The issue that perhaps drew the most attention
was the historic vote, held on 29 November, granting
Palestine non-member observer State status in the
United Nations (see resolution 67/19). Moments before
the ballots were cast, I extended an appeal from this
rostrum to the General Assembly, in particular my dear
friends from Palestine and Israel, to work for peace
with the aim of reaching a comprehensive settlement.
Today, allow me to call again for a just peace in the
Holy Land. I fervently believe that when it comes to
the Middle East — or, for that matter, to the Sahel, the
Great Lakes Region of Africa and a number of other
conflict-ridden areas across our planet — good-faith
engagement in a peace process is the only way to bring
strife to a lasting conclusion.
In today’s globalized interconnected world, what
happens in one part of it invariably affects us all. With
that in mind, I chose as the overarching theme for
the sixty-seventh session “Bringing about adjustment
or settlement of international disputes or situations
by peaceful means”. In such tumultuous times, the
enormity of that challenge is evident. So we look with
hope to far-sighted leaders, mindful of democratic
aspirations, yet capable of making tough and historic
decisions. Their task is a truly monumental one — to
see ahead what not appears, as the poet Robert Frost
wrote so many years ago, and to remember the future
and the path that beckons.
The content of the general debate reflects the fact
that there is now a congruence of views among Member
States that conflict prevention, durable peace and
security and sustainable development can be achieved

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-66174 (E)

*1266174*

A/67/PV.62

only through an integrated approach. Fulfilling the
Millennium Development Goals must remain at the core
of our shared vision for a more prosperous, peaceful
and equitable world. At the same time, we must also
focus on the post-2015 agenda.
I am going to leave aside the substantial part of my
speech on sustainable development goals. I had certain
strong beliefs that I am no longer prepared to share
with this audience before the next attempt is made to
make certain breakthroughs in that process. Personally,
I strongly believe that the sustainable development
agenda is critical to the prosperous future of mankind.
I very much hope that that view will also be reflected
in the decisions that we might take in this Hall in the
future. However, before we come to an agreement,
I must say that I am no longer prepared to speak in
public about sustainable development as President of
the General Assembly.
Over the past few years, the Group of 20 (G-20)
has come to play an increasingly important role
in the debate on global economic governance. Its
decisions have worldwide implications and, in one
way or another, affect every Member State’s political,
economic and social development. I believe that the
General Assembly, which operates on the basis of the
principle of sovereign equality, can provide a unique
platform to exchange views and to share information on
our economic concerns.
To that end, I intend to launch a process that would
lead to the establishment of a non-intrusive form of
regular interaction between the General Assembly
and the G-20, with the participation of international
financial institutions as appropriate. Let me be very
clear that the intent of that initiative is not to infringe
on established prerogatives but to complement the
existing international efforts, in accordance with the
G-20’s readiness to reach out to non-G-20 countries
and the United Nations. That would certainly help
answer a number of questions related to transparency
and inclusivity.
I intend to organize a thematic debate on ways to
enhance dialogue between the G-20 and the rest of the
world. I will extend invitations to several G-20 and
non-G-20 Heads of State and Government, as well as the
Russian G-20 presidency and other key stakeholders.
In my view, the need for regular consultations has
become all the greater in the wake of a number of
sobering studies that forecast a slowdown in global
growth and job creation, including, most recently, the
2

alarming United Nations World Economic Situation
and Prospects 2013 report.
I will also convene several other high-level
thematic debates in the months to come. One will be
organized on social inequality, in partnership with
the Organization of American States. Another will
focus on the role of international criminal justice in
reconciliation. In collaboration with UNESCO, I will
invite Member States to participate in a thematic debate
on culture and development. In addition, we will have
a debate devoted to examining tools for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in Africa.
Moreover, a thematic debate will be held on climate
change, green energy and water sustainability, in
partnership with the United Arab Emirates and the newly
established United Nations Sustainable Development
Solutions Network, spearheaded by the Director of its
secretariat, Mr. Jeffrey Sachs of Columbia University.
As mandated by the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, a thematic session will also be held to
mark the International Year of Water Cooperation.
Other debates will be held on entrepreneurship for
development, improving coordination of efforts against
trafficking in persons, external debt sustainability
and development, and international migration and
development, among others.
The themes we have chosen for our debates during
the resumed part of the sixty-seventh session are not only
important in and of themselves, meriting significant
attention from the Member States; they are also
designed to advance our common efforts to revitalize
the work of the General Assembly. At the same time,
we must endeavour to consistently implement what has
already been agreed on in this Hall. Doing so should
be seen by all Member States as a core principle of
effective multilateralism for the twenty-first century.
As President, I will also continue to encourage greater
transparency in the conduct of our affairs, making more
efficient use of our time and resources in advancing our
common objectives. However, at the end of the day, it
is the conduct and dedication of Member States, and
Member States alone, that will determine the future
strength of the General Assembly.
In coming to the end of my remarks, I would like
to extend my best wishes to all delegations and their
families for a joyful festive season. As we take the time
to reflect on what has been achieved and what remains
to be done, I believe that we can draw inspiration
from the words of one of my predecessors, Namibia’s
12-66174

A/67/PV.62

Theo-Ben Gurirab, who, while addressing the plenary
from this rostrum a little over a decade ago, said that
the United Nations must always be a
“beacon for all worthy causes in the far corners of
the world, especially among the poor and needy in
the developing world” (A/54/PV.1, pp. 2-3).
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The meeting was suspended at 3.55 p.m. on Friday,
21 December, and resumed at 5 p.m. on Monday,
24 December.
Agenda item 69 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including
alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Report of the Third Committee (A/67/457/Add.2)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/670)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it draft resolution XVI, recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 137 of its report. We will
now take a decision on draft resolution XVI, entitled
“Committee Against Torture”. The Third Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution XVI was adopted (resolution
67/232).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
also the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 69?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee (A/67/457/Add.3)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/672)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia to speak in explanation
of position.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will join

the consensus on draft resolution I, entitled “Situation
of human rights in Myanmar”, since my Government
supports the progress that has been made in Myanmar
and its Government’s declared commitment to political
reform, strengthening and protecting human rights,
national reconciliation, achieving justice and equality
for all citizens, and preventing all acts of aggression
on the basis of race or religion, especially organized
attacks, killings and displacement that target the
Rohingya Muslim minority.
The Rohingya Muslim minority is enduring a
tragic situation caused by the policy of punishment and
violence directed at it, in contravention of all principles
of human rights, moral values and international law. My
country supports the rights of this vulnerable minority,
including those relating to citizenship, political rights,
property and all other fundamental rights. We also call
for full access to humanitarian assistance for affected
people and groups, regardless of their race or religion.
My country has contributed $50 million to help the
Rohingya victims and hopes that the international
community will take similar, speedy steps to support
that vulnerable minority.
My Government welcomes the recent letter from
the President of Myanmar to the Secretary-General,
in which he condemned the criminal provocation of
violence and organized attacks in his country that have
resulted in a significant loss of lives and displacement
of families in the state of Rakhine. We also welcome his
affirmation of the Myanmar Government’s willingness
to address the political matter of resettling displaced
members of the Rohingya Muslim minority and its
intention to take into consideration all relevant issues,
in line with international standards. Accordingly,
Saudi Arabia has joined the consensus in the hope that
the commitments made by the President of Myanmar
on behalf of his Government will be respected and
fulfilled.
Unfortunately, we note that after the vote on the draft
resolution in the Third Committee, the Government of
Myanmar expressed strong reservations about the use of
the term “Rohingya minority”. Saudi Arabia notes that
such reservations do not encourage hopes of reaching
a peaceful settlement of the situation of this oppressed
minority, and are a negative response to the consensus
reached by the international community. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia will continue to closely monitor the
situation of the Rohingya minority in Myanmar in the
hope that the Government of Myanmar will cooperate

12-661743

A/67/PV.62

fully with the international community in order to
achieve justice for that minority.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on draft resolution I, entitled “Situation of human rights
in Myanmar”. The Third Committee adopted it. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/233).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 69, and of
agenda item 69 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 94 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
Report of the First Committee (A/67/409)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/671)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it draft resolution IV, recommended by the First
Committee in paragraph 97 of its report. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/67/671.
We will now take a decision on draft resolution IV,
entitled “The arms trade treaty”. Separate votes have
been requested on operative paragraphs 2 and 3. I shall
first put to the vote paragraph 2.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,

4

Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States
of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Egypt,
Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Mauritania, Myanmar, Namibia, Oman, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen
Operative paragraph 2 of draft resolution IV was
retained by 126 votes to 1, with 21 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Kazakhstan and
Kyrgyzstan informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
Belarus and the Russian Federation informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
operative paragraph 3.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
12-66174

A/67/PV.62

Jordan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Mauritania, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South
Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen
Operative paragraph 3 of draft resolution IV was
retained by 123 votes to 1, with 24 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Kazakhstan and
Kyrgyzstan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of the
Russian Federation informed the Secretariat that it
had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I now put to the vote draft
resolution IV, entitled “The arms trade treaty”, as a
whole.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,

Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet
Nam, Zambia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Cuba, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kuwait, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Arab
Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Yemen
Draft resolution IV, as a whole, was adopted by
133 votes to none, with 17 abstentions (resolution
67/234).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Kazakhstan and
Kyrgyzstan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of the
Russian Federation informed the Secretariat that it
had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Holy See to make a statement following
the adoption of the draft resolutions.

12-661745

A/67/PV.62

Mr. Urbańczyk (Holy See): As the Holy See has
long reiterated, a strong, effective and credible arms
trade treaty can make a difference to millions of people
confronted by insecurity, deprivation and fear. We
therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 67/234,
entitled “The arms trade treaty”, which reignites
the hope that, after the unfortunate stalemate of the
conference of July 2012, the international community
will finally be provided with such a legally binding
instrument.
In order to achieve that noble goal, it is necessary that
we have an open and transparent process that allows for
the full participation of all States. The United Nations
and the conferences held under its auspices have long
followed the practice of encouraging the participation
of all States in the drafting and adoption of multilateral
treaties so that the outcomes of such conferences have
broad and universal support and ratification. Therefore,
in view of a treaty as important as the arms trade treaty,
the participation of all States also in such a conference
is not only desirable but necessary and consistent with
the long-held practice of the General Assembly.
The Holy See therefore understands that the
inclusion of mutatis mutandis in paragraph 2 of the
present resolution is recognition that one of the changes
necessary for the upcoming conference is to rectify
the improper treatment of my delegation during the
previous conference so as to ensure that the Holy See,
in accordance with resolution 58/314, pertaining to
its participation, be fully recognized, in accordance
with its rights within the United Nations and the rules
of procedure adopted at the beginning of the July
conference.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
94.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on
agenda items 128 to 131, 133, 134, 137, 138, 141 to 145
and 153.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Justin Kisoka of the United Republic of Tanzania,
to introduce in one intervention the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before the Assembly.

6

Mr. Kisoka (United Republic of Tanzania),
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee: I have the honour
today to introduce to the General Assembly the reports
of the Fifth Committee that contain recommendations
on issues that required action during the main part of
the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 4 October to
24 December and held 22 plenary meetings and several
rounds of informal consultations, as well as innumerable
informal-informal consultations. I will now introduce
the reports of the Fifth Committee.
With regard to agenda item 128, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors”, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/67/666, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
On agenda item 131, entitled “Programme
planning”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report contained in
document A/67/668, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 133, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/67/664, the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
On agenda item 134, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations,” the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/67/502/Add.1, the adoption of a draft
resolution, which the Committee adopted without a
vote.
On agenda item 145, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations of the United Nations peacekeeping operations,”
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/67/665, the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
Under agenda item 138, entitled “United Nations
pension system”, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly, in paragraph 7 of its report
contained in document A/67/667, the adoption of a

12-66174

A/67/PV.62

draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
Under agenda item 139, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency”, the Committee recommends to the
General Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/67/662, the adoption of a draft decision,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 141, entitled “Administration
of justice at the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph
6 of its report contained in document A/67/669, the
adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 142, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/67/674, the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 143, entitled “Financing of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, an oral amendment to
the draft resolution contained in document A/67/675 was
introduced by the delegation of the Russian Federation.
The delegation of Sweden requested a recorded vote on
that amendment, and the Committee voted not to accept
the amendment. A recorded vote was also requested on
the draft resolution as a whole. Subsequently, the draft
resolution was adopted.
On agenda item 144, entitled “Financing of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/67/676, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
On agenda item 153, entitled “Financing of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”,

the Committee recommends to the General Assembly,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/67/663, the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 130, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2012-2013”, the Committee
considered two draft resolutions contained in its report
contained in document A/67/677. With regard to draft
resolution I, the delegation of Cuba introduced an oral
amendment to section I of the draft resolution. The
delegation of Denmark requested a recorded vote on
the amendment, in which the Committee voted not to
include the oral amendment in the draft resolution. The
Committee subsequently adopted the draft resolution
as a whole without a vote.
Also with regard to agenda 130, the Committee
considered and recommended the adoption of three
statements of programme budget implications. The
reports of the Fifth Committee on those statements were
issued in documents A/67/670, A/67/671 and A/67/672.
The Committee therefore recommends the adoption
of the draft resolution on the programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013.
Finally, under agenda item 129, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
adopted, without a vote, the draft resolution on the
proposed programme budget outline for the biennium
2014-2015. Also, in paragraph 9 of the same report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft decision entitled “Questions deferred
for future consideration”, which the Committee adopted
without a vote.
I wish to thank delegations for their cooperation,
and to assure them that the action taken in the course of
the main part of the sixty-seventh session of the Fifth
Committee will be reflected in the draft resolutions and
reports that will be issued shortly.
I also wish to thank the secretariat of the Fifth
Committee and other United Nations officials and
personnel for their dedicated efforts in support of our
work. I wish everyone happy holidays.
The Acting President: Before proceeding further,
I would like to emphasize to delegations that, as the
Fifth Committee has just finished its work, the reports
are available in English only. It is my understanding
that they will be issued in all the other official

12-661747

A/67/PV.62

languages as soon as possible. I thank delegations for
their understanding.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/235).

If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before it today.

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
128.

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee, and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 128
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/666)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft resolution, entitled “Financial reports and
audited financial statements, and reports of the Board
of Auditors”, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.8.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

8

Agenda item 131 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/668)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft resolution, entitled “Programme planning”,
is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.10. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/236).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 131.
Agenda item 133
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/664)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being,
the text of the draft resolution, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.5.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/237).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 133.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/502/Add.1)

12-66174

A/67/PV.62

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations”, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.6.
I give the floor to the representative of Monaco in
explanation of position.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Monaco
would like to explain its position before the Assembly’s
adoption of the report of the Fifth Committee on
agenda item 134, entitled “Scale of assessments for the
apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations”.
The Government of His Serene Highness the
Sovereign Prince of Monaco joined the consensus for the
adoption of the draft resolution contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.6 and recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/67/502/Add.1, although, for the period 2013-2015,
Monaco has seen its assessments increase from
0.03 to 0.12 per cent, which is a 300 per cent increase.
Monaco has reservations about the methodology used
to calculate this scale of assessments, and regrets that it
has not been reviewed, despite the fact that the General
Assembly decided upon that at its sixty-fourth session
in order to fully abide by the principle of Member
States’ capacity to pay.
Monaco particularly regrets that the current
methodology does not allow for specific characteristics
particular to the Principality to be taken into account,
including its low resident population and salaried
population. When Monaco’s non-resident salaried
population involved in daily domestic wealth creation
is factored in, it represents an increase of 120 per cent
over the country’s resident population. That atypical
situation leads to a distortion in evaluating Monaco’s
capacity to pay.
Despite the 300 per cent increase in its assessment
in the United Nations budget, the Government reiterates
its commitment to complying with its international
obligations and to honour the payment of its contribution
on time. In doing so, Monaco reaffirms its attachment
to a strong United Nations with the financial resources
needed to implement the mandates of its agencies in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/238).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
134.
Agenda item 145
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/665)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of United Nations
peacekeeping operations”, is contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.7. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution.
I would like to confirm the understanding of
the Assembly that, on an exceptional basis for the
2013-2015 scale period only, three countries in
Level B — the Bahamas, Bahrain and Oman — will be
afforded discounts of 7.5 per cent on their assessment
rates; that Oman will forgo its transition period; and that
these accounts will not cause the aggregate assessment
rates for countries in Level A over the scale period to
exceed their aggregate effective rates, as contained
in annex III of the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
55/235 and 55/236 (A/67/224).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/239).
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Oman, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Al-Mazroui (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I will
be brief. With respect to agenda item 145, “Scale of
assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of

12-661749

A/67/PV.62

United Nations peacekeeping operations”, I should first
like to thank the Chairman of the Fifth Committee,
Ambassador Berger of Germany, for the wisdom with
which he conducted the work of the Committee, as
well as the Chairman of the Group of 77 and China,
the Permanent Representatove of Algeria, and all the
representatives of that Group, who made great efforts to
reach fair conclusions in the interests of those members
of the Group who are currently facing great difficulties.

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?

Oman joined in the consensus adoption of resolution
67/239. However, consideration should be given to the
fact that there was no justification for raising Oman
to Level B under fabricated pretexts and for only one
scale of assessment period. In view of all the logical
and objective criteria on which relevant decisions are
supposed to be based, the Sultanate of Oman should
be at the same level as developing countries where
per capita income increases gradually and nominally.
The level on which Oman has been placed includes all
developed countries, while Oman remains a developing
country.

United Nations pension system

The Sultanate of Oman is proud to participate in
providing the necessary support to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we appreciate the fact
that some measures are being taken to reduce our
assessment by 7.5 per cent, in line with the scale of
assessments. In that regard, we thank all those who
negotiated for that conclusion. However, we are not
happy with the fact that our country has been put at
Level B when it should have remained at its previous
level or at least allowed to accept a gradual increase and
not a sudden, direct move to Level B.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 145.
Agenda item 137
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/678)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft decision, entitled “United Nations common
system”, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.14.
We will now take action on the draft decision. The

10

The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 137.
Agenda item 138
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/667)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 7 of its report. For the time being, the text
of the draft resolution, entitled “United Nations pension
system”, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.9. We
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/240).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 138.
Agenda item 141
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/669)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution, entitled “Administration of
justice at the United Nations”, is contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.11. We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/241).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 141.

12-66174

A/67/PV.62

Agenda item 142
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/674)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution, entitled “Financing of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994”, is
contained in document A/C.5/67/L.15.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/242).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 142.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/675)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.16.

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation to introduce oral amendments to the draft
resolution.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I wish to state for the record
that we worked under a very heavy schedule and
that we have not had an opportunity to properly
verify the enumerated figures on the financing of
the two Tribunals. The Secretariat has assured us
informally that amendments to the financing figures
corresponding to our a consensus decision would be
provided subsequently.
With regard to the voting, we are grateful for the
active involvement of all delegations in discussing
the financing of the International Criminal Tribunals
for Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia and of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We thank delegations for their pursuit of a
compromise solution, taking into account our position
on the financing of the Rwanda Tribunal and the
Residual Mechanism.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to achieve a
consensus on the parameters for the financing of the
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The Russian
delegation showed maximum flexibility and amended
its proposals to strengthen the budgetary discipline
of the Former Yugoslavia Tribunal. However, even
our amended proposals, including those of other
delegations, are not reflected in the text of draft
resolution A/C.5/67/L.16, submitted by the Chairman
of the Fifth Committee.
In line with the request of the Secretary-General to
approve the additional expenditure requirements with
respect to inflation and exchange-rate fluctuations,
we support the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to absorb those reasonable requirements. As was the
case with such requirements for the Tribunal under
the United Nations internal justice system, we propose
conducting an independent expert assessment of the
administrative budgetary aspects of the activities of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
The delegations that endorse the need for such an
assessment of the Disputes Tribunal and the Court of
Appeal but did not support such requirements for the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, are,
in our view, adopting a position of double standards

12-6617411

A/67/PV.62

and a politicized approach with regard to financial and
technical matters.
Given that the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia requires greater budgetary discipline
and accountability than the Tribunal for Rwanda, we
support the initiative of returning the budgetary cycle
of that Tribunal to a one-year basis, as was the case
prior to the year 2000. Such a proposal would be fully
in line with Security Council resolution 1966 (2010)
on the completion of the work of the Tribunal and the
transfer of its functions to the Residual Mechanism.
In view of the aforementioned issues, we are
compelled to propose amendments to the draft resolution
on behalf of the Russian Federation and the Republic
of Serbia in order to strengthen the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia’s administrative
and budgetary discipline and accountability to Member
States. Allow me to make those amendments orally.
First, in paragraph 3, we propose endorsing the
conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and to delete the phrase
“subject to the provisions of the resolution”. In that
connection, we request that the calculations for the
revised appropriations for 2012-2013 and the respective
apportionment be amended to bring them in line with
the levels recommended by the Advisory Committee.
We also propose the following amended paragraphs:
“Recalls its resolution 55/225 and requests the
Secretary-General, with the objective to ensure
timely downsizing of the work force and transition
to the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, to submit proposals for an
independent expert evaluation of the efficiency of
the functioning of the Tribunal.
“Decides not to take note of the basis for the
proposed budget for the biennium 2014-15, as
requested in paragraph 19 of the relevant report of
the Secretary-General A/67/595.
“Requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the transition from a biennual budget cycle of the
Tribunal to an annual cycle in connection with the
upcoming completion of its work and transition to
the Residual Mechanism.
“Requests the Secretary-General to submit his
next budget proposals for the Tribunal only for 2014
on the basis of the approved preparations for 2012.”
12

The Acting President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has submitted an oral amendment
to the draft resolution recommended in the report of the
Fifth Committee in document A/67/675. In accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly
shall first take a decision on the amendment submitted
by the representation of the Russian Federation.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
oral amendment submitted by the Russian Federation?
I give the floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Soteriou (Cyprus): My delegation would like
to request a recorded vote on the oral amendment
proposed by the Russian Federation.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested on the oral amendment suggested by the
Russian Federation.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Kazakhstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Serbia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Fiji, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
12-66174

A/67/PV.62

Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Japan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Yemen

Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia

The oral amendment was rejected by 59 votes
against to 17 in favour, with 65 abstentions.

Against:
None

[Subsequently, the delegation of Saudi Arabia
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]

Abstaining:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Sierra Leone, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of)

The Acting President: Since the oral amendment
submitted by the representative of the Russian
Federation has not been adopted, we shall now proceed
to take a decision on the draft resolution as a whole. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,

The draft resolution, as a whole, was adopted by
139 votes to none, with 12 abstentions (resolution
67/243).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 143.
Agenda item 144
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/676)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.17.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/244).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
144.

12-6617413

A/67/PV.62

Agenda item 153
Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/663)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.4.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/245).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
153.
Agenda item 130
Programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013
Reports of the Fifth Committee (A/67/677)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 33 of its report.
I now call on the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Goicochea Estenoz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation has the honour to speak on behalf of
the delegations of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
the Republic of Nicaragua, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, the Republic of Ecuador and the Islamic
Republic of Iran on the draft resolution contained in
document A/C.5/67/L.18, entitled “Questions relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”,
which includes estimates related to special political
missions, good offices and other political initiatives
authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security
Council.
Our delegations regret the fact that, once again,
activities and elements related to the responsibility
to protect were included in the logical framework of
the Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, as we all know that the General Assembly
has not pronounced itself on that concept. Given the
absence of specific mandates, it is inappropriate to

14

include, in budget estimates, human and financial
resources related to the activities of the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect. We are concerned that
the budget presentation did not indicate the resources
related to activities pertaining to the responsibility
to protect within the total resources requested for the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
In addition, our delegations believe that including
those activities is a violation of various resolutions
on programme planning and the programme budget,
including the settlement of and detailed regulations
for programme planning, programme budget elements,
implementation oversight and evaluation methods. Our
delegations furthermore believe that this inclusion
does not help us to reach an agreement on the budget
estimates for this thematic group.
The delegations on behalf of which I am speaking
would like to reiterate our full support for the activities
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
We also reiterate our full adherence to international
law. However, given the stated reasons for including
activities and concepts related to the responsibility to
protect within the budgetary estimates of the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, our delegations call for a recorded vote on
section I of draft resolution I recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 33 of its report in document
A/67/677.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the voting.
Mr. Bayat Mokhtari (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation has asked for the floor to explain its
vote under this agenda item. My delegation has always
supported the activities of the United Nations in all
areas within the scope of its work, as long as they abide
by the rules and regulations of the Organization and
remain within international law and the purview of the
United Nations. Although Iran supports the functions
of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, in the view of my delegation
the issue of the responsibility to protect, including its
definition, is still under consideration by the General
Assembly. It is therefore not acceptable for my
delegation that the limited financial resources of the
Organization be allocated to fund posts for which there
is no mandated definition.

12-66174

A/67/PV.62

It is for that reason that my delegation will vote
against section I of the draft resolution and urges other
member States to do the same.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution I, entitled “Questions
relating to the programme budget for the biennium
2012-2013”, the text of which is contained, for the time
being, in document A/C.5/67/L.18.
A separate, recorded vote has been requested on
section I of draft resolution I.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet
Nam, Yemen
Against:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Ecuador, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Nicaragua,
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia

Abstaining:
Barbados, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, China, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Fiji, Haiti, Iraq,
Kazakhstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Papua New Guinea, Russian Federation, Samoa,
Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Thailand, Togo, Zimbabwe
Section I of draft resolution I was retained by 113
votes to 12, with 22 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Brunei
Darussalam, Djibouti, Iraq and Madagascar
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
consider draft resolution I, entitled “Questions relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013”,
as a whole. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/246).
The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution II, the text of which, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/67/L.19.
Draft resolution II is entitled “Programme budget
for the biennium 2012-2013”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/247).
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of vote.
Mr. Ayzouki (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of section I,
“Special political missions”, of resolution 67/246.
However, my delegation would like to express
reservations about the allocation of financial resources
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004), because the Special Envoy, Mr. Roed-Larsen,
does not qualify under the criteria set out in paragraph
12 of resolution 63/261.
He has exceeded the mandate given to him under
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) by pursuing
bilateral issues concerning two sovereign States,
Syria and Lebanon, on the establishment of diplomatic

12-6617415

A/67/PV.62

relations and the demarcation of borders between them,
whereas he is flagrantly biased in favour of Israel
and deliberately covers up that country’s failure to
implement any of its obligations under resolution 1559
(2004), especially its obligation to withdraw from the
occupied Lebanese territories.

Agenda item 139

My delegation joined the consensus on resolution
67/247, entitled “Programme budget for the biennium
2012-2013”. However, with regard to section 7, entitled
“Revised estimates on decisions and resolutions of the
Human Rights Council”, the Syrian delegation would
like to express its reservations about the allocation
of financial resources under the two Human Rights
Council resolutions 19/22 and 21/26.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft decision is contained in document
A/C.5/67/L.3. We shall now take action on the draft
decision, entitled “Budgetary and financial situation
of the organization of the United Nations system”. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
130.
Agenda item 129
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/673)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 9 of the same report.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution entitled “Proposed programme budget outline
for the biennium 2014-2015”, the text of which, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.13.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/248).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, the text of which, for
the time being, is contained in document A/C.5/67/L.21.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 129.

16

Administrative and budgetary coordination of the
United Nations with the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/662)

The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
Agenda item 110 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President: Members will recall that, in
accordance with subparagraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180, of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee shall comprise the following: seven
members of the Security Council, including the five
permanent members; seven members of the Economic
and Social Council, elected from regional groups;
five top providers of assessed contributions to United
Nations budgets and voluntary contributions to United
Nations funds, programmes and agencies, including
a standing peacebuilding fund; five top providers of
military personnel and civilian police to United Nations
missions; and seven additional members elected by
the General Assembly, giving due consideration to
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that, at the 83rd plenary
meeting during its sixty-sixth session, the Assembly
elected Croatia and El Salvador as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding

12-66174

A/67/PV.62

Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2012.
Members will further recall that by resolution
63/145, of 18 December 2008, the General Assembly
decided, at its sixty-third session, that the term of
office for the members of the General Assembly on
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission shall begin on 1 January instead of 23 June.
By a letter dated 19 December 2012 addressed
to the President of the General Assembly (A/67/657),
the facilitator of the group of the leading financial
contributors informed the President that the financial
contributors had decided that Canada, Japan, Spain and
Sweden would serve a full two-year term in 2013 and
2014, and that Norway and Germany would each serve
a one-year term in 2013 and 1014, respectively.
Also, by a letter dated 20 December 2012 addressed
to the President of the General Assembly (A/67/658), the
facilitator of the troop-contributing countries informed
the President of their decision that the terms of office
of Bangladesh, Egypt, India, Nigeria and Pakistan,
from the troop-contributing countries category of
membership, would start on 1 January 2013 and run
until 31 December 2014.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of documents A/67/657 and
A/67/658?
It was so decided.

of members of its subsidiary bodies shall apply to its
election of members of the Committee. For this election,
rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable. Accordingly, the
election shall be held by secret ballot and there shall be
no nominations. However, I should also like to recall
paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby the practice
of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections to
subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard, unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since the number of
candidates endorsed by the Group of Asia-Pacific States
and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides to elect Brazil,
Malaysia and Peru as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a twoyear term of office, beginning on 1 January 2013?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate Brazil,
Malaysia and Peru on their election as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now proceed to the election of five members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

I should like to remind members that there remain
two vacant seats on the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2013.

By resolution 60/261, of 8 May 2006, the Assembly
decided that the members of the Organizational
Committee shall serve for renewable terms of two years,
as applicable. Accordingly, Benin, Brazil, Indonesia,
Tunisia and Uruguay are eligible for immediate
re-election.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item
110.

With regard to candidatures for the five seats, I
should like to inform members that the Group of AsiaPacific States has endorsed Malaysia, and the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States has endorsed
Brazil and Peru.
Members will recall that, in resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the election

Agenda item 111 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/107)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/67/107, since the terms of office of Côte d’Ivoire,
Germany, Nigeria, Panama, the Republic of Moldova,

12-6617417

A/67/PV.62

the Syrian Arab Republic and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela will expire on 31 December 2012, it will
be necessary for the President to appoint, during the
current session, seven members in order to fill the
resulting vacancies. Those members will serve for a
period of three years, beginning on 1 January 2013.
On the recommendation of the African States, I
have appointed Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal as members
of the Committee on Conferences for a period of three
years, beginning on 1 January 2013. May I take it that
the Assembly takes note of these appointments?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should also like to remind
members that one seat from among the Asia-Pacific
States, two from among the Latin American and
Caribbean States, one from among the Eastern European
States and one from among the Western European and
other States for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2013 remain vacant.
I would also like to recall to members that one
seat from among the Asia-Pacific States and one from
among the Latin American and Caribbean States for a
term of office beginning on the date of appointment
and ending on 31 December 2015 have remained vacant
since the sixty-sixth session. I urge those regional
groups to submit their candidatures as soon as possible.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 111.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/67/602)
Letter from the President of the Security Council
(A/67/652)

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
decision A/67/L.51, entitled “International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”, I wish to put on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By the draft decision, the General Assembly would
decide to extend the term of office of the following
permanent judges of the International Tribunal, who are
members of the Appeals Chamber, until 31 December
2014 or until the completion of the cases to which
they are assigned, if sooner: Mehmet Güney (Turkey),
Khalida Rachid Khan (Pakistan), Arlette Ramaroson
(Madagascar), Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov (Russian
Federation) and Andrésia Vaz (Senegal).
In accordance with the trial schedule, provisions
for the costs of the honoraria and other entitlements for
the five judges for 2013 were included in the budget
for the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for
2012-2013.
The resource requirement for the biennium
2014-2015 will be reviewed in the context of established
budgetary procedures. Hence, the adoption of draft
decision A/67/L.51 would not entail any additional
appropriation under the programme budget for the
biennium 2012-2013.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 124.

Draft decision (A/67/L.51)
We shall now proceed to consider draft decision
A/67/L.51.

18

12-66174

A/67/PV.62

Agenda item 125
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Letter from the Secretary-General (A/67/574)
Letter from the President of the Security Council
(A/67/653)
Draft decision (A/67/L.52)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft decision A/67/L.52.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department of General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft decision A/67/L.52, entitled “International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”, I wish to put on record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
By the draft decision, the General Assembly would
decide to extend the term of office of the following
permanent judges at the International Tribunal, who are
members of the Appeals Chamber, until 31 December
2013 or until the completion of the cases to which
they are assigned, if sooner: Carmel Agius (Malta),
Liu Daqun (China), Theodor Meron (United States of
America), Fausto Pocar (Italy) and Patrick Robinson
(Jamaica).
The Assembly would also decide to extend the
term of office of the following permanent judges at
the International Tribunal, who are members of the
Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2013 or until the
completion of the cases to which they are assigned, if
sooner: Jean-Claude Antonetti (France), Guy Delvoie
(Belgium), Burton Hall (Bahamas), Christoph Flügge
(Germany), O-Gon Kwon (Republic of Korea), Bakone
Justice Moloto (South Africa), Howard Morrison
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) and Alphons Orie (Netherlands).
The Assembly would also decide to extend the
terms of office of the following ad litem judges at the

International Tribunal, who are members of the Trial
Chambers, until 1 June 2013 or until the completion of
the cases to which they are assigned, if sooner: Elizabeth
Gwaunza (Zimbabwe), Michèle Picard (France), Árpád
Prandler (Hungary) and Stefan Trechsel (Switzerland).
The Assembly would also decide to extend the
term of office of ad litem Judge Frederik Harhoff
(Denmark), who is a member of the Trial Chambers,
until 31 December 2013 or until the completion of the
cases to which he is assigned, if sooner.
And the Assembly would decide to extend the
term of office of the following ad litem judges at
the International Tribunal, who are members of the
Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2013 or until the
completion of the cases to which they are assigned, if
sooner: Melville Baird (Trinidad and Tobago), Flavia
Lattanzi (Italy) and Antoine Kesia-Mbe Mindua
(Democratic Republic of the Congo).
The extension of the terms of office of judges
through 31 December 2013 would require a total
payment in honoraria amounting to $1,303,100 for an
aggregate period of one additional month. The Tribunal
would make every effort to meet those additional
requirements from within the overall resources
amounting to $201,036,100 approved for the Tribunal
for the biennium 2012-2013.
Hence, adoption of the draft decision A/67/L.52
would not entail any additional appropriation under the
programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/67/L.52.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 125.
Programme of work
The Acting President: With regard to the
programme of work of the General Assembly, apart
from organizational matters and items that may have to
be considered by operation of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly, and bearing in mind that the Assembly
has already considered and taken action on the majority
of items, I should like to inform members that the

12-6617419

A/67/PV.62

following agenda items remain open for consideration
during the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly: agenda items 9, 11, 13 to 15, 20 (a) and (h),
30, 31, 33 to 37, 39, 40, 42 to 48, 54, 56, 60, 63 (a) and
(b), 70 (a) to (c), 74, 94 (b), 106, 107, 110 (a) to (c), 111
(f), (g) and (h), 112 to 117, 118 (a) and (b), 119, 120, 121
(a), (b), (e), (g), (i) (p), (q), (r), (s) and (v), 122, 124 to
126, 128 (a) to (r), 129 to 157, 158 (a) and (b), and 159
to 164.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of those items on the agenda that remain open
for consideration during the sixty-seventh session of
the Assembly?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I should like to announce
that the consideration of the following items will
take place immediately following the consideration
of the reports of the Fifth Committee: sub-item (c)
of agenda item 110, “Election of five members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding

20

Commission”; sub-item (f) of agenda item 111,
“Appointment of members of the Committee on
Conferences”; agenda item 124, “International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994”; and agenda item 125, “International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991”.
I should also like to inform members that the
consideration of draft decision A/67/L.48 is postponed
to a later date, to be announced, in order for further
consultations to be conducted on that issue.
I wish everyone here a bright and prosperous New
Year and success in all their endeavours.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

12-66174
