V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commitlee

5. Further requests the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session to submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-second session concrete recommendations on definitive institutional arrangements for
human settlements within the United Nations;
6. Decides to take action on those recommendations, at the latest at its thirty-second session, taking
into account the conclusions of the Ad Hoe Committee;

III
SECRETARIAT ARRANGEMENTS

l. Requests the Secretary-General, as an interim
arrangement, to ensure, through the appropriate machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, the co-ordination of the work of all the United
Nations bodies concerned with respect to their activities in the human settlements field and to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third 5ession
on the progress made;
2. Requests that, since definitive arrangements for
human settlements are yet to be decided upon, the
Secretary-General should take appropriate measures to
ensure effective preparations for the discussions on human settlements questions at the sixty-third session of
the Economic and Social Council, bearing in mind the
contributions made by the relevant components of the
United Nations system as represented in the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination;
3. Requests all the United Nations bodies concerned, particularly the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme, the Centre for Housing, Building and Planning
and the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, to ensure that the recommendations
of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements are taken into account in their respective
programmes related to human settlements and within
their respective terms of reference, and to make their
consultative services and resources available, as appropriate, for the implementation of national programmes
of action and in strengthening regional co-oper.:ition in
the field of human settlements;

IV
REGIONAL COMMISSIONS

Requests, in this regard, the United Nations bodies
concerned, particularly the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme and the Centre for Housing, Building and
Planning, to give all possible support to the regional
commissions in the strengthening of regional co-operation in the field of human settlements and further requests the regional commissions to report to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session on
the results of regional co-operation in human settlements, including the progress made in the establishment
of governmental regional committees on human settlements.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/117.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,

63

3313 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 and 3439 (XXX) _
of 9 December 1975,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
( S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations University on the work of the University, 37 and the report of the Secretary-General, 38
Noting the satisfactory relationship developing between the United Nations University and the appropriate
agencies and bodies of the United Nations system, in
particular the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research,
Noting decision 5.2.2 of 26 May 1976, adopted by
the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its ninety-ninth
session, in which the Board, inter alia, reiterated its
appeal to member States to contribute generously to
the United Nations University in every manner possible,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the efforts made
by the United Nations University to commence its programme activities and welcomes the fact that two of the
three priority programme areas-world hunger and
human and social development-have become operative, and that the third area, use and management of
natural resources, is expected to begin in the near
future;
2. Encourages the United Nations University to
continue its efforts to launch unique and effective research activities on a global basis and to enlarge its
network of scholars and research institutions throughout the world;
3. Reiterates the importance of full co-operation
and co-ordination, within the framework established
by the Charter of the United Nations for co-ordinating
policies and activities in the economic, social, cultural
and humanitarian fields, between the United Nations
University and the appropriate agencies and ':lodies of
the United Nations system;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Council of the United Nations University all the
documents of the thirty-first session of the General Assembly relating to the University;
5. Appeals to all Member States to make substantial contributions to the Endowment Fund of the United
Nations University and to give, where appropriate, financial and other support to specific programmes of
the University, so as to enable the University to embark
on its full activities while maintaining its academic
autonomy and financial viability;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Rector of the United Nations University, the
Council of the University and the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, further to continue his efforts to raise
more funds and to submit a report to the General
37 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No, 31 (A/31/31) and Supplement No. 31A
( A/31 /3 l / AdcU and Add, 1 /Corr-1 L
:iH A/311281-

64

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Assembly at its thirty-second session on the progress
achieved in this regard, together with the annual report
of the Council of the University.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/118.

Chair on non-alignment within
United Nations University

the

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, by which it adopted the Charter of the
United Nations University,
Noting the proposal of the non-aligned countries to
establish a chair on non-alignment within the United
Nations University,
1. Invites interested countries to enter into consultations with the Council of the United Nations University and the Rector of the University with a view
to implementing the above-mentioned proposal;
2. Further invites the Council of the United Nations
University to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the results of these consultations.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/119.

Economic co-operation among developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3177 ( XXVIII) of 17 December 1973, 3241 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974
and 3442 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, and resolution 92 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development39 on measures
of support by developed countries and international organizations for the programme of economic co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of
a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Noting the programme of economic co-operation
among developing countries, adopted at the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group of Seventy-seven, held at
Manila from 26 January to 7 February 1976,40
Noting also the decisions of the non-aligned movement on economic co-operation among developing countries and, in particular, the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation and other relevant resolutions
adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,41
30 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.Tl.D.10),
part one, sect. A.
40 Ibid., annex V, annex I, resolution 1.
4L See A/31/197.

Noting further the measures set out in the report of
the Conference on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries, held at Mexico City from 13 to
22 September 1976,42
Noting that the developing countries have set in motion an irreversible trend towards the consolidation of
their unity and mutual co-operation and noting their
desire to maintain their efforts to strengthen further
such co-operation and solidarity,
Recognizing that, in the context of global economic
co-operation, the achievement of the goal of greater
co-operation and collective self-reliance espoused by
the developing countries will not only promote their
economic development, but also facilitate effective and
meaningful negotiations with the developed countries
on the establishment of a new international economic
order,
Stressing that fundamental structural changes in existing international economic relations on the basis of
equity and justice are important _in providing an cnd~ring solution to the world economic problems so essential
for the promotion of international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the efforts towards mutual co-operation by the developing countries do not diminish the
responsibilities of all other countries for establishing
just and equitable economic relations between them and
the developing countries and for contributing to the development of the developing countries,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on economic co-operation among developing countries;43
2. Requests the Secretary-General to study the relevant decisions on economic co-operation among developing countries, including the Programme of Action
adopted by the Third Ministerial Meeting of the Group
of Seventy-seven,44 the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries45 and the report of the Conference on Economic
Co-operation among Developing Countries, 46 with a
view to formulating appropriate support measures for
the realization of the objectives of economic co-operation among developing countries, and to submit a report
thereon, together with the organizational and financial
implications, to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in the medium-term plan of the United
Nations an intersectoral presentation of the activities
envisaged to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions on economic co-operation among developing
countries and, in co-operation with the organizations of
the United Nations system, to secure the same kind of
intersectoral presentation on a system-wide basis;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance
with their established procedures and practices, to support measures of economic co-operation among developing countries, including, as and when requested, the
continued provision of the necessary secretariat support
42 See A/C.2/31/7, part one.
4:i A/31/304 and Add. I.

44 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.TI.D.10),
annex V, part two.
4;:; A/311197, annex III.
46 A/C.2/31 /7.
