S/PV.8791

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8791st meeting

Wednesday, 9 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Bynoe
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Woodroffe
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-14589 (E)
*2114589*

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate Estonia for holding the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of June. I wish you,
Mr. President, continued success in presiding over the
crucial work of this body.
This is my final briefing before the Council in my
capacity as the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). It has been an honour and a privilege to
serve in that capacity and to work with the Security
Council over the years. Notwithstanding the challenges,
together we have forged ahead as we carried out our
respective mutually reinforcing, but independent,
mandates in the pursuit of accountability for atrocity
crimes and of peace and security.
The situation in Darfur is a clear demonstration of
how the framers of the Rome Statute system envisaged
the ICC and the Security Council working together
towards the twin goals of justice and peace. When
the Council referred the Darfur situation to the ICC,
in March 2005, it brought hope to victims of atrocity
crimes in Darfur by sending a clear message that
justice was not only important in its own right, but also
had a multiplier effect on achieving sustainable peace
in Darfur.
Over the years since the referral, that hope has seen
its ups and downs, but the people of Darfur never gave
up. I recall the countless times that I appealed for help
from the Council for investigations in Darfur. I recall
2/17

09/06/2021

the number of times that I pleaded with the Assembly
of States Parties to allocate sufficient resources to
effectively investigate the situation in Darfur. I can
recall the number of times that the Office and I were
ridiculed and labelled as biased and that it was said that
our investigations were targeted to specific individuals.
There were many who told us that we should stop
metaphorically banging our heads against the wall
and that we should forget about Darfur and move on.
Indeed, as I give this last briefing on Darfur, I am
reminded of the calls for mass withdrawal, from certain
quarters, and threats to the very existence of the only
institution that promised hope to Darfur victims and so
many others.
Yet, with the support of many Council members,
and civil society, we stood firm and resolute and held
to our conviction that our actions and decisions in
Darfur, and indeed everywhere else, were guided by
nothing but the law, the facts and the search for truth
and justice in strict adherence to the cardinal principles
of independence, impartiality and fairness. We found
strength in the plight of victims and courage in the truth
of our convictions and the righteousness of our cause.
Through it all, Darfur victims never gave up hope.
They stood shoulder to shoulder with the Office and
urged us on, providing critical evidence even as we
investigated Darfur without being able to go to Darfur.
They rallied behind us during our briefings, attentively
following and clinging to every word that gave them a
glimmer of hope that they too might one day benefit
from the protective embrace of the law and justice duly
administered for the wrongs they have endured.
Today, as I bid the Security Council farewell, I
salute the women, men, children and all Darfur victims
for their courage, patience, resilience, perseverance and
unrelenting belief in the course of justice. My heartfelt
thanks go to them for their support even in the face
of great adversity. I stand at this meeting today in
solidarity with them.
The developments in the Sudan amply demonstrate
that the arm of justice is long and patient; that justice
may be delayed by those who stand in its way, but
justice has more durability than the politics of a few
whose aim is to shield culpability. Justice and the voice
of the people and the wronged ultimately prevail.
My historic visit to Darfur last week opened my
eyes even more to the reality of what we and the people
21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of Darfur have been fighting for over the years. Indeed,
the visit was a vivid reminder of the raison d’être of this
institution, the ICC, which I have had the privilege to
serve with honour, dedication and integrity for almost
two decades. Witnessing countless women, men and
children lined up in the dusty streets in the blazing
hot sun to welcome me and my delegation, calling for
justice and the surrender of those indicted by the ICC,
was one of the most moving and humbling experiences
of my life. The images of this visit will remain written
in indelible ink in my memory. For those who saw those
images, I hope they serve as a strong reminder that we
should stay focussed on achieving justice for the victims
and finding lasting peace for the people of Darfur.
The reality of Darfur victims hit me even harder as
I engaged with victims, leaders of internally displaced
persons (IDP) and local officials and listened to victims’
harrowing stories of the brutality they had endured and
the inhumane conditions under which they continue
to live. That first-ever visit of the ICC to Darfur — over
15 years since the Council referred the Darfur situation
to my Office — has rekindled the hope of resolution
1593 (2005). We cannot allow that rekindled light to
be extinguished again through our inaction or halfhearted, ineffective action.
The simple things in life that we take for granted are
what the Darfur victims continue to yearn for, namely,
peace and security, food, water, health, education for
their children and to return to their homes. They want an
end to the deadly violence; they want the disarmament
of militias and compensation for their long years of
suffering. The withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur seems to have
created a vacuum that still needs to be filled.
Addressing those issues will require not only the
restoration of trust between Government authorities
at all levels and the people of Darfur, but also the
resolution of the root causes of the issues that have
bedevilled the region over the years, as well as the
support of the international community.
The Darfur victims continue to place their hope in
us. We must heed their clarion call for the surrender of
those wanted by the ICC to face independent, impartial
and fair judicial processes that respect all their rights,
inasmuch as the alleged perpetrators themselves denied
the people of Darfur their rights over the years.
I am pleased to report that the ICC and the
Government of the Sudan have turned a new page

S/PV. 8791

in their relationship. The old days of hostilities and
non-cooperation have been replaced by constructive
dialogue and a good spirit of cooperation. Following
the conclusion of a memorandum of understanding
between my Office and the Government of the Sudan on
14 February, my team of investigators has undertaken
investigative activities in the Sudan and has begun
to prepare to go to Darfur soon. It has constructively
engaged with relevant Government ministries,
including the Office of the Attorney-General.
My recent visit to Darfur would not have been
possible without the assistance and cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan, including various ministries
and local governors. I am grateful for all the support
extended to me and my delegation and the effective
facilitation of my visit.
I would also be remiss if I failed to acknowledge the
timely and effective operational and logistical support
provided by the United Nations through its different
entities and agencies. Their support was crucial to
the success of the mission. Without that necessary
support, it would not have been possible for me and
my delegation to travel to different regions of Darfur
and directly engage with victims. I am confident that
the authorities and the United Nations and its entities
will continue to extend the same excellent cooperation
and support to my successor as the Office expands its
investigations on the ground in Darfur.
Even as we applaud the new era of the Sudan, we are
reminded that the road ahead remains long and fraught
with dangers. We are all aware that the transition in
the Sudan is still in its infancy and needs nurturing
to mature. We must therefore not be lulled into a false
sense of security. Today, peace and justice continue
to elude the people of Darfur. They continue to suffer
in internally displaced persons camps and, for them,
accountability remains critical for lasting peace in the
Darfur region.
The clear and consistent message I received from
Darfur victims in El Fasher, Nyala and Zalingei is
that the four outstanding warrants must be executed
and that suspects must be handed over to the ICC. I
have communicated and stressed that message in my
interactions with Government of the Sudan officials at
all levels, including the Chairperson of the Sovereignty
Council and the Prime Minister, as well as other
members of the Sovereignty Council, during my visit.

21-145893/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In particular, I have stressed the urgent need for
Mr. Harun to be transferred into ICC custody as a
matter of priority. In that regard, I recalled that both
Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, also known
as Ali Kushayb, and Mr. Ahmad Muhammad Harun
were jointly charged with many of the same crimes
in respect of the underlying incidents and that their
cases were separated because Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman
voluntarily surrendered himself to the ICC. Even
though Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s confirmation of charges
hearing took place from 24 to 26 May, there is still a
window of opportunity to rejoin the cases at trial if Mr
Harun is surrendered to the ICC now. In addition to
ensuring efficiencies and judicial economy, rejoining
the cases at trial would obviate the retraumatization of
witnesses who would have to be called twice to testify
before the Court.
The Sudan is under a legal obligation to surrender
the suspects pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). The
Juba Peace Agreement also makes it clear that all
suspects must appear before the ICC and that the Sudan
should fully cooperate with the ICC in its investigation
and prosecution of those suspects. The Sudan has to
tangibly demonstrate that the new Sudan is now a
fully-fledged member of the international community
that has joined the fight against impunity and is fully
committed to justice and the rule of law.
Almost all the suspects are in the custody of
the Government of the Sudan and there is no legal
impediment to their surrender to the ICC. In particular,
credible reports and other information indicate that
Mr. Harun has expressed his wish to be transferred to
the ICC. I appeal to the Council to prevail upon the
Sudan to immediately honour Mr. Harun’s wish and
facilitate his transfer to the ICC without delay.
Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain, for his part,
is a fugitive from the Court and his exact whereabouts
are unknown. I call on him to surrender immediately
to the Court.

09/06/2021

on the communities and the fragility of the social
fabric, acknowledging the ongoing suffering of their
people and recognizing the importance of justice and
accountability. They all pledged to cooperate and support
the Office, as well as the Court, in pursuit of justice for
the people of Darfur. Affected communities were urged
to trust and fully engage with the investigators, who
will be travelling to Darfur in the near future, and to
report any incidents of threats or intimidation.
The visit to Darfur also provided a unique
opportunity to manage victims’ expectations and
explain what the ICC is capable of, what it does and
what it cannot do. More work remains to be done in
that regard and the Office will coordinate with the
Registry’s outreach section to devise strategies on
how best to reach out to the affected communities and
explain the work of the Court.
Let me highlight some of the significant
developments regarding the Darfur situation.
Exactly one year ago today, Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman,
also known as Ali Kushayb, was transferred to
the custody of the Court in the midst of a global
pandemic, no less. On the anniversary of that occasion,
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s surrender continues to serve as
a reminder that the Office will not be deterred from
its mission to bring the alleged perpetrators of atrocity
crimes to justice.
Between 24 and 26 May, the Pre-Trial Chamber
II convened the confirmation of charges hearing for
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. During the hearing, the Office
presented evidence in order to demonstrate that there are
substantial grounds to believe that Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman
was responsible for all 31 counts charged in relation to
crimes alleged to have been committed in Kodoom,
Bindisi, Mukjar, Deleig and surrounding areas between
August 2003 and March 2004.

Additionally, the Sudan has to fully cooperate with
the Office’s investigations, including by providing
unhindered access to its territory and to the relevant
records, information and materials, as well as the
protection of witnesses.

Having worked on this situation since 2005, it was
gratifying for me, my team and above all, Darfur victims,
to finally see one of the Darfur suspects in the dock to
answer for his alleged crimes. I extend my gratitude to
the Darfur team for making that happen despite severe
resources constraints and restrictions related to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

The Council may also benefit from knowing that
my meetings with the Walis, or Governors, of the three
states I visited were very productive. The authorities
described the consequences of the conflict in Darfur

It is worth noting, regrettably, that the security
situation in some areas of Darfur remains volatile,
as further confirmed by the accounts of families of
victims I engaged with during my visit to Darfur. Tribal

4/17

21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

fighting and armed clashes between Government forces
and armed rebel groups have continued to contribute to
large-scale displacement and deaths.
I am particularly dismayed about reports indicating
an increase in incidents of sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls, especially internally
displaced persons. We should all denounce these
despicable crimes and remind the competent Sudanese
authorities of their primary obligation to investigate and
prosecute such acts. Justice and accountability in the
Sudan, including Darfur, cannot be achieved without
maintaining security and stability for vulnerable
communities. The violence against IDPs — and in
particular women, girls and children — must stop. I
call on the members of the Council and other regional
partners to continue to do everything within their power
to help the Sudan break this troubling cycle of violence.
Over the past months, as the Office intensified its
efforts to constructively engage with the Government of
the Sudan, we received and relied upon the invaluable
support of many European countries, some of which are
present in the Council today, through their embassies
in Khartoum. We are most grateful for that assistance.
Both States parties and non-States parties in and outside
the Council have also been instrumental in assisting and
contributing to our efforts to build relations with the
Sudan. That help is appreciated, and I trust that it will
continue to be extended to the Office and my successor.
The successes we have recorded so far would also
not have been possible without the support of our civil
society partners, with which we have collaborated over
the years. The Office is thankful for their support.
On my own behalf, on behalf of the Darfur team
and on behalf of the rest of the Office that I have had the
privilege to lead for the past nine years, we thank one
and all for their contributions to the work of the ICC. I
am honoured to have been able to address the Council
these past nine years in my capacity as Prosecutor.
The time has now come for me to pass the baton to
my successor, Mr. Karim Khan, under whose capable
leadership I believe the team and the Office will
continue to progressively advance the cause of justice
for Darfur victims and beyond. The Council’s support
for him and the Office will continue to be critical for
the success of the Court as he navigates the challenging
mandate of the Rome Statute during these trying
times of COVID-19 and the ever-increasing disparity

S/PV. 8791

between the existing allocation of resources and the
disproportionately high workload of the Office.
I conclude my last briefing to the Security Council
by once again paying homage to the paramount interest
of the victims in Darfur, many of whom I met this past
week, for continuing to have faith in the Office as it
finally took a small but important step towards achieving
justice for the crimes committed against them. The
referral of the Darfur situation to the Office in 2005,
the first of its kind, was a landmark development in the
fight to end impunity for perpetrators of atrocity crimes.
At the time of the referral, the Council emphasized
the need for the international community to promote
healing and reconciliation by encouraging the creation
of institutions and commissions involving all sectors
of Sudanese society in order to complement judicial
processes. The support of all States Members of the
United Nations in restoring and maintaining lasting
peace in the Sudan by promoting the rule of law and
protecting human rights remains as important today as
it was 16 years ago.
I trust that the recent progress in the Darfur
situation, after so many years of shattered promises and
disappointment, will serve as a beacon of hope to the
victims of atrocity crimes in other countries as well.
Although the journey towards justice may be long and
the path uncertain, I remain confident that the Office
will never waver in its dedication to investigating and
prosecuting these crimes without fear or favour, as it
must. I hope and count on the Council’s crucial support
as my Office and I discharge our crucial mandates.
I often state that the creation of the ICC must
surely be one of humankind’s proudest moments
because it represents an awakening rooted in great
human suffering throughout the ages, culminating in
the recognition that lawless wars and conflict must
no longer get a pass to cause human carnage. Let us
remain principled, vigilant and consistent in the service
of the Rome Statute and the founding principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. I am grateful, as always,
for the Council’s support and for this opportunity.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line

21-145895/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
on the latest report on the situation in the Sudan
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). I also welcome the
representative of the Sudan to this meeting.
We welcome the significant progress in cooperation
between the Sudan and the ICC, especially the signing
of two memorandums of understanding. In that regard,
we also welcome the Prosecutor’s visit last month to
the Sudan and trust that it will mark a new chapter in
cooperation to facilitate the process of justice, peace
and reconciliation.
Mexico acknowledges the Sudan’s efforts to ensure
access to justice for the victims, as this is one of the
central points of the Juba Peace Agreement and one of
the commitments of the transitional Government. We
reiterate that the implementation of the agreement is
critical to achieve lasting peace. We therefore urge all
parties to continue working to that end.
As the Prosecutor rightly noted, a hearing on
charges in the Abd-Al-Rahman case also took place
during this reporting period. This is a concrete step
for the victims of the atrocities committed in Darfur to
finally be able to have the Court consider the facts of
the case.

09/06/2021

The ICC’s investigative work has benefited from
collaboration with the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan and with
other United Nations agencies, particularly in terms of
logistical support. We recognize this joint work and its
potential for collecting and preserving evidence, and
we look forward to even closer collaboration in future.
We also call for an end to the violence in Darfur, which
continues to be a cause for concern and therefore
hinders the collection of evidence on the ground.
We also note the ICC’s efforts to investigate crimes
of sexual and gender-based violence as a method of
warfare in Darfur, which we strongly condemn. We also
look forward to stepping up the pace and implementing
the March 2020 framework for cooperation between the
Government and the United Nations on sexual violence
in armed conflict.
In conclusion, on behalf of Mexico, I would like to
acknowledge the work of Prosecutor Bensouda and her
entire team throughout her nine years in office. Despite
facing significant challenges, both institutionally and
personally, she has managed to promote the work of
the International Criminal Court in an independent
and impartial manner, making progress in the fight
against impunity for the most heinous crimes. We
wish Prosecutor Bensouda every success in her future
endeavours, while extending our support to the new
Prosecutor Karim Khan.

While this case represents meaningful progress,
there are other pending cases where the accused
have not been surrendered to the Court. In particular,
my country calls for the surrender of Mr. Al-Bashir,
Mr. Hussein and Mr. Harun, who are already being
detained. With regard to Mr. Banda, who is a fugitive,
we urge the Sudan and the countries of the region to
redouble efforts to find him, arrest him and surrender
him to the ICC.

Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her valuable
briefing and her thirty-third report to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). I would
also like to welcome the representative of the Sudan
to today’s meeting. Since this is the last briefing by
Ms. Bensouda before the Council, I would like, on behalf
of my country, to take this opportunity to commend her
for her tireless efforts throughout her term of office in
fighting impunity for the most egregious crimes. I wish
every success to her and her successor at the helm of
the Office of the Prosecutor, Mr. Karim Khan.

On the other hand, evidence-collection work by
the Office of the Prosecutor continues to be essential
for further progress in the investigation of cases. The
ICC’s lack of access in recent years has hampered this
work, and now there is also a need to take measures for
the preservation of such evidence, as well as to ensure
access to witnesses.

Tunisia is following with satisfaction the positive
and continuous approach to achieving peace, justice
and comprehensive national reconciliation in the
brotherly country of the Sudan. In this context, we
salute the firm determination and tireless efforts of the
transitional Government as it strives to achieve societal
and political harmony among all components of

6/17

21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudanese society, in parallel with its efforts to ensure
accountability for the egregious crimes committed in
Darfur. Its activities have been undertaken through
intense engagement with the different regional and
international actors and through its interaction with the
United Nations and the ICC.
Tunisia commends the fact that peace and justice
have gone hand in hand in Darfur, especially since the
signing of the Juba Peace Agreement in October and
since the ground-breaking visit by the ICC Prosecutor
to the Sudan, also in October. We welcome the ongoing
direct negotiations in Juba between delegations of
the Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North
for
achieving
comprehensive
peace in the Sudan. We also value the opportunities
and options emanating from the different local,
national, international, hybrid and transitional justice
mechanisms in the country, which will contribute to
achieving justice and comprehensive reconciliation
among the Sudanese people, helping to turn the page
of wars and tragedies that have obstructed security and
development and consolidate a smooth and peaceful
democratic transition.
Tunisia values the fact that the relationship between
the Sudanese authorities and the ICC Prosecutor’s Office
has advanced to a higher level, as recently framed in a
cooperative memorandum of understanding between
the two parties. We also welcome the visit by the ICC
Prosecutor to the Sudan last month. Ms. Bensouda’s
meetings with senior officials in Khartoum and leaders
in Darfur were fruitful, as was her interaction with
victims. We support the efforts of the Prosecutor and
her Office to implement its mandate on the ground by
gathering more on-site evidence, which would help
ongoing prosecutions and investigations pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005). These efforts would also
contribute to achieving justice appropriate to the local
context, bringing it closer to victims and to affected
communities in Darfur.
We welcome the first investigative mission of the
Office of the Prosecutor on Sudanese soil in recent
months and the measures taken by the transitional
Government to facilitate this mission. We also take
note of the conclusion of the main hearings of the
ICC in the Ali Kushayb case last month and welcome
the confirmation by Trial Chamber II of the charges
levelled against him, namely, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. This is a first step towards ensuring

S/PV. 8791

accountability for the most egregious crimes committed
in Darfur.
We look forward to continued cooperation between
the Sudanese Government and the Office of the
Prosecutor in a spirit of constructive engagement and
mutual respect, so as to achieve the common goals of
accountability for the most egregious crimes committed
in Darfur, prevent any recurrence of those crimes in
the future and implement resolution 1593 (2005),
we call on both sides to explore options provided for
under the Rome Statute to share the burden, harmonize
efforts and build the capacities of the Sudanese judicial
organs, while taking into account the requirements and
the context of the transitional phase in the Sudan.
In conclusion, we believe that the best way to
advance justice in Darfur is to pursue a participatory
approach based on dialogue and building national
judicial capacities, without overlooking the political,
economic and social tracks at this very critical phase
in the country’s history. That would embody effective
Sudanese ownership of the transitional phase and
the post-conflict justice track and ensure that peace
and justice are mutually reinforced and the pillars of
democracy are consolidated.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway would like
to thank the Prosecutor for today’s briefing and for
her thirty-third report, which we have read with
great interest. The Prosecutor and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) can count on Norway’s continued
full support.
We commend the Prosecutor for the landmark
visit she made to Darfur. My colleague, the Norwegian
Ambassador in Khartoum, greatly appreciated meeting
with her, and we commend the Sudanese Government
and United Nations agencies for facilitating the visit.
As we highlighted during the recent Security
Council meeting on the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, Norway is
highly concerned by the precarious security situation in
parts of Darfur. Norway condemns the intercommunal
violence, reports of violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights violations and
abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence,
and violence directed towards children. Large-scale
displacement of civilian populations also remains of
particular concern.

21-145897/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The victims of atrocities in Darfur deserve justice.
There will be no lasting peace in the Sudan until there
is accountability for the crimes that were committed
during the long years of conflict. In this regard, we
welcome the confirmation-of-charges hearing held by
the Pre-Trial Chamber of the ICC on 26 May in the case
against the Sudanese militia leader Ali Kushayb. As the
first indictment in connection with atrocities in Darfur
and the first trial based on a referral from the Security
Council, this is a significant step. Norway welcomes
the continuous engagement between the Court and the
Sudan in respect to the case against Mr. Kushayb and
commends Sudanese authorities for facilitating the
ICC’s investigations in the Sudan.
We are encouraged also to learn about the first
investigative mission in 14 years. We hope that it
sets a precedent for cooperation in the cases against
other suspects.
Norway urges the Government to transfer the
remaining individuals for whom there is an arrest
warrant to the ICC. In particular, we echo the
Prosecutor’s call for urgently having Mr. Harun
transferred to the ICC to be tried in parallel with
Mr. Kushayb. Full and unlimited cooperation with the
ICC is an important step in the implementation of the
Juba Peace Agreement. The Court’s work must not be
restricted for political reasons. We also specifically call
for Mr. Banda to surrender to the ICC.
Finally, as this is Prosecutor Bensouda’s last
briefing of the Security Council, we would like to
express our deepest appreciation for her excellent
work over the past nine years. We thank her for her
unwavering integrity, commitment and dedication to
the ICC.
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by thanking the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for her thirty-third report on the
situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005),
which is, of course, her final report to the Security
Council in that capacity. The United Kingdom would
like to express its deep gratitude to the Prosecutor for
her unwavering commitment to the pursuit of justice
over the past nine years. The continued work of
Ms. Bensouda and her team have played a vital role in
the effort towards ensuring accountability for the most
serious crimes committed in Darfur.
As detailed by the Prosecutor in her report, the
situation in Darfur continues to be characterized
8/17

09/06/2021

by intercommunal violence, resulting in deaths and
large-scale displacement of civilians. We call for an
immediate end to the ongoing violence across the
Sudan. In that respect, we urge the Government of
the Sudan to swiftly implement the National Plan for
the Protection of Civilians, and we underline the need
for accountability for the crimes committed before,
during and since the revolution in order for the Sudan’s
transition to succeed.
The United Kingdom commends the constructive
and sustained dialogue between the ICC and the
Government of the Sudan, including the facilitation
of evidence gathering and access to witnesses, which
has enabled significant progress to be made in the case
against Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman.
In that regard, we particularly welcome the historic
visit of the Prosecutor to the Sudan and, in particular,
the Darfur region, which enabled her to engage with
victims and affected communities. Such positive
developments are a testament to the Government’s
meaningful engagement with the Court and genuine
efforts to fulfil the transitional justice provisions of the
Juba Peace Agreement.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to build on
that positive cooperation, in particular by facilitating
the prompt transfer of Mr. Harun to the Court to be
tried alongside Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. We believe that
a single trial of those two co-accused together would
ensure that the possibility of retraumatizing the victims
and witnesses by multiple trials would be avoided.
The United Kingdom’s Special Representative for
the Sudan and South Sudan raised the need for the
urgent transfer of Mr. Harun with the Government of
the Sudan in Khartoum this week.
The United Kingdom stands ready to assist the
Court and the Government of the Sudan in facilitating
that the four ICC arrest warrants are executed. We call
for the surrender of Mr. Banda, who remains a fugitive
from the Court.
Finally, we wish to record our appreciation for the
excellent cooperation between the United Nations and
the Office of the Prosecutor in that respect. We also
underline the role that the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan can play in
supporting the Government of the Sudan as it works to
deliver accountability and justice for Darfur.
21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
Kingdom’s support for the Government of the Sudan’s
important progress towards meeting the calls of the
Sudanese people for justice and accountability as
part of our wider support to the Sudan’s transition to
full democracy.
Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her
briefing. I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan at this meeting.
Kenya commends the people of the Sudan for their
steadfast commitment to rebuilding peace in their
country, including in addressing issues relating to
transitional justice and national reconciliation. We also
take note of the positive steps that the Sudan is taking
towards ensuring that its national institutional and legal
framework is supportive of international efforts, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005). It is important
that those efforts be reciprocated, as provided for by
the resolution.
At its meeting of 13 April, the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Council acknowledged the
readiness of the transitional Government to address
issues relating to transitional justice, including
accountability for human rights violations, through a
truth and reconciliation process. They called on AU
member States to share with the Sudan experiences,
lessons and best practices.
Kenya sees that as a critical step towards
reconciliation, unity, peace and stability in the
Sudan. We therefore commend the Sudan for the
operationalization of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in relation to Darfur and the Special Court
for Darfur Crimes.
Alongside the strengthening of the national judicial
capacity for the Sudan, we encourage similar investment
into national dialogue and reconciliation processes for
the sustainability of the peace process.
Kenya recalls the Security Council’s invitation to
the Court and the African Union to discuss practical
arrangements that will facilitate the Court’s work,
including the possibility of conducting proceedings in
the region, under resolution 1593 (2005).
We would like to hear from the Prosecutor the
status of engagement with the AU, if any, to that
end, particularly given that, under article 1 of the

S/PV. 8791

Rome Stature, the International Criminal Court is
complementary to national criminal jurisdictions,
Finally, we take this opportunity to congratulate
Ms. Fatou Bensouda as she successfully completes her
tenure as the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court in a couple of days. We wish her success in her
future endeavours.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for
her briefing. The Niger commends her leadership and
the work that she has accomplished at the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and wishes her every success
in her next task. I also welcome the presence of the
representative of the Sudan at this meeting.
Since the presentation of the previous report to the
Security Council in December 2020 (see S/2020/1192),
the Sudan has made efforts and encouraging progress
in its quest for justice for the victims of atrocities
committed in Darfur. The signing on 14 February of
a memorandum of understanding between the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Government of the Sudan
to promote cooperation in certain investigations and
prosecutions is a major and welcome development.
My country encourages the Office to continue the
constructive dialogue in which it has been engaged
with the Sudanese authorities since 2020, while
respecting the respective roles of each and the principle
of complementarity, in order to ensure that those who
committed crimes are held accountable before the ICC
and that justice is done for the victims of Darfur.
With regard to recent judicial activities, my
delegation welcomes the developments in judicial
proceedings, in particular the decisions regarding the
participation of victims and their representatives in the
confirmatory charge hearings, which is an inherent
right, as well as the rights of the defence, which must
also be guaranteed.
Furthermore, we commend the determination of the
Office, which, despite the situation of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and the restrictions that it imposes,
has continued to carry out its work by pursuing its
investigation activities between March and May.
My delegation is concerned about the widespread
displacement of civilians in Darfur, where hundreds
of thousands of people have been forced to flee their
homes and there have been armed clashes between
Government forces and rebel groups. We deplore the

21-145899/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

loss of life, including among women and children, as
a result of this fighting. We also deplore the attacks
on humanitarian workers and the destruction of
property, the hospital and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur base in Nyala. My
delegation calls on the parties to respect the rules of
international humanitarian law and joins the Office
of the Prosecutor in condemning all attacks against
United Nations and humanitarian personnel and the
destruction of their equipment.
Sexual and gender-based violence continues to
be perpetrated against women and girls in Darfur,
in particular those who fled the tribal violence in El
Geneina in January. As one of my country’s priorities
in the Council is to defend the rights and improve
the conditions of women and children, my delegation
encourages the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
to advance its investigation into those violations in its
contacts with individuals and groups concerned. My
delegation also condemns all violence against civilians
and calls for respect for the responsibility to protect
them and the prosecution of the perpetrators.
With regard to the outstanding arrest warrants, and
in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005) and the Juba
Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, signed on 3 October
2020, we call on the Sudanese Government and Member
States to strengthen their cooperation with the ICC to
ensure justice for the victims and to fight impunity.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages further
cooperation and constructive dialogue between the
Government of the Sudan and the ICC and reiterates
its congratulations to Prosecutor Bensouda and her
Office for all their work and commitment in the fight
against impunity.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): Today
is Ms. Bensouda’s final briefing before the Security
Council in her capacity as the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). China has always
closely followed the work of the ICC, taken note
of the efforts made by the Prosecutor and her team
and appreciated her adherence to the principles of
objectivity and non-politicization.
For some time now, the situation in the Sudan has
been improving. We hope that the current positive
momentum in the Sudan will continue and will move
the political process along a constructive path.
10/17

09/06/2021

The situation in Darfur is generally stable,
despite occasional intercommunal conflicts. We call
for greater support for the Sudanese Government’s
capacity-building and for economic development and
the improvement of people’s livelihoods in order to
eliminate the causes of conflict.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that China’s
position on the ICC remains unchanged. The Court
should strictly adhere to the principle of complementary
jurisdiction, respect in earnest the judicial sovereignty
of nations, pay full attention to the legitimate demands
of the Sudanese Government and the African Union
and respect the views of the Sudanese Government.
Mr. Bynoe (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Permit me to extend sincerest gratitude to Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), and her team for their remarkable work
vis-à-vis the situation in Darfur. We also thank her for
today’s comprehensive presentation of the thirty-third
report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). We further acknowledge the presence of
the Chargé d’affaires of the Sudan at this meeting. As
this is Ms. Bensouda’s final presentation to the Security
Council, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to
thank her for her leadership and invaluable contribution
in advancing the agenda of our international criminal
justice system.
The Preamble to the Rome Statute affirms that the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole must not go unpunished and
that their effective prosecution must be ensured by
taking measures at the national level and by enhancing
international cooperation. In 2005, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1593 (2005), which enjoined all
Members of the Organization to ensure that the most
serious crimes in Darfur were investigated, impunity
ended and justice brought to all victims, in firm
adherence to the Rome Statue.
Today Saint Vincent and the Grenadines renews
its commitment to upholding that resolution and the
principles and purposes of the Rome Statute. It is our
firm conviction that the ICC has a central role in our
collective quest for justice and peace. More specifically,
in countries like the Sudan that are undergoing
transformative democratic processes, the ICC can play
a vital role in their peacebuilding and development by
contributing to the full guarantee of justice for victims.
21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8791

The Security Council, together with all the Members
of the Organization, bears testimony to the progress in
our sister nation. We are indeed heartened by the positive
developments. We encourage the Sudanese transitional
Government to continue along its progressive path
and advance with the necessary reforms, including
finalizing the establishment of transitional institutions,
such as the transitional legislative council. We are
cognizant that socioeconomic and intercommunal
challenges, among others, still linger. However, we
are confident that the Sudan’s tenacity will permit it to
forge forward.

to effectively execute its mandate, in accordance with
international law.

The
international
community,
especially
international donors, ought to continue supporting
the Sudan, including increasing their contribution and
support to the national humanitarian response plan.

The Sudan has continued to make significant
headway in its political transition and reform efforts,
which I am pleased to see is being matched by tangible
steps by the transitional Government to work with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in the fight against
impunity. A number of those steps are particularly
noteworthy, including the fact that the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Prosecutor herself travelled to the
Sudan three times during the reporting period.

At this important juncture of the Sudan’s
renaissance, the people, especially the victims of the
most heinous crimes, must be at the core. We therefore
reiterate the importance of the full and well-timed
implementation of the Constitutional Document and the
Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan.
The Sudan’s advances are commensurate with
the deepening of cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor, exemplified by the signing of the
memorandum of understanding last February and
ongoing visits to Khartoum to undertake investigative
activities. Equally evident are the conclusion and
ratification of numerous international instruments on
issues related to the protection and promotion of human
rights, transitional justice and the implementation
of the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians.
Those indeed bode well for upholding the enduring
principles of our international criminal justice system.
We therefore maintain that the Sudan has the primary
responsibility to protect it citizens, as well as investigate
and prosecute atrocities.
The principles that inform the Charter of the
United Nations are the same timeless principles that
undergird the ICC. Both the United Nations and the
ICC are mutually reinforcing and have a symbiotic
relationship. In that respect, we look forward to the
further strengthening of cooperation between the
Sudan and the ICC and the application of the principle
of complementarity, enshrined in the Rome Statute, to
ensure full accountability for all five suspects in the
Darfur situation and for the Office of the Prosecutor

In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
fully endorses the conclusion made in the Prosecutor’s
thirty-third report. It is now time, in the specific cases
of Darfur, for historical injustices to be redressed, and
that should be done in a spirit of national reconciliation,
healing, reparation and social justice.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to give
special thanks to Prosecutor Bensouda for her report as
well as for her briefing.

In that regard, we also acknowledge the important
support provided to the Court by United Nations
entities and encourage its continuation. The fact that
investigators have been able to conduct investigative
activities in the territory of the Sudan for the first
time in over a decade is particularly important. The
provision of requested materials to the Office by the
Sudan is another positive step towards justice.
We note Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s surrender to the
Court last June and the confirmation of charges hearing
in his case in May. We welcome the memorandum on
modalities and the agreement reached with the Sudan
to facilitate cooperation and enable the Court’s work
on the case.
Our sincere hope is that the positive engagement
of the past six months marks the beginning of a strong
relationship between the Court and the transitional
Government. We look forward to continued cooperation
and the development of further arrangements dealing
with the Court’s broader investigations.
We acknowledge the importance of complementarity
and encourage further dialogue between the Court and
the Sudanese Government. At the same time, we recall
the Sudan’s ongoing obligation under resolution 1593
(2005) to execute the four outstanding arrest warrants
and surrender the remaining suspects.

21-1458911/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In relation to Mr. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain,
we urge him to surrender himself to the Court.
As regards Mr. Ahmad Harun specifically, given
the interest of victims and witnesses in hearing
Mr. Harun and Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman’s cases together
and Mr. Harun’s own request to be transferred to The
Hague to stand trial, we urge the Sudanese authorities
to lose no further time in carrying out his surrender.
While the positive developments of the past six
months are very welcome, we must also acknowledge
that the Sudan’s transition remains fragile and that
those steps towards accountability are taking place
against a background of ongoing violence in Darfur and
mass displacement. We remain deeply concerned by the
killing of civilians and reports of incidences of sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls
in Darfur. The pattern of violence and perpetration
indicates that the power and impunity dynamics
that underlay the war in Darfur and that underlie
the current situation investigation have not yet been
effectively addressed.
Though we are alive to the wider pressures faced
by the Sudan, including the ongoing economic crisis,
justice and accountability need to remain a priority
as the peace process moves forward. In calling for an
end to violence, we know that impunity for the most
serious crimes and a perceived tolerance for serious
human rights violations and violations of international
humanitarian law serve only to perpetuate the cycle
of violence. We therefore encourage the transitional
Government to prioritize the establishment and
implementation of the transitional justice mechanisms
and processes agreed in the Juba Peace Agreement as
part of the Sudan’s own broader democratic transition,
including the full implementation of the national plan
for protecting civilians in Darfur and the establishment
of a truth and reconciliation commission and a special
court for Darfur.
The Prosecutor has told us that this is her final
time addressing the Council in her current role. I could
not conclude without taking a moment to join others
in paying a most sincere tribute to her work and to the
legacy she leaves behind. Her commitment to justice
has been steadfast as she has guided the Office of
the Prosecutor from its first successful prosecution
through numerous challenges in recent years. We have
real respect for all she has achieved and for her personal
and professional dedication during her term. We wish
12/17

09/06/2021

her well in her future endeavours and can assure her
that Ireland will continue to support the Court that
she has so diligently worked to strengthen, bringing
us ever closer to the common goal of peace based on
international justice.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for her briefing. As
this will be her last briefing to the Security Council, I
wish her all the best in her future activities.
I also welcome the representative of the Sudan to
this meeting.
At today’s briefing, Viet Nam wishes to stress the
following three points.
First, it is critical to continue advancing the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement and to
make further progress on the transitional process in
the Sudan.
The recent unanimous adoption of resolution
2579 (2021) has demonstrated the Security Council’s
consistent support for long-term peace, stability
and development in the Sudan. The United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
and the Government of the Sudan should continue to
work closely together. We commend the ongoing peace
talks between the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction led
by Abdelaziz Al-Hilu and call on all other remaining
armed groups in Darfur to join the peace process.
We also take note that four out of the twenty-five
members of the new Cabinet are women. We call on
the Government to further promote the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women at both the
national and the local levels, in line with the Juba
Peace Agreement.
Secondly, it is equally important to further address
the humanitarian and economic challenges in the Sudan.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to further
strengthen its capacity in the protection of civilians and
to take all appropriate measures to address the issue
of intercommunal violence in Darfur, including acts
related to violations of international humanitarian law.
At the same time, it is concerning that over
13 million people require humanitarian assistance in
the country, including over 7.3 million people who
need emergency assistance. We welcome the outcome
21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the recent Paris conference on the Sudan and call for
further facilitation of debt relief for the country, as well
as access to international financial facilities.
Thirdly, we take note of the thirty-third report of
the Prosecutor of the ICC pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005). We wish to reiterate our consistent position
that States bear the primary responsibility for the
implementation of international humanitarian law and
the prevention and suppression of serious criminal
acts, such as war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The establishment of accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and serious criminal
acts shall be conducted in accordance with the
fundamental principles of international law, including
respect for the independence and sovereignty of States.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor for her briefing.
Over 16 years ago, the Security Council referred
the situation in the Sudan to the International Criminal
Court (ICC). As this is Prosecutor Bensouda’s last
briefing before the Council, the United States would
like to express our gratitude to her personally for her
commitment to ensuring justice for the victims of
atrocities in Darfur in the long fight against impunity.
Through moments of despair and hopelessness that
justice might not arrive for the Sudan, her dedication
and perseverance ensured that justice and accountability
will now be part of the Sudan’s peaceful and democratic
future. We hope that she takes pride in that enduring
legacy of her tenure as Prosecutor and we wish her well
in her future endeavours.
The hearing on the confirmation of charges against
Ali Kushayb was a historic moment. The voices and
experiences of victims of serious crimes, including
victims of sexual violence, were a powerful testament
to the necessity of justice and accountability for lasting
peace and security.
The United States fully supports the ICC’s
investigations in Darfur. We call on the civilian-led
transitional Government to honour its obligations under
the Juba Peace Agreement and resolution 1593 (2005)
to cooperate with the ICC. In that regard, the United
States will continue to take active steps to encourage
the civilian-led transitional Government to immediately
transfer Ahmad Harun to the Court.
The Prosecutor’s briefing today is timely. Just over
one month ago, the Security Council met to discuss the

S/PV. 8791

latest developments in the Sudan. During that meeting,
we detailed our concerns about rising intercommunal
violence in Darfur and underscored the need for
Sudanese authorities — at both the national and the
local levels — to engage in earnest in order to address
the underlying issues of housing, land, displacement
and property rights that spur so much of the violence.
We know full well the problems that have led to the
Sudan’s decades of insecurity, including more than
300,000 deaths in Darfur since 2003 alone. These
include limited or a complete lack of access to justice
in many parts of the country, gross violations of human
rights, a lack of trust between local communities and
those responsible for governing in an accountable,
transparent and equitable manner under the law and
the former regime’s indifference towards Sudanese
citizens, who simply wanted to secure more prosperous
futures for their children and families.
Our message today remains the same as it was
during the Security Council’s most recent meeting on
the Sudan. This organ must continue to underscore
the need to build lasting peace and security in the
country, promote and protect human rights and hold to
account those responsible for insecurity. The civilianled transitional Government in the Sudan has the
responsibility to protect all people in the Sudan, and we
should be ready to assist in its efforts to ensure civilian
protection in Darfur.
The United States supports the ICC’s efforts to shed
light on the abuses and atrocities committed against
countless Sudanese, who deserve justice for those acts.
Such accountability is a powerful deterrent against
future abuses and makes clear to those who suffered that
their pain will not be left unnoticed and unaddressed.
Ending the culture of impunity is also an important
step in the country’s transitional justice process.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
too thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her report and
briefing, and welcome the representative of the Sudan
to this meeting.
The mission entrusted by the Security Council to
the International Criminal Court in Darfur is all the
more essential at this time of transition in the Sudan.
Building a lasting and inclusive peace in the region
will not be possible without justice. The fight against
impunity for the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
is part of restoring democracy and reconciliation in
the Sudan.

21-1458913/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Prosecutor’s recent visit to Darfur, following
her visit to Khartoum in October, is historic and
demonstrates the cooperation between the Court and
the Sudanese authorities.
The report highlights concrete progress in the
case against Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman,
known as Ali Kushayb, both in The Hague, where the
confirmation of charges hearing was held from 24 to
26 May 2021, and on the ground. In that regard, France
welcomes the commitment of the Sudanese authorities to
provide the Office of the Prosecutor with the necessary
assistance to continue investigations. In particular,
access to Darfur for investigators must be promptly and
freely granted under satisfactory security conditions.
Cooperation with the Office must be consolidated
and extended to all suspects. France calls on the Sudan
to promptly surrender Mr. Ahmad Harun to the Court
so that a link can be established with the case against
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman.
In addition, while complementarity remains a
cardinal principle, the execution of outstanding arrest
warrants is crucial. Dialogue between the Court and the
Sudanese authorities must therefore be intensified in
order to explore all possibilities under the Rome Statute.
We also urge Mr. Banda to surrender immediately to
the Court so that he can be tried.
In Darfur, the recurrence of large-scale
intercommunal violence and the persistence of clashes
on the ground confirm the fragility of the security
situation. In recent months, that violence has claimed
hundreds of victims and forced several hundreds of
thousands of civilians to flee. France condemns in
the strongest terms violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, including genderbased and sexual violence against women and girls. It
is important that the perpetrators of these crimes do not
enjoy impunity.
France notes the importance of a return of the
Sudanese Administration to Darfur and welcomes the
political will of the authorities in that regard. We call
on the Government to accelerate the implementation
of the Juba agreements, with the support of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
Sudan, and to promptly deploy the joint protection force,
pursuant to the agreements. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian workers, and the guarantee of
safe and unhindered humanitarian access must remain
a priority. The National Human Rights Commission
14/17

09/06/2021

must be able to fulfil its mandate. As stipulated in the
Juba agreements, the Transitional Justice Commission
must be established without delay.
Finally, we call on all parties to join the
peace process.
Let me conclude by commending, on behalf of
France, Fatou Bensouda for her determination, courage
and unwavering commitment over the past nine years.
The mission entrusted to her was perilous, and the
obstacles numerous. Her contribution to victims, justice
and peace is invaluable.
France will continue to lend its full support to the
Court and to the next Prosecutor, Mr. Karim Khan.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The position of the Russian Federation
regarding the work of the International Criminal Court
has not changed.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, I would
like to state that India is not a signatory to the Rome
Statute and not a member of the International Criminal
Court (ICC).
We take note of the thirty-third report of the ICC
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on the situation in
Darfur, submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of resolution
1593 (2005) and in order to update the Council on her
recent visit to the Sudan. Since this will be her last
briefing to the Council, I join others in extending her
our best wishes for her future endeavours.
The transitional Government of the Sudan has
shown its willingness to address issues relating to
transitional justice, including accountability for human
rights violations, through a truth and reconciliation
process. The parties to the Juba Peace Agreement have
also agreed to establish a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission with respect to Darfur and a Special
Court for Darfur. The jurisdiction of this Special Court,
which will include genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes since 2002, is an important step in the
right direction.
The pursuit of justice for victims of crimes in
Darfur is also reflected in the cooperation shown by
the authorities. The signing, on 14 February, of the
memorandum of understanding on cooperation on the
June 2020 surrender case is a welcome development, as
is the signing on May 10 of a country-wide agreement on
cooperation by the transitional authorities. It is important
21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8791

that both sides continue to engage on outstanding issues
in order to find mutually acceptable solutions.

the way for strengthening cooperation in the pursuit of
justice for atrocity crimes.

We note the positive outcome from the recent visit
of the Prosecutor to Khartoum and Darfur. Since the
Sudan is not a party to the Rome Statute, we hope
that the constructive exchanges with the Sudanese
authorities will lead to a consensus-based way forward
on the mandate of the ICC.

We welcome the fact that the ICC has been able
to carry out investigations on the ground. Access
to the territory of the Sudan remains critical to the
investigations and to ensuring accountability. The
preservation of evidence is crucial. There needs to
be unimpeded access for the ICC investigators to
witnesses, crime scenes and other evidence in Darfur.
We welcome the Sudanese Government’s cooperation
thus far. Further cooperation may be warranted to
ensure greater accountability.

As the Sudan transitions to a more peaceful, stable
and prosperous future, there is a need to provide it with
all the necessary assistance to redress the shadows
of the past, promote intercommunal harmony and
protect the fundamental rights of all its citizens. In that
context, it will be important to build the capacity of
national judicial institutions to deal with past cases.
Furthermore, it will serve the credibility of the ICC to
partner with national judicial institutions and assist in
its capacity-building.
Lastly, we urge the international community
to provide all possible assistance to the transitional
Government for the successful completion of the
current transition phase. Over the years, India has
implemented several projects in the Sudan in the
sectors of energy, transport and agro-industry through
concessional lines of credit. We have also assisted in
capacity-building through our scholarship programmes
and extended humanitarian assistance by supplying
food and life-saving drugs. India remains committed to
supporting the Sudan and its people in this important
phase of political transition.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her thirty-third
periodic report on the situation in the Sudan and Darfur
and for her briefing.
Allow me start by reaffirming Estonia’s unwavering
commitment to promoting respect for international law
and a rules-based international order, in which the
ICC plays a vital role. We call on all States to uphold
and defend the principles and values enshrined in the
Rome Statute.
Estonia welcomes the landmark visit by the
Prosecutor and the representatives of her Office to
the Sudan at the end of May, where she met with the
victims of Darfur, senior officials of the Government of
the Sudan and other stakeholders. That hopefully paves

The ICC has issued four outstanding arrest
warrants. Those suspects, wanted for atrocity crimes,
ought to be surrendered to the Court without delay.
Estonia remains concerned about the security
situation in Darfur. The increased violence,
including the killing and large-scale displacement
of the civilian population, must stop. We call on the
Sudanese authorities to accelerate efforts to enhance
the protection of civilians and the restoration of the
rule of law in Darfur. We hope that the Sudan will
closely cooperate with the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan to help to
build those capacities.
In order to provide justice to the victims of crimes
committed, we remain expectant and hopeful that, by
the next reporting period, there will be further concrete
positive steps taken in that direction. Justice needs
to play a central role in the Sudan’s transition. The
Sudanese people have demanded a civilian Government,
justice and security. It must be our common aim to
support those demands.
Finally, we would like to extend our deeply-felt
gratitude to Ms. Bensouda as the Prosecutor of the
ICC over the past nine years in office for her tireless
efforts in pursuing justice for atrocity crimes for people
everywhere. We wish her every success, and we look
forward to cooperation with Mr. Karim Khan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda to respond
to comments.
Ms. Bensouda: I just want to take the floor for
a moment to thank Their Excellencies for their kind

21-1458915/17

S/PV.8791

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

commendations, as well as their kind expressions of
support for the work of my Office continuing.
As Prosecutor, I am not accustomed to having
the last word, but I appreciate the kind gesture in this
being my last briefing to the Security Council. I will
not impose on the precious time of the Council and the
tasking schedules of the representatives who are here,
but I would be remiss if I did not take the floor only
to once again briefly express my sincere gratitude for
their support and for their kind was bidding farewell
and recognizing my work and that of my able team at
the Office over the past nine years.
It has certainly not been easy, but, with the support
of the Council, we have stayed the course and have tried
to bring to life the goals and the values of the Rome
Statute. I have indeed come to the end of my mandate
with the International Criminal Court (ICC) and, as the
saying goes, I gave it my best shot, empowered by my
dedicated team across my Office. I take this opportunity
to salute them.
Where I may have fallen short, I can assure
Council members that it was not for lack of trying. The
work of the Office on behalf of international justice
and, by extension, sustainable peace will continue
without pause.
Led by my sense of duty and ideal pragmatism,
I truly believe that, together with the support of the
international community and this organ, a more secure
and just world, a just future for all is attainable. It
merely takes the trinity of courage, leadership and
genuine conviction in higher ideals. I cannot underscore
enough the important role of the Security Council
in the fight against impunity for atrocity crimes in
close cooperation with the ICC, I can only encourage
continued engagement and cooperation between the
two institutions, which is so crucial to a rules-based
international system and the cause of the peaceful
settlement of disputes. I wish the Security Council
continued success with this critical mission and this
honourable duty that it has.

09/06/2021

for the month of June. We look forward to working with
you on matters that relate to the Sudan in the upcoming
period. I also express my appreciation to the outgoing
President of the Security Council, His Excellency the
Permanent Representative of China, for his efforts
and his able and skilled management of the Council’s
agenda last month. I would like as well to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing today.
(spoke in English)
I am glad that the Security Council has now
returned to normalcy by convening this meeting in
person. I hope that the upcoming days will witness
an everlasting recovery from the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the strong launching of the process
of building back better, commencing with the even
distribution of vaccines, including to poor countries.
No one is safe until everyone is.
(spoke in Arabic)
At the outset, the Sudan reiterates its deep
commitment to justice and accountability, especially
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
Justice is one of the three pillars of the Sudan’s
glorious December revolution and remains the primary
objective of this blessed revolution. Without a doubt,
the foundation and backbone of justice are putting an
end to impunity and ensuring accountability. Based
on that, the Sudan’s transitional Government spares no
effort to uphold justice in Darfur, since it believes that
peace and justice go hand in hand.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.

The Government has adopted a comprehensive
approach to improve the overall living conditions
of the citizens in Darfur. To that end, the Juba Peace
Agreement was signed in October between the
Government, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front and the
Sudan Liberation Movement-Minni Minawi faction.
The Government continues to work closely with all
parties to the Agreement to ensure that it is implemented
in a manner that achieves stability and lasting,
comprehensive peace. The Prime Minister has declared
the Government’s determination to pursue the path of
peace by continuing its dialogue with movements still
outside the peace process, without preconditions except
the national interest.

Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
begin by congratulating your country, Mr. President, on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council

In that regard, it is worth noting that justice is one of
the main themes of the Agreement, including adopting
transitional justice arrangements and establishing a

The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
the clarifications she has provided.

16/17

21-14589

09/06/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

dedicated commission. The Sudan Council of Ministers
has issued a bill on transitional justice, which is currently
being finalized in accordance with the legislative
arrangements for the transitional period. Moreover, the
Government continues to implement its National Plan
for the Protection of Civilians with the participation of
the signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement.
Against that backdrop, I would like to note the
following three points.
First, the transitional Government has established
cooperation channels with the ICC. In order to
formalize that cooperation, the Sudan and the ICC
signed a memorandum of understanding.
Secondly, last week, the Prime Minister announced
that the Government “is working with the ICC
and victims groups to find the best ways to bring
internationally wanted suspects to justice before the
ICC”. In addition, the Prime Minister expressed his
thanks to Ms. Bensouda for her service to the ICC and
renewed the Government’s commitment to cooperate
with the ICC in achieving justice. That was done during
the Prosecutor’s visit to the Sudan.

S/PV. 8791

Thirdly, the Sudan’s Government is working
to improve living conditions in Darfur, which is
experiencing a fundamental shift from war and conflict
towards building peace. It is working to establish a
transitional justice commission as a means of upholding
justice in cases where it is difficult to use traditional
judicial methods. The commission’s work includes
shedding light on the truth, establishing justice,
providing restitution and pursuing reconciliation. Once
established, the commission will conduct an expanded
dialogue to ensure that it is able to fulfil its duties
as expected.
In conclusion, the Sudan reiterates that ending
impunity is one of the noble goals of upholding justice.
It is one of the transitional Government’s top priorities,
as well as being one of the most important elements
in achieving peace throughout our country. We would
therefore like to reiterate our commitment to justice,
especially with regards to crimes related to Juba Peace
Agreement on Darfur.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

21-1458917/17
