United Nations

A/RES/61/66

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 90 (y)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2006
[on the report of the First Committee (A/61/394)]

61/66. The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 56/24 V of 24 December 2001, 57/72 of 22 November
2002, 58/241 of 23 December 2003, 59/86 of 3 December 2004 and 60/81 of
8 December 2005,
Emphasizing the importance of the continued and full implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, 1
Welcoming the efforts by Member States to submit, on a voluntary basis,
national reports on their implementation of the Programme of Action,
Noting with satisfaction regional and subregional efforts being undertaken in
support of the implementation of the Programme of Action, and commending the
progress that has already been made in this regard, including tackling both supply
and demand factors that are relevant to addressing the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons,
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by non-governmental organizations in the
provision of assistance to States for the implementation of the Programme of
Action,
Recalling that, as part of the follow-up to the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, it was agreed
that meetings of States should be convened on a biennial basis to consider the
national, regional and global implementation of the Programme of Action, 2

_______________
1
See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), chap. IV, para. 24.
2
Ibid., sect. IV, para. 1 (b).

06-49839

A/RES/61/66

Reiterating the significance of the adoption of the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small
Arms and Light Weapons, 3
Recognizing that illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons is a serious
problem that the international community should address urgently, and in this regard
welcoming the decision of the General Assembly to establish a group of
governmental experts to consider further steps to enhance international cooperation
in preventing, combating and eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light
weapons,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 60/81, 4
Welcoming the fact that the United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, 5
held from 26 June to 7 July 2006, highlighted the importance of implementing the
Programme of Action in the activities of the international community to prevent,
combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects, beyond 2006,
Encourages all initiatives, including those of the United Nations, other
1.
international organizations, regional and subregional organizations, nongovernmental organizations and civil society, for the successful implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,1 and calls upon all Member States to
contribute towards the continued implementation of the Programme of Action;
2.
Regrets the fact that the United Nations Conference to Review Progress
Made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action was not able to conclude
an outcome document;5
3.
Calls upon all States to implement the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms
and Light Weapons,3 among others, through the provision of information to the
Secretary-General on the name and contact information of the national points of
contact and on national marking practices related to markings used to indicate
country of manufacture and/or country of import, as applicable;
Decides that, as stipulated in the Programme of Action, the next biennial
4.
meeting of States to consider the national, regional and global implementation of the
Programme of Action shall be held no later than in 2008, in New York;
Also decides that the meeting of States to consider the implementation of
5.
the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and
Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, shall be held within the
framework of the biennial meeting of States;
Recalls that the group of governmental experts, established to consider
6.
further steps to enhance international cooperation in preventing, combating and

_______________
3

A/60/88 and Corr.2, annex; see also decision 60/519.
See A/61/288.
5
See A/CONF.192/2006/RC/9.
4

2

A/RES/61/66

eradicating illicit brokering in small arms and light weapons is to submit a report on
the outcome of its study to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session;
7.
Emphasizes the fact that initiatives by the international community with
respect to international cooperation and assistance remain essential and
complementary to national implementation efforts, as well as to those at the regional
and global levels;
Continues to encourage all such initiatives, including regional and
8.
subregional ones, to mobilize resources and expertise to promote the
implementation of the Programme of Action and to provide assistance to States in
its implementation;
Encourages States to submit national reports on their implementation of
9.
the Programme of Action and to include in such reports information on their
implementation of the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and
Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons in
accordance with these instruments, and requests the Secretary-General to collate and
circulate such data and information provided by States;
10. Also encourages States to share information on national experiences
relating to best practices in the implementation of the Programme of Action;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-second session
the item entitled “The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects”.
67th plenary meeting
6 December 2006

3
