United Nations

S/PV.6003

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

6003rd meeting
Tuesday, 28 October 2008, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Yesui . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Belle
Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/659)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-57267 (E)

*0857267*

S/PV.6003

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Adoption of the agenda

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, contained in document S/2008/659.

The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2008/659)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Sudan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamad
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.
I now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur and the efforts of the United
Nations, working with the African Union, to bring an
end to that terrible conflict.
The Council has before it the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on Darfur (S/2008/659). In
accordance with Security Council resolution 1828
(2008), the report provides a detailed update on the
status of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the political process,
the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur and
compliance by all parties with international
obligations.

I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council

I will not repeat the contents of the report, of
course, but would instead like to share with the
Council some of the impressions of my visit to the
Sudan earlier this month. This afternoon, members of
the Council will also be briefed by Under-SecretaryGeneral Malcorra, who will speak on the logistical
aspects of UNAMID’s deployment.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support.

I visited Darfur from 8 to 11 October. During that
time, I travelled to El Fasher, Nyala and El Geneina, as
well as to the site of the UNAMID team in Labado,
South Darfur. I was also able to spend time in the
internally displaced persons (IDPs) Kalma and
Ardamata camps in South and North Darfur,
respectively.

It is so decided.
table.

It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Malcorra to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is

2

In addition to discussions with the leadership and
staff of UNAMID and informative visits to the Mission
and sector headquarters, I met with Government
officials and had fruitful exchanges with IDPs both in
Kalma camp and in El Fasher and with representatives
of the humanitarian community. I also met with Minni
Minnawi in a remote location in Northern Darfur.

08-57267

S/PV.6003

I concluded my visit to the Sudan with
conversations in Khartoum, where I met a range of
senior Sudanese Government officials, including the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Deng Alor; the Senior
Adviser to the President, Nafie Ali Nafie; the Director
of National Security, Salah Gosh; and the senior
official responsible for liaison with UNAMID, Mouttrif
Siddiq.
Perhaps above all, the visit allowed me to obtain
a first-hand understanding of the situation in Darfur,
the conditions under which the 2.5 million displaced
persons are forced to live and the many daunting
challenges facing UNAMID in its effort to contribute
to an improvement in the overall situation.
Turning to the peacekeeping operation, I would
like to assure the Council that every effort is being
made to move forward rapidly with deployment.
Meeting the targets described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, namely 60 per cent deployment by
the end of the year and 80 per cent by the end of March
2009, is one of our highest priorities. Under-SecretaryGeneral Malcorra will speak in more detail on this
issue.
We speak of increased numbers, but more
important is increased capability, which will give
UNAMID a chance to implement the wide-ranging
mandate given to it by the Security Council. Above all,
it will give UNAMID the tools to protect civilians, as
initially envisaged by the Security Council.
I believe we are making good progress. I visited
the Nyala super camp, which is now an impressive
facility nearing completion, built by UNAMID troops
from a brownfield of scrub and desert. I saw first-hand
the impact of effective relations between UNAMID
and the humanitarian community in West Darfur, where
the fighting of last January brought the peacekeepers
and the humanitarians together to respond to the needs
of the displaced. This partnership is now maturing and
strengthening.
I also heard for myself from the internally
displaced persons in Kalma camp that the 24-7
presence of UNAMID police in the camp was a clear,
positive development of great importance, because in
their view it greatly increased their safety. I also heard
from Government officials at every level that a new
page had now been turned and that every effort would
be made to support our efforts to deploy UNAMID.

08-57267

Those are all signs that the Mission is now taking
shape and that the hard work of troop and police
contributors and civilian staff is beginning to bear fruit.
Nevertheless, I will be the first to tell the Council that
we still have a considerable way to go. In many
locations, we are still living with the legacy of the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS), where
troops were equipped through ad hoc arrangements
with donors and were often forced by circumstances
and by the demands of the Mission to deploy to remote
locations without the necessary materiel.
As a result, there are still locations where the men
and women of UNAMID are seriously underresourced,
vulnerable and living and working in extremely
difficult conditions. I saw this clearly in Labado, where
Rwandan soldiers are doing their best to project a
presence despite evident shortages of some key
equipment. This problem will ultimately be addressed
by the rotation into UNAMID of new units that will be
equipped to United Nations standards, drawing on
assessed contributions.
In the meantime, business as usual is not an
option, so we are doing everything we can to ensure
that the basics are in place so that our troops and police
can function. But the real solution will come with
increased deployment of robust troops with the
necessary capabilities.
That is why deployment continues to be the focus
both here at Headquarters and for colleagues in Darfur.
In practical terms, this means the senior leadership of
the Mission is heavily concerned with the political,
logistical and operational complexities of deployment.
It means that significant military and police assets are
being dedicated to escorting convoys and protecting
construction sites. It also means that the Mission itself
is in a state of real-time evolution. New units are
arriving, new sites are being built and the overall
picture is really dynamic. This should be viewed as
positive news. Of course, we must continue to press
forward to put the Mission in place.
At the same time, while we need to deploy and to
focus our energies on the strengthening of the Mission,
we cannot do so in isolation from the day-to-day
tumult and tragedy of Darfur. There is still fighting.
There is still displacement. We still receive reports of
rapes and of civilians under imminent threat. In short,
deployment may be UNAMID’s focus, but it is not the

3

S/PV.6003

Mission’s only priority. We are also implementing our
mandate with regard to protecting civilians.
This presents a serious challenge. The
environment is volatile. In fact, over the past weekend
alone, we received reports of military action by the
Sudanese Armed Forces in the North Darfur town of El
Hilif, and of clashes between Government forces and
the rebel forces of the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)Abdel Wahid near Kutum, also in North Darfur. There
is also a relentlessly high level of banditry and
criminality in Darfur. This year, up to mid-October, the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations have had their cars taken forcibly 273
times. In all of 2007 there were 158 such carjackings.
In 2006, there were 116.
All of these aspects add up to a high-risk
environment. In fact, it is an environment where there
is not yet peace to keep. In United Nations terms, it is a
phase IV security environment, where we are obliged
to minimize risk for United Nations civilian staff by
reducing their numbers until we are able to provide a
reasonable level of security for them as they carry out
their duties.
It is in this environment — short of the envisaged
number of troops, without the envisaged military
transport and attack helicopters and with infrastructure
still being put in place — that the United Nations must
act. It is a high-risk proposition, and I remind the
Council that UNAMID has already sustained a
significant number of casualties. Nevertheless, we
must press on, because where we are able to lean
forward there are tremendous opportunities to have a
positive impact.
I mentioned Kalma camp earlier, and the 24-7
presence there of UNAMID police. That presence has
clearly improved the security of the IDPs, who
themselves say so. The humanitarian community says
so as well, and the Government, in my meetings with
Southern Darfur Government representatives, also
welcomed our presence in the camps.
(spoke in French)
During my visit to Darfur, I has the opportunity
to meet with Mission leadership and with colleagues in
each of the Mission’s three sectors to discuss how we
could work together to multiply such forward-leaning
action: by replicating the Kalma experience, by
increasing patrols and by increasing outreach to our

4

humanitarian colleagues. That must be our collective
goal, even as civilian and military colleagues work to
deploy in a difficult phase IV security environment.
Achieving this goal will require a unified effort.
We will need leadership that is courageous even as it
seeks to mitigate risk. Here at Headquarters, we will
have do everything possible to move the remaining
troops, police and equipment into the Sudan. But
Member States will also have a central role to play.
Troop and police contributors will have to continue
mobilizing personnel and equipment, and donors will
have to assist in filling resource gaps. Most important,
the Mission will obviously need the full support of the
Security Council and the acknowledgement that the
risks being taken will be accepted as a collective and
full responsibility.
I hope that we will be able to share some concrete
achievements with the Council when this issue is next
considered.
I should like also to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the message I received from the
Government at all levels, both in Khartoum and from
the governors in the field, was uniformly supportive of
the deployment of UNAMID. My predecessor,
Mr. Guéhenno, always stressed that there could not be
deployment without the complete and sustained
support of the Sudanese Government. That is as true
today as it was then.
I believe that we have come a long way in clearly
defining the expectations and obligations both of the
Government on the one hand and the African Union
and the United Nations on the other. This clarity will
help us to measure progress and to identify and address
difficulties in going forward. Naturally, we shall
continue to work in this way with the Sudanese
Government in a spirit of transparency and good faith.
Ms. Malcorra will be speaking to this issue in some
detail shortly.
The report before you also provides a brief
summary of the work of the Joint African UnionUnited Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibril
Bassolé. In addition to what is found in the report, I
would like to confirm that Mr. Bassolé is pursuing his
intensive consultations with Government and rebel
leaders.
the

In that respect, we look forward to the results of
Sudan People’s Initiative launched by the

08-57267

S/PV.6003

Government of the Sudan. As Mr. Bassolé himself said,
when he assumed his functions, one of the central
challenges for the Sudan People’s Initiative will be to
ensure that it prepares the conditions required for
direct dialogue among the various movements.

deployment efforts, the major challenges we are facing,
the steps we are taking to address those challenges and
our projections for the deployment of UNAMID in the
coming months. Given the thorough nature of the
report, I will to be very brief.

Of course, in the meantime, Mr. Bassolé has
maintained contacts with the Qatar initiative. As his
work progresses, such contact has become increasingly
important to ensuring that he receives the broad
support required for him to effectively discharge the
mandate given to him by the Council. For my part, I
emphasize that Mr. Bassolé is continuing to benefit
from the broad support of the United Nations, its
Secretariat and the African Union in the
implementation of his mandate.

We believe that we have now put in place the
required systems and defined in detail the steps
required to achieve our targets of 60 per cent
deployment by the end of the year and 80 per cent by
the end of March 2009.

I have spoken at some length about the status of
UNAMID and our intention to do our utmost to protect
civilians, even as we press forward with deployment —
all in an extremely volatile environment. It is crucial,
however, to be completely clear: UNAMID will not
solve the problems of Darfur. Our around-the-clock
presence in one camp cannot be replicated in the 71
camps of Darfur on behalf of 2.5 million refugees and
displaced persons. UNAMID can only assist and
contribute to a solution and alleviate the sufferings of
part of the population. The conflict will end only
through a negotiated political settlement, predicated, of
course, on a decision by the parties to halt military
action and engage in peace negotiations.
In that context, the recent violence in North
Darfur is deeply disturbing. Unless there is a
fundamental change in the intent of parties and the
ambitious declarations made in Khartoum are reflected
quickly on the ground, I fear that we will still be
meeting in this Chamber to discuss Darfur for many
months to come.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Malcorra, UnderSecretary-General for Field Support.
Ms. Malcorra: I am glad to be here today to
provide the Council with additional details regarding
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), following
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy’s introduction.
I believe that the report before the Council
(S/2008/659) provides a full picture of the status of our

08-57267

As the Council is aware, those new, revised
targets reflect a scaling-back of initial, extremely
ambitious projections. The new targets are still
ambitious but in our view can be achieved. The
objective has always been and will continue to be the
deployment of the maximum number of capable units
to the locations where they are required in the shortest
time possible.
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy has already
described the kind of collaboration that will be needed
to reach those goals. Troop and police contributors will
have to mobilize personnel and equipment. Donors will
have to fill resource gaps. The Government will have
to deliver on its commitment to support our
deployment efforts. And, of course, we at the United
Nations will have to be at the centre of those efforts by
coordinating the many moving parts of the complex
process, by pressing as hard as we can to move
personnel and equipment into the theatre, and by
ensuring that the required preparations are in place to
receive personnel and equipment when they arrive.
I can say with confidence that our plans are in
place and being implemented, but the task before us is
daunting. For example, there are approximately 6,000
sea containers, full of equipment required by UNAMID
and bound for Darfur, which are currently at the United
Nations logistics hub in El Obeid, which is in the
central Sudan. That is to say, those containers are 800
kilometres from El Fasher — 800 kilometres of dirt
track and narrow roads which were virtually
impassable for large trucks during the rainy season,
which ended only last month.
Getting this equipment to the Mission is central
to the success of our deployment plan. The report
before the Council describes the steps we are taking to
do so and I am pleased to inform members that we
have been making progress. Four new transport
companies have recently been brought on board to

5

S/PV.6003

increase the movement of containers out of El Obeid
and into Darfur.
That is in addition to an air bridge which we are
putting in place to lift high-priority equipment directly
from El Obeid into Darfur, and to our increasing use of
rail and, in some cases, the direct air-lifting of
equipment and personnel from troop-contributing
capitals all the way to Darfur. We have been doing
some useful work with the Friends of UNAMID in that
regard, and we thank them for that.
The other major pillar of our deployment plan
relates to engineering work. New camps must be
constructed, old camps must be expanded and critical
infrastructure must be put in place. The SecretaryGeneral’s report describes the actions being taken to
ensure that we can meet the engineering demands of
starting up a massive operation in that remote location.
What I would like to stress here is that we must
be prepared to be flexible and creative as we continue
to implement our plans. We will, in particular, need our
military engineering units to show maximum flexibility
and to work throughout the Mission area on a wide
variety of tasks.
Finally, I would like to conclude my remarks by
informing the Council that I will be returning to
Khartoum next month for a second tripartite meeting
with the Government of the Sudan and the African
Union. The first meeting of the Tripartite Committee,
which took place on 7 October and which is reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report, was extremely
useful.
Together with the African Union and our
Sudanese counterparts, we were able to identify critical
areas for cooperation and specific requests for
Government support. In many ways, the second
meeting will be even more important than the first,
since it will give us all an opportunity to evaluate
concrete progress against commitments. It will allow
us to put our ears to the ground.
In closing, I look forward to keeping the Council
apprised of the results of those very important
discussions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I feel it is my duty to convey to you,

6

Mr. President, the condolences of the Government and
people of the Sudan for the Chinese who were killed in
cold-blood in a barbaric and heinous terrorist crime
that reflects the destructive approach of the Justice and
Equality Movement and its goals. The crime followed
through on the Movement’s previous well-known
threats against the Chinese presence in the region and
deserves strong condemnation. In May this year, in its
notorious efforts to spread the crisis from Darfur to
other areas, it attacked the Sudanese capital itself.
Through you, Mr. President, I should like to convey
our sincere condolences to the families of the victims,
to wish a swift recovery to the wounded and to express
the hope that those still being held captive will be
released.
In addition, I should like to congratulate you once
again, Mr. President, on your assumption of the post of
Permanent Representative of China, a country that has
strong relations with our mother continent, Africa, and
is linked to the Sudan by strong ties of friendship and
communication. I am also pleased and proud to see you
presiding over the Security Council for the current
month, as you and your friendly country are well
known for your principles and for upholding norms and
values based on the rich history, culture and
civilization of China, with its ancient historical roots.
Furthermore, I should like to commend Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra, UnderSecretary-General for Field Support, for their tireless
and fruitful efforts since they assumed their posts. I
wish both of them every success in establishing
constructive and transparent working relations with
Member States.
The crime of murdering the five Chinese citizens
occurred in the context of several other considerations
and actions and as a reaction to the momentum for
peace that is being felt throughout the Sudan as a result
of the launching of the Sudan People’s Initiative. It was
further proof of the anti-peace posture of that
movement. But the Government of the Sudan remains
the first to attend all forums and negotiations without
any hesitation or conditions, regardless of time or
place. It is the Government that has unilaterally and
repeatedly renewed the ceasefire out of its conviction
that there is no alternative to peace. Peace is the sole
strategic option of the Government and the people of
the Sudan in all their political diversity — hence, the
Sudan People’s Initiative to achieve a political

08-57267

S/PV.6003

settlement to the Darfur crisis on the basis of an
unprecedented national consensus regarding national
objectives and their priority at this stage.
As all Council members are aware, the Sudan
People’s Initiative is neither an isolated effort nor
parallel to regional and international efforts, but it rather
supplements the efforts of Mr. Djibril Bassolé, African
Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur,
and other efforts being made within the framework of
the African-Arab initiative led by Qatar. In particular,
peace will be built by the sons and daughters of the
Sudan, and the international and regional communities
should help the Sudanese people to attain that objective
by supporting and enhancing their efforts. We therefore
hope, now more than ever before, that those promising
efforts will succeed within the national movement
represented by the Sudan People’s Initiative, which is
being led by all Sudanese political parties, both the
Government and the opposition.
I am pleased to inform the Council that the
committees that were mandated to discuss and submit
proposals on various aspects of the Darfur crisis have
accomplished their task. They are: the committee on
development and services; the committee on internally
displaced persons, refugees and voluntary returns; the
committee on peace and justice; the committee on
reconciliation and social peace; the committee on
foreign aspects; the committee on information; the
committee on security; and the Committee on the
choice of solutions.
Only yesterday, the Presidential Council began to
consider the committees’ proposals for submission to a
general conference of the participants so that they can
be adopted as an official document of the people of the
Sudan that reflects their views and ideas and that
constitutes a framework for producing a Sudanese
resolution of the problems in Darfur. Perhaps the only
absent factor will be the Security Council, which we
expect to take positive measures vis-à-vis the leaders
of the non-signatory movements to cause them to join
the national consensus rather than relying on the
military option to attain their objectives.
If the peace process is experiencing obvious
momentum, the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is also making reasonable progress, as
stated in the report of the Secretary-General on the
deployment of UNAMID (S/2008/659). Those who

08-57267

follow all developments related to the Operation’s
deployment will realize that the Government of the
Sudan, having reaffirmed its commitment to resolution
1769 (2007), is backing up its words with deeds to
honour that commitment. The Government was fully
prepared to carry out its strategy to deploy 80 per cent
of the Operation by the end of this year instead of the
end of March 2009. The report, in its paragraphs 10 to
14, lists various reasons for delaying the attainment of
that objective until the end of March 2009.
Those reasons are mere justifications, and are not
the fault of the Government of the Sudan. The
Government has been striving to remove all obstacles
and has been building channels of communication,
coordination and positive action with the United
Nations and the African Union. The most recent
example was the meeting of the tripartite mechanism —
which includes the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations — on 7 October
in Khartoum, in which Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra participated. As members can see from the
report, the Government of the Sudan responded to all
the concerns and requests made by the United Nations,
which were addressed in the agreement signed at the
end of the meeting. For example, the UNAMID Liaison
Office at El Fasher, led by a senior officer, includes
various State institutions and organs in Darfur in order
to ensure the synergy necessary for all its procedures
and processes. Other liaison offices have been
established in the various sectors of the three states of
Darfur.
The agreement also addressed all aspects of the
use of airports, including travel authorizations, customs
clearances, the best ways to use local and regional
construction and transport capacities and the
mobilization of resources. In this forum, I should like
to reaffirm my country’s full commitment to implement
the agreement, which will be followed up during the
forthcoming visit of Ms. Susanna Malcorra to the
Sudan, on 16 November 2008.
The facts and events described in the report
regarding security and humanitarian conditions clearly
reflect the destructive acts and practices of sabotage,
banditry and targeting of humanitarian workers carried
out by armed groups and the incidents in which
European tourists were kidnapped and cars were
attacked. The politicization, militarization and arming
of camps for internally displaced persons can easily
been seen in the Kalma camp in Southern Darfur,

7

S/PV.6003

which has become a threat to UNAMID’s operations
from Nyala airport at a time when the Government of
the Sudan, mindful of its responsibilities, is attempting
to implement the humanitarian protocol it signed
together with the United Nations through a high-level
mechanism that includes the Government of the Sudan,
the United Nations and the representatives of relevant
humanitarian agencies and organizations.
It is also important that I refer to the fact that the
agreement signed in the context of the last meeting of
the Tripartite Mechanism also included several
paragraphs on facilitating humanitarian operations, in
particular to provide protection to humanitarian
convoys. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that my country continues to be fully
committed to facilitating humanitarian operations and
to providing all the assistance necessary to achieve
their objectives.
We appreciate the fact that the new report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/659) includes a full
paragraph on the Sudan’s efforts with regard to justice
and accountability. Paragraph 65 of the report refers to
the appointment of a Special Prosecutor, who is
currently carrying out his duties in all the States of
Darfur in total impartiality and with the high level of
professionalism characteristic of the Sudan’s judiciary.
That neatly complements previous efforts to amend
criminal procedures to establish special courts for the
States of Darfur.
Paragraph 79 of the report states that
“It is unclear what impact the 14 July
application by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court for an arrest warrant against
President Omar Al-Bashir will have on peace and
security in Darfur and in the Sudan”.
I do not think that anyone should underestimate
the real threats that may emanate from that shameful
procedure. Suffice it to say that most members of the
international community — as represented by the
African Union, the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League of
Arab States and the African, Caribbean and Pacific
States — have warned of the tragic consequences of
that measure and the direct threat it poses to peace in
the Sudan and the entire region.
With regard to relations between the Sudan and
Chad, I am very pleased to inform the Council that the

8

good offices being deployed to normalize and
strengthen relations between our two fraternal
countries are making good progress. We have already
agreed to return ambassadors to the two capitals
between 7 and 10 November 2008.
The Government of the Sudan once again calls on
the United Nations to fulfil its obligations with regard
to the full implementation of the heavy support
package, which is the basis for the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Once that is complete, everything necessary for
the Operation will be in place. We also call on the
international community to provide for the remaining
logistical needs of the mission, which have been talked
about for a long time.
In conveying to the Council all the positive
developments on all tracks, my country’s Government
hopes that the international community will support
and strengthen those efforts in order to safeguard peace
from the risks posed by sabotage and irresponsible
undertakings and the harmful mixed messages being
sent.
In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community to work effectively and promptly with
armed groups to convince them to lay down their arms
and to respond positively to the calls for peace.
Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
representative of the Sudan mentioned the abduction of
the Chinese workers. The United States condemns that
abduction, which took place in South Kordofan state
last week, as articulated in the 21 October press
statement of the Department of State. The United
States is aware of reports that five Chinese workers
were killed during a rescue attempt in South Kordofan
State. If those reports are confirmed, we would express
our regret for those deaths, extend our sympathy to the
victims’ families and encourage the Government of the
Sudan and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan to
investigate that incident expeditiously, so that the
perpetrators can be formally identified and brought to
justice.
The United States reiterates its condemnation of
all violence in the Sudan — violence by the
Government and violence by the rebels. All parties
must refrain from violence in favour of peace and
dialogue. In that regard, the Government of the Sudan
has a special responsibility. It must cease to engage in
those areas of concern documented in the most recent

08-57267

S/PV.6003

report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan, including
violating the limited arms embargo on Darfur, using
aircraft painted to resemble United Nations
humanitarian aircraft, conducting offensive overflights
in Darfur, failing to implement the sanctions mandated
by the Security Council and not accepting that there is
no impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

08-57267

The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

9
