IQ"

I 1

7P

I I

r

1raj 1.1 r

PLENARY MEETING

GENER.~L
SIX.TE.'ENTH SESSION

Official Records

FlU"

l078th

United Nations
ASSEMBI~Y

W 11

•

Thursday, 14 December 1.961.,
at3 p.m.

NEW YORK

t
(

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): If no
member of the Assembly wishes to tnlte the floor for
an explanation of vots, I shall put to the vote the draft
resolution whioh appears in the report \)f the Speoial
PolitiCal Committee [A/SOlO, para. 10].

CONTEN'rs
Page
Agenda item ~3..
[dues tion of Oman
Repo1~t of the Speoial Po11tioal Committee. • 1.029

A vote was taken by roll-call.

Agenda item .9~:
Admission of new Me.mbers to the United
Nations (gonoluded)• ••••••••••••• , •• 1.0:4.9

Iran, havinl£ been drawn by lot by the President,
was oallee! upon to f 'Ote firs t.

President.. Mr. Mongj SLIM (Tunisia).
AGENDA ITF.:M 23,
Question of Oman
REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A/SOlO)
PU1:sUi'i1.nf: to rule 68 of the rules of pr.ooedure, it
was deoided not to disot.1SS the report of the Speoial
.Politioal Commlttee.

1. Mr. FUKUSHIMA (Japan), Rapporteur of the Special Political Committee: The General Assembly
included the question of Oman in the agenda of its
fifteenth session [909th plenary meeting] following
the request of ten Arab delGgations,1/ and the matter
was considered by the Special Political CommUte at
four meetings last April, at the resumed session
[225th to 229th m.eetings]. The Assembly at that time
decided [99Sth plenary meefing] that further consideration of the item should be deferred until the
present, s ixteenth, session of the<.General Assembly.
2. Consequently, the Special Political Committee to
which the item was again allocated [1018th plenary
meeting] has devoted eight meetings (~29th to ?06th
meetings] to its consideration. Twenty-eight speakers
were heard during the course of the Committee's
general deba.te and some twenty more spoke on the
draft resolution that was submitted tp the Committee's consideration on 22 November by the delegations
of Afghanistan, Guinea, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Mali, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Republic, Yemen and
Yugoslavia.
3. At the 30th meeting of the Committee on 4 December n the draft resolution was voted upon in parts,
and was adopted as a whole by a roll-call vote of 38
to 21, with 29 abstentions. The text is to be found in
document A/SOlO, the r.eport of the Special Political
Committee on its consideration of the question of
Oman, which I now have the honour to s'ubmit to the
General Assembly l' its consideration.

In 'favour: Iran, Iraq, ,Tordan, Lebanon, Libya, Mali,
Mongolia, Morocco, Poland, Romailia, Saudi Al'nbia,
Sudan, Syria, Ttmisia, Ukrainian Soviet Sooialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Arab Republic, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Cambodia, Congo (Leopoldville), Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Guinea., Hungary, India,
Indonesia.
Against: Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, South Africa,
Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, France, Iceland.
Abstaining: Ivory Coast, Japan, Laos, Liberia,
Madagascar, Mexico, Nepal. Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Senegal, Sierra Laone, Spain, Thailand, Turkey l
Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Argentina, Austria,
Bolivia,Brazil, Ceylon, China. Colombia, Ecuador.
El Salvador, Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti.
The result of the vote was .'33 in fa~'our and 21
against, with 3'1 abstentions.

The draft resolution was not adopted, having failed
to obtain the required two-thirds majority.

AGENDA ITEM 92
Admission of new Members to the United Nati()ns (c;oncluded)*
5. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
General Assembly has before it a report by the Security Council On the admission of Tanganyika to the
United NaU.:>ns [A/5033]. In this connexion, the General Assembly has to take a decision on the draft
resolution [A!L.377 and Add.l] submitted by thirtyone delegations and recommending the admission of
Tanganyika as a Member of the United Nations. Since
there has been no request for a· vote on this draft
resolution" may I assume that the G8neral Assemhly
approves of the admission of Ti!:mganyika as a Membel' of the United Nations?
The draft resolutio,t'j was a.dopted by aoolamation.

!I Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session.
*Resumed from the I045th meeting.

Annexes. I,Igenda it'ilm 39. document A/452,l.

1029

A/PV.l0n

1080

General Al!Isembly - Sixteenth ~llI1on - Plent\r!mMscttng~_,

(3
The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In
view of this demonstration of uppl'oval und ha\'in(;
heard no objection, I hereby declare Tangmwika to
be a Member of the United Nations.

The delegation of Tanganyika was e,~oorteld to its
place in the General Assembly Hal1.
7. The PRESIDENT (trnnslnted from Frenoh): I nm
glad to have this opportunity to welcome Tanganyika
to our Assembly. This great Afrioan oountry will
ce!'tainly not fail to support the work of our Organi...
zation both by its devotion to the prinoiples of the
Chartf;r and by its ability and wisdom, and in this
way to promote fruitful and peaceful co-opel'ation
among all nations and the strengthening of our Organi...
zation on behalf of pe!l.oe, friendship and brotherhood.
I should like to convey my warmest congratulations
to the people and Government of Tanganyika on the
aocession of that oountry to full sovereignty and on
its enthusiastic adhe:'ence to the Charter and its
support for the United Nations.

8. Mr. GODBER (United Kingdom): I have the honour
on this oocasion to express the satlsfaotion of my
delegation at the adoption by the Assembly of the
very welcome resolution deoiding to admit Tanganyika
as a Member of the United Nations. It is with a feeling of happiness, of fulfilment, that I express such
satisfaction.
9. For forty-two years the United Kingdom has been
responsible for the administration of the Ter't'itory of
Tanganyika and, on 9 December, whe~ T~nganyika
attained independence, '!'e sa~ the culmmatlOn of the
success of an associatlOn WhICh has been thro~g~out
one of constructive co-operation. Indeed the dlstmctive characteristic of all the preparations for self...
government undertaken in the past four decades in
Tanganyika has been the spirit of friendship and
understanding, coupled with a firm determination to
press on with increasing speed towards the acclepted
goal which has marked every stage along the way.
10. We rejoi~ a~ one country aft~r anothe.r comes
forward to jom thIS world commumty of natlOns. We
in the United Kingdom are glad-yes, and proUd-that
the people of Tanganyika have so fully taken advantage
of every opportunity in the process of preparation
for independence. Yet, it is the future that matters;
and I am confident that ever'y country here represented will wish this new State every success and
prosperity.
.
11. It is a matter of special satisfaction to my
Government that an agreement has been signed with
the Government of Tanganyika ensuring for the future
the continuation. in as gre~t a measure .as the
Government of Tanganyika Itself may deSIre, of
administrative. and specialist help which ~ritish
admirlistrators have given to the country durmg the
past forty-two years.
•
12. It is right that the United NatIOns s~ould take
~pecial satisfaction in Ta~ganyikals attamment to
mdependence, for TanganyIka is the ~argest. ~rust
Territory to reach independence. PrIme Mmlster
Nyerere has .himself e~pres~e~ple~sure at the va~:
able. part ,!,hlCh the,un~ted Nat.lons in genera~ ~~ ~I~~.
TrusteeshIp CounCIl m. pa;~lCula:: ~ave ,~~~:'i~d .. m
assisting~nd acce.leratmg illS natIOn s aQ1/ ...l1ce ~owards its fmp.} destmy.
13. We in the Commonwealth also especially rejoice
to see yet another important addition to our number

_

of free and independent mttions. and we take purt1cu..
lar slttisfar.tion from tho f:\ot that the Prime Minister
of Tanganyiku•. who has played such an Qutstundlng
part in the leadership of his country in its march to
independence, is hinl!~l)\f an adVOOI\ta of the strength
and the purpose of the Commonwealth. In this regard
I should lilte to quote his own words:
"Stronger than treaties less selflsh than alli...
anoes less restril1tiva th~n any other assooiation.
the C'ommonwealth seems to my colleagues and
myself to offer the best hope in the world today of
lasting peace and friendship among the peoples of
the world."
He went on to say:
"More than any other group of nations in the
world today, the Commonwealth binds together in
friendship and in like-mindedness an astonishing
variety of nations great and small, without dis...
tinction between them and without discrimination
among them."
14. Those Commom.ealth purposes are also the purposes of the United Nations, and we in the British
delegation are fully confident that this new country
will play a distinguished part in the world councils
which today it is about to enter. I welcome most
warmly this opportunity of wishing its people well on
this ve1'Y happy occasion. I wish them well on behalf
of the United K.ingdom, and I believ~ that ever~' word
I say is echoed m every corner of thIS Hall.
15. Mr. Henry Ford COOPER (Liberia): It gives my
delega~ion great pleasure to welcome here in the
General Assembly the new State of Tanganyika.
16. Tanganyika joins our ranks under the able
leadership of its Prime Minister, Mr. Julius Nyerere.
Much has been said about this great African leader,
especially his racial policies by which men are
treated, respected and honoured not on account of the
colour of their skin or their religion but according
to their ability, their conduct and their regf"rd for
their fellow-men.
. . , ..
17. With such a raCIal polIcy all m~norltles a~e
safeguarded and have no fear of oppreSSIOn orexplolta.tion. Such a policy as that which has been adopted
and is being carried out by the Tanganyikan Government should be an example as well as a guide to its
neighbours in the south. where iu one case a ,!,h~te
minority seeks to impose its will on a black maJor.lty
under the guise of peace, orderly government and the
sole interest and welfare of the inhabitants. This is
known as the multiracial society, a society which on
account of its duplicity has neither the support nor
the sympathy of the Africans; for the only thing that
is multiracial in this plan is that circumstances have
forced people of many races and religions to live
together in a particular territory.
.,
.,
J 8. The racial polIcy of Tanganyika IS also m dIrect
contradiction to the policy of apartheid. which is
being rejected by all honest .and decent people and ~y
all progressive and enlightened nations. For apartheId
i o not only the' exploitation but also the demoralization of a people. It tends to create or maintain an
inferior and a superior race. It matters not, therefore, how much progress may be made. or how enlightened a people may become, because on account
of th6 nature of their environment, which has much
to do with the colour or. pigmenta~ion ?f their skin,
they must always be conSIdered an InferIOr people.

19. We kno\\
hardships of t
history have
the hardest c
vlved the ev'
any fear for t
the hazards t
foreign rule,
for the rule
government 1

20. Man wo.
thorefore, he
his goals und
mild, has /l.
mental growt
ally thoy wit
man, no peop
in luxury an
dependence in
21. We wel
United Nation
ranks of tho!
dependenoe f
one of the ca
United Nation
22. In concl
tion to the Ul
towards assi
dependence in
23. Mr. NGI
casion, perm
the Federatio
delegations w
country of Ta
ship in the U
and people P'
welcome to t
dependent Ai
emerged fron
in a most pe
Kingdom Gov
midwife, also
24. Tanganyi
races which
in Africa on a
and which ca
on the basis
society each e
contributes it
of the country
25. The Afr!
nyika are ind
happy exampl
involved in c
resolved. esp
respeot, Tan
Africa but in
proud that sue
ideas into the
hope that the
been lighted 0
tion to oUr A
in the neighb
Mozambique,
land~ Angola· a
26. I wish to
Mr. Julius N

I

1031
1078th meeting - 14 Deoember 1961
-----------....;:;;....---------------------,
-------nyika, whose level..headed leadership and wise und
19. We know the vioissitudes, the trials and the

-1(

responsible statesmanship has brought about this
happy transition of Tanganyika to independence and
full sovereignty. The name of Julius Nyerere will
certainly go down in the annals of history us one of
the great African nationalists and leaders who, by
their unswerving devotion and dedication to the free..
dom and progress of their countt'y and of the continent of Africa, have brought glory to their peoples.
It is with great satisfaotion, thQrefore, that I welcome
Tanganyika's emergenoe as an independent State and
also to membership in the United Nations, to join
forces with its brother independent Afrioan and Asian
oountries in the final march toward the fre~dom of
the whole of Africa and Asia from colonialism.

0\
C

hardships of the Tanganyiknn people who in their long
history have lived through and survived ul:'cter one of
the hardest colonial rules. No people w1 :11 has survived the evil of such a oolonial rGgime can have
a~ fear for their freedom and independenoe. Despite
the hazards and difficulties that surround liberty, no
foreign rule, however benevolent, can be substituted
for the rule of n. people by the people, even if.such a
government leans towards autocracy and dictatorship.
20. Man was created free and independent, nlld,
thorefore, he develops to maturity and realizes best
his goals under freedom. Constant tutelage, however
mild, has a tendency to stultify the physical and
mental growth of a people, and if not resisted, eventu....
ally tho3' wither away into oblivion. Therefore, no
man, no people willingly chooses slavery or bondage
in luxury and plenty I'ather than freedom and independence in poverty and want.
21. We welcome the l04th Member State of the
United Nations: Tanganyika. This State now joins the
ranks of those nations that seek freedom and independence for all regardless of race or religionone of the cardinal principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
22. In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation to the United Kingdom which has done so much
towards assisting this territory to obtain its independenoe in a peaceful and o:o-derly manner.
23. Mr. NGILERUMA (Nigeria): On this happy oc-

casion, permi,~ me on behalf of the delegations of
the Federation of Malaya and Nigeria to join other
delegations which have congratulated the independent
country of Tanganyika on its admission to membership in the United Nations. It givel'3 my Government
and people particular joy to be able once more to
welcome to this august Assembly yet another independent African State, which has successfully
emerged from colonial domination to independence .
in a most peaceful and smooth manner. The United
Kingdom Government, which has played the role of
midwife, also deserves some felicitations.
24. Tanganyika represents a hal)PY system of many
races which find themselves in a single community
in Africa on account of historic and economic factors
and which can nevertheless live together as brothers
on the basis of equality and mutual respect. In this
society each element finds its natural place, and each
contributes its share to the progress and well-being
of the country.
25. The Africans, Asians and Europeans in Tanganyika are indeed furnishing the modern world with a
happy example of how the many thorny problems
involved in creating a multiracial society can be
rsaolved, espe'Cially on the African continent. In this
respect, Tanganyika represents a torch not only in
Africa but indeed in the whole world. And we are
proud that such an infusion of progressive democratic
ideas into the world should emanate from Africa. We
hope that .the symbolic torch of freedom which has
been lighted on MouJit Kilimanjaro wili be an inspiration to our African brothe:rs who are still in bondage
in the neighbouring territories of Kenya, Uganda,
Mozambique, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, Nyasalandv Angola· and South Africa.
26. I wish to sflize this opportunitj~ tt.' 1.y tribute to
Mr. Julius Nyerere, the Prime Mln~.sc3r of Tanga"cJ;-'

W

e1
3'
0
0.

tc
w
11
g
3'
g
a
t
s

27. My country is very happy, indeed, along with
other Commonwealth and African countries to sponsor the application of Tanganyika to membership of
the United Nations, and we are exceedingly proud of
Tanganyika's peaceful and harmonious evolution to
indepemivnce. As a Member of this world Organization, Tanganyika will be able to oontribute in no
small measure to the solution of the highly complex
and intricate problems which are plaguing the United
Nations and humanity as 11 whole today. It will be
able to infuse new spirit and new ideas into this
Organization.

'"
a
a

3
t
0

t
I
a
t
v
e

28. In conclusion, I wish to congratulate Tanganyika
once more on its successful and happy emergence as
an independent sovereign State, and to extend the
hand of brotherhood to it on behalf of the Federation
of Malaya and my country, Nigeria, and to assure it
of the fullest co-operation and friendship in all fields
of our relationship.

0

p
3
0

t
a
c
a

29. Mr. CORNER (New Zealand): At a time when the
Assembly is in the midst of a discussion of so many
grave and seemingly intractable problems, it gives
my delegation-which also has the honour of speaking
on behalf of the delegations of Australia and CanadapartiCUlar pleasure to participate in a moment of
history, dear to the people of Tanganyllta, and which
is at the same time a source of special pride for all
the countries of the Commonwealth and one of deep
satisfaction for the United Nations. We feel that we
are doing much more than simply welcom:l.ngthe l04th
Member of the United Nations.

3

D

r
1

i
(

f
~

~

30. Tanganyika has been a Trust Territory' of the
United Nations, and so its accession to independence
last wE!ek represented not only a notable achievement
for thE(' people of Tanganyika. but also a further Vindication ~of the International Trusteeship System. The
presence in this hall of the Prime Minister of Tanganyika, Mr. Julius Nyerere, who is no stranger here,
brings to mind tIds previous link with the United
Nations. Thanks to his efforts, to the encouragement which he received here and also to the goodwill, political awareness and enlightment displayed
by the Administering Authority, Tanganyika has
achieved its· independence in a harmonious and dignified manner.
.

s
c

t

~

r

(

!

~

t

~

31. I am sure that Mr. Nyerere is most anxious for
his·· country to make a contribution to the United
Nations: I am certain that his presence here today is
intended as tangible evidence that Tanganyika is prepared to take serimlsly ~he responsibilities of United
Nations members1lip at a highly critical period in the
life of this Organiz2tion. And those of us who have
had the good fortune to discuss some problems of the

IM.a

i:i~I!!!I!!~\~@~• • • • • • • • • • • • • •

~,

i

.

1032

General Assembly - Sixteenth Seasion - Plenary Meetings

world with Tanganyiltan leadel's, in Tanganyika, in
our own oountl'ies 01' here at the United Nations are
oonvinced that the new wisdom of old Afrioa will
enlarge our sometimes all too limited understanding.
32. It is thus with very great pleasure that, on behalf
of the Governments and peoples of Australia, Canada
and New Zealand, I take this opportunity to pay trib\\te
to the people and to the leaders of TanganyUta. They
will have a unique role to play and it will not be
limited to the history of East Afrioa or even to the
grent oontinent of Afrioa.
33. Australia, Canada and New Zealand are naturally
gratified that Tanganyika has also deoided to beoome
a meno1 Jer of the Commonwealth, and we look forward
to a C lose and fl'iendly oo-operation in that important
sphere, as well as in the work of the United Nations.
We, like other Commonwealth oountl'ies, are in faot
already oo-operating with Tanganyilta in the teohnical
assistanoe field.
34. The New Zealand delegation is thus very happy
to have had this opportunity of joining other members
of the Commonwealth in co-sponsoring a draftresolution on Tanganyika's admission to the United Nations.
I should like onoe again, on behalf of New Zealand
and its fellow-members of tlle Commonwealth, Australia and Canada, to extend a warm weloome to the
very distinguished delegation from Tanganyika and to
express through them, to the people of their country,
our warmest good wishes for their well-being and
prosperity•
35. Mr. GEBRE-EGZY (Ethiopia): I wish to take this
opportunity to extend the warmest oongratulations of
the Ethiopian Government and people to the leaders
and people of Tanganyika on the ocoasion of their
oountry's acoession to independence and today's
admission to the United Nations.
36. We weloome Tanganyika here as, one of our
neighbours, as it joins our I'8.nks in this august international body. Tanganyika is a great country, with a
long and historical tradition, whose presence :...nd
participation in the United Nations we have greatly
looked forward to. Today we have the great pleasure
of welooming Tanganyika here with a sense of cordial
friendship '\nd sincere amity.
37, We sinoerely hope to see here, within the shortest possible time, representatives of all the other
territories in the eastern, central, southern and
southwestern parts of Africa, and indeed in all parts
of the world which have advanced and are advancing
towards independence.
38. Before I conclude, I wish to congratulate warmly
Mr. Julius Nyerere, the Prime Minister of Tanganyika, for his wisdom, realism an<;l remarkable vision
of African unity, a vision I am oertain is shared by
all those who are dedicated to the well-being and progress of our continent.
Mr. Schurmann (Netherlands), Vice-President, took
the Chair.

39. Mr. OKAZAKI (Japan): It is a great relief and
a happy occasion to meet together in r"~q.l..' 2' and
harmony, as we are doing today, for the !-,d )O;R'Y o-f
welcoming a new Memb8r into our mid<;;t. T:·ir.[.'.J <l} ;.:~?
is the newest flower to bloom on the forme: -;o]onLi
desert of Africa, the latest aohievement ·of fi',:- p .. , r",J
Nations Trusteeship System. To this great syG ..... m,
which has nurtured so many new nations in their
growth towards independence, we must pay tribute.

40. In achieVing its independence, Tanganyilm hus
eleoted to beooml~ the newest Member of the British
Commonwealth of Nntions. It is more than nppropri...
ate that we shoull:1 pU\\se at this point and puy tribute
to the enlightened policies of the TJnited Kingdom
Government whioh, in recent years. has led so m,any
new nations to freeldom and membership in thA Unii.ed
Nations. B\\t the greatest trib\\te of all that we must
pay today, and a deeply sinoere one it must be, is to
the people of Tanganyilm and to those who have led
them steadily onward, through all trials and tribulations, to their freedom, their independenoe and their
sovereign 11ationhood: to their distingUished Prime
Minister, Mr. JUliUI, K. Nyerere, and to his assooiates in the new Government of Tanganyika.
41. Shortly after midnight last Saturday, 9 Deoember,
early in the morning;, while the snowflakes swirled
abol\t, a symbolic tOlch was lighted at the t r ." of the
famed Mount Kilimanjaro, aspiring 20,000 feet into
the skies, the highest summit on the Afrioan oontinent. Foreoasting this historio event in 1959, Prime
Minister Nyerere is r~ported to have said:
"We, the people of Tanganyika, would like to light
a oandle and put it on top of Mount Kilimanjaro to
shine beyond our bOll'derl:l, giving hope where there
was despair, love where there was hate, and dignity
where before there was only humiliation."
42. The oandle lighted atop Mount Kilimanjaro five
days ago is indeed now shining beyond the borders of
Tanganyika. It is bringing light into these halls where
before there was muoh darkness; it is bringing faith
among us where before there were grave doubts. And,
if we have known sadness in our time, how much the
greater then is our joy today as we welcome this
noble 'nation to membership in our Organization.
43. On behalf of the Japanese people and the Japanese Government, which reoognized the sovereign
State of Tanganyika on the day of its independence,
we of the Japanese delegation offer our warmest
congratulations to Prime Mill1ister Nyerere and to the
people of Tanganyika. We welcome them with open
arms into the 'United Nations; we look forward with
keen anticipation to working with the delegation of
Tanganyika in the closest oollaboration. May the light
kindled in Tanganyika reflect itself' in our renewed
endeavours to bring peaoe, justice and prosperity to
all the world.
44. Mr. FARAH ALl OMAR (Somalia): The Somali
delegation is honoured to be a co-sponsor of the draft
resolution (A/L.377) which calls for the admission of
independent Tanganyika into this august Assembly. I
have particular pleasure in welcoming to the Organization, on behalf of the Somali people and the Government of the Somali Republic, this new independent
sister African State of Tanganyika. It is heartwarming for our Republic to witness and to be present at
the admission of another East African State whose
.political development is demonstrated by the status it
has reached.
45. The new independent State of Tanganyika has
reached a st~te of nationhood through peaceful means
and co-operation between the people and the British
Government. That evolution indicates that to achieve
independence it is not always essential tosp:ill blood.
We have before us today a clear and patent example
that harmony could and should be the means towaIdR ind'3pendence and the cementing of. eXisting
friendships.
~f"!~~~!·~""ii~.ojji';pitl~~~~!It~~.~
..

46. Under th
Prime Minis
Afrioa whose
this new Sta
peans all WOl
the common
homeland, T
other Afl'!Oll,
aohie've theiJ
ways.
47. 'I'he oont
oolonl.\\lism t
of this oontiu
than the west
ence. The in
aohievement
hopeful that i
of others an
Central Afri
Urundi, Nyas'
talte their pI
nations.
48. An indep
bute to polit
nent, but it ~
development
determine th
and political
49. Mr. PA
French): The
colonial peop
tunity at this
an Afrioan 0
pleasure for
and Governm
congratulatio
Tanganyika 0
efforts to ach
50. The ace
an event of t
in the devel
whioh is the
.struggle for
with stubbor
51. Thanks
of Tanganyil
Nyerere, a
central Afri
will blow wi
obstacles pIa
other peoples
52. The suc
have been th
then selves f
significant b
neighbouring
freedom and
ing stronger
powers and 0
53. The peo
followed the
wards indepe
lent them th
the various
have had the
ing for a n
Prime Minist

1078th meeting - 14 Deoembel' 1961
46. Under the leadership of Ml" Jtllius Nyel'ere, its
Prime Minister, Tanganyika is the first country in
Africa whose society is based on multiracialism. In
this new State we see Afrioans, Asians and Etlro...
peans all worldng side by side in harmony towards
the common aim whioh is the betterment of their
homeland, Tanganyilta. It is our ardent hope that
other Afl'ica,n countries, not ~et independent, will
aohie've their independenoe in similarly peaceful
ways.
47. '1'he continent of Africa has been emerging from
coloni,alism to nationhood. However, the eastern part
of this continent to whioh we belong has been slower
than the west and the north in achieving its independence. The independence of Tanganyika is a proud
achievement of the people of that oountry. We are
hopeful that its independence will (le the forerunner
of others and that the other countries in East and
Central Africa, namely, Uganda, Kenya, RuandaUrundi, Nyasaland and the Rhodesias will soon also
take their places in the community of independent
nations.
48. An independent Tanganyika will not only contribute to political stability in that part of the continent, but it will be a big St5P towards the economic
development of East Africa as a whole, and thus
determine the beginning of the removal of economic
and political barriers.
I

49. Mr. PAVICEVIC (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): The inexorable process of the liberation of
colonial peoples has once again given. us an opportunity at this session to rejoice at the admission of
an African country to the United Nations. It is a
pleasure for me to be able, on behalf of the people
and Government of Yugoslavia, to offer our sincerest
congratulations- t) the people and Government of
Tanganyika on the success which has crowned their
efforts to achieve freedom and independence.
The accession of Tanganyika to independence is
an event of the greatest importance, a turning point
in the development of eastern and central Africa,
which is the part of the Afr'ican continent where the
'struggle for freedom and independence is meeting
with stubborn resi.stance from the colonialist forces.
50.

51. Thanks to the efforts of the valorous people
of Tanganyika and of its leader, Prime Minister
Nyerere, a breach has been made in eastern and
central Africa through which the "Wind of change"
will blow with even greater force to eliminate the
obstacles placed in the path of the liberation of the
other peoples of that part of Afr~ca.
52. The success of the people of Tanganyika, who
have been the first in that part of Africa to free
then selves from colonial dependence, is particularly
significant because it will inspire and stimulate
neighbouring peoples which, in their struggle for
freedom and independence, are constantly encountering stronger resistance on the part of the colonial
powers and other difficulti.3s of all kinds,

.

53. The people and Government of Yugoslavia have
followed the progress of the people of Tanganyika towards independence with profound sympathy, andhave
lent them their support at all times, particularly in
the various organs of the United Nations where we
have had the opportunity and the honour of collaborat-

Mr. Ny.rer.,

.1
~:::::~r~:~'fI~.Witb

the

103S

64. The people and Government of Tanganyika may
rest assured tnat, in any efforts they may undertake
to solve the various problems arising from their
colonial past, they will always meet with the full
understanding and the sincere and friendly support of
the Government and people of Yugoslavia, whose feel..
ings of friendship were olearly expressed on the
occasion of the recent visit of the Prime Ministel' of
Tanganyilta to Yugoslavia.
Mr. Mongi Slim (Tunisia) resumed the Chai1:.
65. Mr. LAPIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Soviet delegation, lilte
the delegations of the other sooialist countries, is
heartily glad to weloome to the United Nations the
representatives of a new independent African StateTanganyika.
56. The formation of a new State in Africa confirms
the fact that the changes occurring in that continent
are truly historic. Like shagreen leather, the terri~
tory over which the colonial Powers hold sway is
shrinking, and the day draws near when all the
peoples now oppressed will breathe freely and fully,
when they will all build up really independent and
sovereign states.
57. The Soviet people are sincerely gl'atified by the
successes of the liberation movement in Africa. and
are very happy to note the increasing role being
played by African countries in solving important
international problems connect~d with ensuring peace
and happiness for all the peoples of our planet. We
know that the peoples of the young African States,
including the people of Tanganyika, face many complex and difficll1t problems, many diffioultiss inherited by them from their colonial past.
58. The Soviet delegation would like to assure the
peoples of the African countries that, in their just
struggle for the complete emancipation of the African
continent from colonial oppres~'don and in defence of
the sacred rights of national sovereignty, they have
in the Soviet Union a faithful and disinterested friend
and ally.
59. True to its unalterable policy of peace and
friendship bt;ltween peoples, my country is always
prepared to give every kind of help to the African
peoples in building up really sov(:)reign, national
States.
60. While it oongratulates the people and Government of Tanganyika on havi.ng won their long-awaited
independence, the Soviet delega.tion cannot refrain
from pointing out that it wc:,~d h,~ wrong to pass over
in silence the following two facts.
61. In the first place, one cannot overlook the lessons of recent times and the events which hl":ve been
a feature of the whole history of the peoples of
Atrica. These events show that'indepeudence is not
given to the African peoples easily. It has to be fm.lght
for vigorously and tenaciously. The peoples of Africa
have tost.ruggle against the vestiges of colonialism,
even after attaining political independence. It is
common knowledge that the 'olonial Powers make
desperate efforts to maintain the colonial exploi.ta~
tien of the population of the former colonies by new
methods and in new' forms-for instance, by exercising indirect control over countries that are formaily independent.
62. The imperialists retreat and manoeuvre~ realizing that they cannot maintain the colonial systell1 in

I

I

I
I

I

_lO_S_4

G_e_n_e_ra_l_A_s_s_el~!.. - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

its former guise, but while retreatir.:g under the
pressure of the national..Uberation mClVement and
while agreeing to grant independenoe, th~W try at the
same time to maintain old economio ties, to reta.in
in the hands of 1mperiaUst monopolies financial and
eoonomio links between the home oountries and the
oolonies.
63. While granting the oolonies politioa1 independenoe, the imperialists strive at the same time to
emasou1ate and undermine the national sovel'eignty
of the liberated oountries and to prevert the idea of
the selll-determination of peoples.
64. The achievement of politioa1 independence is
undo~bt\:ldly a real sucoess for the national liberation
oampaig'n of the oolonial peoples. When Staiei:l gain
political independence it gives them an opportunity
of formi',ng eoonomic and politioal linl~s not only with
their own metropolitan oountries but also with many
other St!ltes which oan help them in their economic
and poiitlloal development.

I
I

6\5. In s~cquiring their political independence, the
former oolonies also gain the opportunity of utilizing
the forum of international organizations for a further
fil~ht to 'consolidate their own sovereignty. At the
S~Lme time the uncontrolled domination of imperialist
monopoliEls in the former colonial countries is weakened, and the prerequisites are created for the
speedier growth of industry, for carrying out agrarian
r~foI'ms~ and for expanding the domestic market, ;'e.,
for independent economic development.

66. In thi\s connexion, the Soviet delegation would
like to say that it welcomes the fact that the Government of Tanganyika and its people are beginning their
work by implementing economic development plans,
training their administrative staffs, abolishing illiteracy among the population of the country, and creating
facilities for education, more especially, for higher
education.
67. The difficulties confronting Tanganyika are
enormous, but we have no doubt that its people wilJ
succeed in overcoming them and in building up a
really sovereign apd national State.
•
68. Secondly, the Soviet deleration would like to

mention the -fact that the grantwg of independence to
Tanganyika does not mean the end yet of the struggles
of the peoples of Africa, and, in particular, of the
peoples of East Africa, for freedom and independence. The peopleb of Mozambique, NortbernRhodesia,
Southern Rhodesia, Nyasaland, Uganda, Kenya and
Zanzibar are still under the colonial yoke and a
stubborn struggle for their emancipation lies ahead.
In that struggle too, the peoples of the African continent must march in the leading ranks.
69. During the discussion of the colonial question at
this session (me 01 th\3 African representatives rightly
exclaimed iiAfl'l.na cannot be half free".
70. The Soviet Delegation welcomes the

recerlt
declaration Oy the Prime Minister of Tanganyika,
Mr. Julius Nyerere. when ,-.e said in his broadcast
address on 10 December 1961:
"In our joy let us not forget one thing, namely,
that certain of our brothers in Africa have not yet
achieved the freedom which we are celebrating
today. OU1' own freedom cannot be secure, however
much we may labour, until all of Africa has become
free .and united. In setting up our own country we

must do a.ll we oan in order to help 0\\1' brothers
who are fighting to aohieve, as you have, an in..
dependent position so that all of us together may
maroh forwal'u towards even greater tmity."
71. May I, in oonolusion, wish the people of Tanganyika and their Government suooess in building up an
independent State, and expre!::s the hope that~ as a
Member of the United Nations, Tanganyika will play
an outstanding role in the oause of strengthening
peace in Afrioa and all over the world and in oonsolidating friendship between the Afrioan and other
peoples.
72. Mr. CISSE (nenegal) (translated from French):
Senegal and its friends of the African and Malagasy
Union calIDot refrain from expressing the pride they
take today in sponsoring, together with many other
Member States, the admission of Tanganyilta to the
United Natio::l.s. One, and not the least, of the links
whioh bind us to Tanganyika is worthy of attention;
that is the faot that both Senegal and Tanganyika, like
a number of other African States, haw'l decided, in
acceding to their independence, to eliminate all
bitterness about anything which might to a greater
or lesser extent oonstitute a factor of division and to
look resolutely forward in order, in a spirit of
friendship and of mutual respect for sovereignty, for
the future together with the former colonial Power.
73. It would therefore be a serious mistake if the
event which we are witnessing today in the admission
of Tanganyika to the United Nations were to be regarded as merely another African State swelling the
ranks of the others. Much more is involved. There is
the faot that this independence was acquired in peace,
harmony and friendship between the United Kingdom
and Tanganyika. The Europeans in Tanganyika are by
no means the least enthusiastic supporters of the
policy pursued by Mr. Nyerere, the Prime Minister
of that. country.. In Tanganyika, Europeans, Africans,
Arab"! and Asians live together in peace and friendship. We should pay a well-deserved tribute to the
wisdom of Her Britannic Majesty's Government for
the <s;;nellent results achieved in Tanganyika and for
its gennine collaboration with the United Nations
throughout the period during which it was responsible
for the administration of that territory.

74. This is an example upon which the Members of

our Organization would do well to .:-eflect. Senegal
would like to express the hope that the example of
Tanganyika-which has acceded to Independence in
peace, but is surrounded by States where fiJ:'es glow
red, where blood flows, where hatred is rampant and
where other explosions apt to imperil the peace of
the world a)~e being prepared.-will be pondered and
that the administering Powex-s in that part of Africa
whose policies are contrary to the principles of the
United Nations Charter, apparently signed by them
in a spirit of mockery, will ultimately be guided by
good sense and will follow the lead of the United
Kingdom. A trihute should also be paid to the Tanganyikan people for its determinatio.n to achieve independence and to take its place at the meeting ground
of a reborn Africa.
75. What we know of the policy and achievements
of Mr. Nyerere's Government gives us grounds to
assume that among us, the African States, Tanganyika
will be one of the staunchest upholders of the dignity
of the black man, of African solidarity and of international co-operation.

76. At tl
to indepe
Kilimanjo
indeed sy
he,arts oj
soon glo

77. Ml'.
tion's fel
the ausp
family 0
refer to
Addressi
Presiden
"By
another
our ra
ment a
a war'
meetin

It is my
warmth
the peopl
in the in
have dese
78. We

guidance
wisdom,
can acbie
a rich me
ideals of
79. Mrs
the dele
Israel th
of Tanga
into the
ourselve.
belong.
free WOI'
has not
and inde
freer wit
80. We

a world
complete
independ
joy that
welcome
and wish
independ
independ
source of
are not a
importan

81. We 1
the great
Julius N
dependen
present.
declarati
ence, wo.
the vehic
Tanganyi
ment, eq
living, hi
health, a
themselv
could the

1078th meetinl?\ .... 14 December 1961
76. At the very hour when Tanganyika was aoceding
to independenoe, torches were lit on the summit of
Kilimanjaro, the highest mountain in Africa. This is
indeed symbolio. Freedom is at last glowing in the
hearts of the Tanganyikans as we are sure it will
soon glow for ever in the heal'ts of all Afrioans.
77. Ml'. ADEEL (Sudan): In extending m3f delegation's felioitations to the delegation of Tanganyika on
the auspioious admission of their country to the
family of nations, I think I could do no better than
refel' to what our Chief of State said on this matter.
Addressing this Assembly on.S Ootober this year,
President Abboud said:
.

~

1

1
r
)

f
r

1
i

i
f
i

"By the time the present session rises, yet
another youthful nation of Afrioa will have joined
our ranl~s. We rejoioe in that prospeot. The Government and people of Tang£.nyi1~a may be assured that
a warm welcome awaits them." [1036th plenary
meeting, para. 6.]
It is my speoial pleasure today to express anew the
warmth of this weloome. Our best wishes go out to
the people of Tanganyika for happiness and prosperity
in the independent and sovereign road on which they
have deservedly embarked.
78. We are firmly of the oonviction that under the
guidanoe of leaders ·of Prime Minister Nyerere's
wisdom, dedioation and statesmanship, Tanganyika
can achieve much for its people and oan oontribute in
a rich measure to the promotion of the principles and
ideals of this Organization.
79. Mrs. MEIR ~Israel): It is the firm conviotion of
the delegation, the Government, and the people of
Israel that in celebrating the acoession of the people
of Tanganyika to their independence and admission
into the United Nations we ought also to oongratulate
ourselves, the world Organization to which we all
belong. Being convinoed that tlhis cannot be called a
free world while there remains a single people that
has not come into its elementary right to freedom
and independence, we believe that the world becomes
freer with each people that'gains its independenoe.
80. We who belong to this Organization want it to be
a world Organization. We all know that it will not be
complete until all peoples of the world are free,
independent. and Membel'sof it. Therefore. it is with
joy that we. the people and Government of Israel.
welcome the people and Government of Tanganyika,
and wish them. well on their great day of freedom and
independen<.:e. We know that each people that becomes
independent not only frees itself but is, in addition, a
source of joy and encouragement to other peoples who
are not as yet independent. Therein lies an additiona~
importance in the indel.'l8ndence of eaoh people.
81. We have been extremely interested to read what
the great leader of Tanganyika, its Prime Ministel'
Julius Nye:rere, said Cl'l the very day of their independence. in the midst of all the great joy that was
present. He oalled upcn his people to know that the
declaration of independence, the attaining of independ...
enoe, was ilOt in itself the goal: that it was merely
the vehicle-the only vehicle-by which the people of
Tanganyika could achieve their real goal of development, equality among themselves, high standards of
living, high standards of education, high standards of
health, a society such as. they wished to build for
themselves; it was the vehicle and only through it
could the goal be achieved.

1035

82. Again I shuuld like, on beha.lf of the people and
Government of Israel, to extend to the people and
Government of Tanganyika a hearty weloome. So fnr
as we, the people of Israel are ooncerned, we oonsider it a privilege, a good fortune, to have already
good relationships with that oountry and its peoplej
and I am oonvinced that these will grow.
83. Sir Muhammad ZAFRULLA KHAN (Pakistan): I
have the honour to speak on this oooasiOr'l on beh31f
of the Government {l,nd people of Pll.ldstan, and also
on behalf of the Government and people of Nepal. We
havo the honour to offer our most sincere felioitations to Tanganyika on its admission to membership
of the United Nations. We, who faoe Tanganyika across
the Arabian Sen, and who have many ties with that
land and its peoples, have watched with keen b~terest
and growing satisfaotion the progress of Tanganyika
towal'ds full sovereignty and statehood, under the
guidl:!J'loe of its distinguished Prime Minister, Mr.
Nyerere, who is already recognized as an able
administrator and a constructive stateeman.
84. Pakistan has a sizable group of its nationals in
Tanganyi1~a. We (~$sire to assure the distinguished
Prime Minister of Tanganyika of their fullest 00operation and loyalty in promoting the prosr>erity of
Tanganyika and the welfare of its people.
85. We regard the admission of Tanganyika to this
great fellowship as a very good augury towards the
strengthening of international peace~ We recall that
the oapital of Tanganyika is Dar file Salaam, a:G..
Arabic word meaning "The abode of peace'!. We hope
fervently that Tanganyika has a valuable and signifioant contribution to make to the cause of international
peace.
~5. On an ocoasion like this I would venture to bespeak the President's indulgence and that (If my
fellow delegates to call to mind a cause of a more
personal nature for our rejoicing at the admission of
Ttlnganyika to the membership of the United Nations.
That is that the Mayor of Dar es Salaam, the first
Tanganyikan to be elected to that high office, His
Honour Shaikh Amri Abedi, spent four years with us
at Rabwah in West Pakistan. and won all our hearts
through his courtesy. gentleness and charm. Sheikh
Amri Abedi is also a member of the Tanganyikan
Parliament. He is as much loved in Pakistan as he is
in Tanganyika, and we consider that he belongs as
much to Paldstan as he does to Tanganyika.
87. In conclusion. we desire to convey to the Government and people of Tanganyika. through thaiJ;' distinguished Prime Minister. the assuranGes of our
goodwill and affection, and our readiness and eagerness to oo~operate with them in all that' might tend to
foster their welfare and prosperity, and to st~ngthen
international peace :md security.
88. Mr. BOURGUIBA (Tunisia) (translated from
Frenoh): Five days ago, a Tunisian delegation had the
honour of representit'.g my Government and my coun,:"
try at the festivities which opened the doorways of an
independent sovereign life for Tanganyika. It is· a
privilege for me torlay to be able to tell Mr. Nyerere,
the Prime Minister of Tanganyika, how this visit to
Dar es Salaam a few days ago filled us with joy. It
was not merely a response to a coU!'teous invitation;
it was a response to our own conscienoe, and it was.
above all, the culmination of several visits of Tu'"
nisian delegations to Dar as Salaam, which oonvinced us that this country~ its leaders and its people

: .'_._-'_h_-_ .. ~:''::2~'!:'=':'''''':.~.=''~~~iii!,!,I~!'m'tl\~~.1ii.~.,.

771"'.

I

~.

'ii5
1036

..•-~._..-.

~,-,

£- ....

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

were tatting tIteir first steps in freedom under the
best possible conditions and were beginning, after
exoellent prepuration, what we, since 0\\1' independence, have regarded as the supreme struggle: not
merely throwing off the bonds of foreign domination.
but the domestic struggle to raise the standard of
living and to combat a muoh more dangerous servitude, that of ignorance, a servitude in which any
country lives when it is in fear of hunger and disease.
89. I have the signal honour of speaking today on behalf also of the delegation and Government of the
Republio of Iraq, and I wish to express our joy and
our pride in the admission of Tanganyil~a to the
United Nations, for Tanganyika is one of the countries whioh has been able to attain independence in
the best possible conditions. We should also like to
express to the Government of the United Kingdom our
satisfaction at the manner in which it fulfilled the
responsibilities imposed by history on those who,
having passed through a colonial stage, know how,
when the time oomes, to turn the page graciously,
honestly and without ulterior motives.
90. We are sure that, so far as the United Nations is
concerned, the admission of Tanganyika. whioh has
attained independence by the process we know and is
led by statesmen of the oalibre of its Prime Minister.
does not merely mean one more Member State, but
rl9presents a valuable addition and a constructive
oontribution to the Organization's work.

91. Once again, on behalf of Iraq and Tunisia, we
we'1come Tanganyika.
92. Mr. CHAKRAVARTY (India): On behalf of the
Go,rernment of India and of the Govermnent of
Afghanistan, which has done me the honour of asking
me to speak on its behalf, it gives me much pleasure
to welcome Tanganyika to the fraternity of independent uations.

93. TUs Assembly has today admitted into its ranks
the nl9wly independent State of Tanganyika, the second
Trust Territory from the eastern seaboard of Africa
to attain independence and to accede to membership
in the United Nations. It should be a matter of personal gratification to the United Nations that in East
Africa the movement toward independence has been
led by Trust Territories. with the active support and
under th~ supervision of the United Nations.
94. It ~s a tribute to both the patience and wisdom of
Tanganyika, as well as to the Administering Autho't'ity,
the United Kingdom, that the transfer of power has
taken place peacefully and in an atmosphere of mutual
trust and co-operation between the colonial Power
on the one hand and the Trust Territory on the other.
This augurs wen for the future and we may look forward to increasing co-operation between the former
Trust Territory and the Administering Power who
are now f(~now Members of the Commonwealth.
95. The a.ttainment of independence by Tanganyika is
an occasion of historic significance and will doubtless give great impetus to the freedom movement in
neighbouring territories which are stiil under colonial domtnation. Kenya and Uganda are happily not
far from the day of their independence. The Trust
Territory of Ruanda-Urundi is also moving rapidly
toward indElpendent statehood. But in Mozambique,
Tangarryika's neighbour to the South, colonial domination of the worst kind still prevails and there is no
sign yet of any advance toward independence.

96. As a member of the Trusteeship CO\\l1cil, 'uy
oountry has been assooiated with the developments in
Tanganyilta whioh we have watohed with olose attention and great interest. Under the ldndly eye of the
Trusteeship Counoil, a good deal has been aooomplished in that oountry; but muoh still remains to be
dor-e. There is muoh that Tanganyika laol~s by way
of eoonomic development and social advancement.
Tanganyi1~ll has been fortunate, however, in having at
the head of its Government a statesman of stature in
the person of Prime Minister Julins Nyerere.

ship of
constr
the wo

97. Mr. Nyerere is no stranger to this Organization.
He appeared here in earlier years as a petitioner for
the early independence of his oountry and he pleaded
with indefatigable energy, persuasive eloquenoe and
irrefutable arguments. Mr. Nyerere himself said in
his address to the Trusteeship Council on 13 Jnly
this year:
"We have serious enemies-poverty, ignorance
and disease. We have declared war against these
enemies and in waging this war we are determined
~.o be among the bellig-erent peoples in the world.
Unfortunately, this is not a particularly popular war
in this world. It is not the kind of war for which
needy countries can expect generous assistance.
Bu~ we are not daunted and the aim of my Government, both 110W and after independence, is to wage
that war with all the vigour and the resources at
our.' disposal." Y
98. We are ourselves engaged in a ceaseless struggle against these enemies in our own country. The
problems faced by Tanganyika and India after indepondence are common ones. Perhaps each of us
can learn something from the experience of the other
and be able to help each other in that manner. We
know that the people of Tanganyika, u:\der the inspiring leadership of their great Prime Minister,
possess the determination to overcome these enemies
and we are confident that they will be successful in
their struggle. We wish them good luck and Godspeed.

99. Mr. Nyerere's Government is faced with difficulties that are characteristic of the Africa of the
past but as regards the infamous doctrine of racial
discrimination and segregation, Tanganyika stands
for inter-racial harmony and equality of status for
all Tanganyikans, be they Africans, Europeans or
Asians.
100. India has many ties with· Tanganyika. Across
the Indian ocean Tanganyika is one of our closest
neighbours. Much comme.rce has flowed between
India and Tanganyika. Many Indians have served and
are serving in Tanganyika's Government and a number of persons of Indian origin have made Tanganyika
their home and are pursuing other vocations there.
Under the conditions promised by the far-sighted,
liberal and humane policy of the independent Government of Tanganyika, led by Prime Minister Nyerere,
we are confident that these persons will. continue to
contribute to the development of the prosperity and
greatness of Tanganyika. It is much more than the
formal ties of diplomatic relations and international
intercourse that binds us to Tanganyika.
101. Once again, on behalf of the people of India and

of Afghanistan, we par,ticularly welcome the member-

Y See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 4, para. 24.

103.

~

Speaki
my 0
gratul
indepe
Indepe
those
this p
and in
of the
solida

105.

the In
able t
people
occasi
this p
depend
spirit
ment
stages
indepe
106.

cratic
best of
107.

from
into a
step a
intern
as a
abroad
in ord
whicih
the ec
welco
in its i
2!see
meeting.

1078th meeting ... 14 DeoembeX' 1961
---------_._--_._----

y

n

e

e
y

.t

n

l.

r

d
d
n
y

e

e

d
I.

r
h

.

"

e

s
r

e

"

s

n

e

,1
s
l'
l'

s

it

n
d

a
,

..

i,

.

"
,0

d

,€I

Ll
d

~,

.I

ship of Tanganyilm and look io:rwal'd to a long era of
oonstruotive oo-operation with her representatives in
the worlt of this Organization.
102. Mr. PLIMPTON (United States of Amerioa):
The United States delegation had the opportunity only
this morning in the Soourity CounoiHI of expressing
its great pleasllre at the prospeot of having Tanganyil\d. join onr ranks. Subseql\ently, wew~'I:'eprivileged
to partioipate in the Security Council's unanimous
vote <;Indorsing Tah~anyika's applioation. Thei-efore,
I shaH not make a long speeoh, or even any speeoh at
all. But now that we have seen the oulmination of the
happy prooess whioh began in the Seourity Counoil
this morning, I would be disappointed if I did not have
the opportunity, in the presenoe of Tanganyika's most
distinguished Prime Minister, Mr. Nyerere, and his
oolleagues, to say ouoe again that the United States
and its Government and people are pleased and proud
to weloome Tanganyika to membership of the United
Nations and to offer our very warm and very hearty
oongratulations to its people, to its Government and
to its distingUished Prime Minister and his delegation.
103. Mr. VAKIL (Iran) (translated from Frenoh):
Speaking on behalf of the Indonesian delegation and of
my own, I am glad to have this opportunity of oongratulating a new African State ,on its accession to
independen<ee and its admission to our Organization.
Independent Tanganyika will thus add its efforts to
those of its neighbours which have preceded it along
this path, in asserting the personality of the Africans
and in strengthening the contribution of that continent
of the future to the cause of peace and international
solidarity.
104. This objective, to which Tanganyika is devoted,
will be attained more easily and more effectively by
virtue of the faot that the great people of Tanganyika
have entrusted the task of guiding that country's first
steps towards full independence to such a respected
leader as Mr. Nyerere.
105. My delegation, on its own behalf and on that of
the Indonesian delegation, is therefore glad to he
able to extend its warmest congratulations to the
people and Government of Tanganyika on·this historic
ocoasion which represents the supreme reward for
this people's struggle for its sacred right to independence. This victory is also a tribute to the
spirit of understanding which haQ enabled the Government of the United Kingdom to faoilitate the last
stages of the evolution of the territory towards
independence.
106. We wish the people of Tanganyika, its democratic Gov":':'iment, and Mr. Nyerere personally, the
best of he\ and all happIness and p-rosperity.
107. Mr. 1)I-.rIZ MARTIN (Costa Rica) (translated
from Spanish): A new African nation has emerged
into a free and independent existence and, as a first
step after this g-reat event, has been admitted to this
international community. This means full recognitiotl
as a legal and corporate entity. both at home and
abroad, of a people that is setting itl:lelf up as a State
in order to live a life of its own. Latin America.
whicjh is still in the lengthy prooess of strengthening
the economic foundations of its independenne, gladly
welcomes the Republic of Tanganyika as a companion
in i.ts ideals with which it hopes to share all the diffi21 See Ofticial Rllcords of the SecUritY Council, Sixteenth year, 986th
meeting.

1087

uulties and joys arising from the struggles to attain
the objeotives set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, whioh, if respeoted, will fulfil our desire to
live in peace and seourity.
108. In greeting Tanganyika on hehalf of Latin
America, whioh I have the honour to represent, I
should like partioularly to pay a tribute to the forces
which have made this event possible. I refer to the
Trusteeship Council of the United Nations whioh, in
collaboration with the United Kingdom, made ready
the glorious road to independence.
109. I would like to place on record our admiration
for the leader of that people, Mr. Julius Nyerere, a
sohool-teaoher of humble extraction who raised a
standard bearing the legend "Freedom and Bread"
and lad his people, with firmness and love, in opposition to violence.
110. I would llke to remind the new Member State
that freedom and independence, U they are to be
effective, must be based on the development of eoonomic resouroes in order that man may live in full
dignity.
111. All America sincerely andenthusiasUoally joins
it the justifiable happiness of free Africa upon this
historic occasion.
112. Mr. QUAISON-SACKEY (Ghana): On behalf of
the delegations of Guinea. Mali and Ghana, I warmly
congratulate the Prime Minister and the people of
Tanganyika on the admission of Tanganyika in this
world Organization.
113. Once again a bastion of imperialism has fallen.
Once again the membership of the African group has
been increased. Once again the United Nations has
demonstrated its wisdom in having the Trusteeship
System. That is why we pay homage to the Administering Authority. the United Kingdom, for guiding this
country to independenoe; and that is why we feel
u11happy that South-·West Africa. a country which
should have been in a similar position as Tanganyika,
was handed over to South Africa and not to the United
Kingdom for administration.
114. My delegation and the delegations of Guinea 9.nd
Mali welcome the Prime Minister here this afternoon; he has aD. indomitable personality and he is a
great leader of Africa whose wisdom and guidance
will be welcomed by all Afrioan peoples in Africa,
The delegations of Guinea. Mali and Ghana, like
other delegations here. stretch the haUll of friendship to this -great African country. and assure it of
their brotherly and close co-operation in the Unite6
Nations.
115. May. the flame lit on the top of Mount Kilimanjaro glow not only throughout South Africa, but
throughout a world which is in need of peace.
116. Mr. COLLIER (Sierra Leone): It gave my delega:tion particular pleasure to have had the honour to
co-sponsor the admission of Tanganyika for membership in the United Nations. In welcoming Tanganyika
today. I wish to congratulate Mr. Juliu.s Nyerere for
his'illustrious aohievement in conceiving a great
dream for his cou.ntry and in finding the faith and the
strength to see that dream COme true. Mr. Julius
Nyerere has emerged in recent times as one of the
great lea.ders and statesmen of our genel>ation. With
his policy of and faith in the multiraoial society. he
has been able to display a beacon of light to all those

1038

General Assembly - Sixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

.

who genUitloly believe in the equality of man. His
imp'\'6ssiv6 achievement in Tanganyilta has been a
great symbol of inspiration and pride to all those who
believe that we of bla.ck Africa are truly dedicated to
the doctrine of the multiracial society, in which all r
irrespective of oolour, race and creed, can find
fulfilment.
117. This great event marks another milestone in
the peaceful evolution of free peoples in Africa, an
event in whioh the British and indeed the United
Nations have played a signifioant and worthy part.
118. Not very long ago my country had the great joy
and honour of joining this community of nations, and
it is thus, with every oonfidence, that I extend this
hand of welcome on behalf of my country and express
our conviction that Tanganyika will play a useful and
significant role in the deliberations and activities of
this Organization.
119. Mr. SCHURMANN (Netherlands): The birth of a
nation 'l.nd its introduction into our United Nations
family are always occasions for rejoicing. In this
case we have a special reason for gratification now
that Tanganyika has joined our ranks: first, because
this newly won independence of a former Trust
Territory is a tribute to and a confirmation of the
success with which the Trusteeship System is evolving towards an ever-nearer future when all its aims
will have been achieved and the System will have
served its purpose and can disappear; and secondly,
because the skill and the moderation and the trUly
wise statesmanship shown by the Prime Minister of
Tant<l.nyika, Mr. Nyerere, in negotiating the new
status of this country are the best augury for a fruitful co-operation by Tanganyika in the work of the
United Nations.
120. I have the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg and
Spain as well as my own. We look forward wlrh eagerness to hearing the views of this new and vigorous
country with which we have had excellent relations in
the past and with which we hope to have still better
and still closer relations in the future.
121. The delegations for which I speak present to
the Government and the people of Tanganyika their
cordial congratulations and a most hearty welcome.
122. Mr. LOUTFI (United Arab Republic) (tl'anslated from French): It is with great satisfaction that
I am taking the floor today, on behalf of my own delegation and that of Yemen, to join in the congratulatiOllS which have been extended to Tangfmyika on the
occasion of its accession to independence and its
admission to the United Nations. My satisfaction is
the greater because Tanganyika, like the United Arab
Republic, belongs to Africa.

123. The United Arab Republic and its people have
followed with great interest the progress of Tf.nganyika towards independence and the negotiations
which have resulted in the proclamation of that independence.This event marks an achievement of the
Trusteeship System and of the Trusteeship Conncil.
124. We extend to the Government of Tanganyika, to
its able and eloquent Prime Minister, Mr. Nyerere.
and to its people our fullest congratulations. We wish
to express the sincerest hopes for their' well-being
and prosperity. We rejoice at the natural co-operation
which will, I am sure, exist between this African
State and our country. We are confident that Tanga-

~

-_--:=-------------

nyilta will make a valuable oentribution co the work
of the United Nations, and especially to t1:l.e Elettlement of questions relating to international peaoe
and security as well as the settlement of African
problems.
125, It is a source of great joy for us tt,,!; this young
and gl'eat African State, which I had h,,' honour to
viait with a United Nations Visiting Mission, is jvining
the international community, which already comprises
many African States. We hope that the ;:'eJmaining
African States still struggling for thai!' inJependence will soon take their places in the international
community.
126. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): It is my privilege and
honour '1;0 express, on behalf of my delegation and the
delegations of Austria, Denmark, Finland, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Norway, Turkey and Sweden, our
cordial congratulations t'l the Government and people
of Tanganyika on their attainment of independence.
We are happy to extend a warm and brotherly welcome to the delegation of Tanganyika on this auspicious occasion of taking a seat in this Assembly.
127. We are glad to see another large African country attain its freedom by peaceful means and in conformity with the principles of the Charter and the
Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples which was adopted by the
General Assembly at its last session. The Administering Authority and the people of Tanganyika are to
be felicitated on this great achievement.
128. What is really of importance is that the march
of freedom is proceeding at an accelerated pace. As
another people attains independence, all of us feel
great joy in the sense that one more step has been
taken towards universal freedom as a basis of universal peace. For indeed theI'e cannot be peace without freedom.
129. The concept of freedom and the concept of
peace are inseparable and indivisible realities. So
long as peoples are denied freedom in any part of the
world, their spirit is in rebellion-so there Gan be
no peace in the world. We therefo:n:l hope to see, in
the not too distant future. all the p€/oples now dependent and subjected in Africa become independent and
free, and that the same will be true of all peoples in ",'
the world, for the promotion of freedom and human
rights constitutes progress towards peace and the
attainment of the purposes for which this Organization' stands.
130. We particularly welcome Tanganyika to the
fold of small nations as one more addition to the
number of those engaged in the effort of taking an
independent and objective stand on all matters, with
dedication to the Principles and Purposes set forth
in the Charter and in the service of maIlkind. We feel
certain that the United Nations will f:ind in Tanganyika a wholehearted contributor to the constructive
endeavours towards strengthening the United Nations
and promoting its evolution into a world Orgamization
effectively upholding freedom and preserving peace.
131. Mr. AKAKPO (Togo) (translated fro:n J!'rench):
On behalf of the Togolese Republic, my 'lelegation
extends to the people of 'I'anganyika its hearty congratulations Oll their' admission to the community of
free nations. I am sure that Tanganyika will place
its newly recovered independence at the service of
Africa for the speedy liberation of all our brothers
who are still under domination and at the service of

•
. ".' '$

;

•

,,'

. • •,ft ,

,,.;:'

107Sth meating ..... 14 Deoember 1961

the whole world for the mnintenanoe of universal
peaoe.
182. The independenoe of Tanganyika ('Ijl ,Jh we are
celebrating today with suoh joy, has be.l:ln aohieved in
peace, thanks to the mutual understand~;ng whioh
exists between that oountry and the United KIngdom.
My delegation tht'n'efore oannot fail to pay a tribute
to the United Kingdom for the exoellent work it has
done in Tanganyika. On behalf of the people and
Government of Toga, I extend to Mr. Nyerere, the
Prime Minister, and to the entire nation of Tanga...
nyika our most fervent wishes for their happiness
and prosperity.
138. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenoh): We
have oome to the end of my list of speakers. I must
point out, howevel', that after the list was olosed a
number of delegations asked me whether they could
speak. I should Uke to t.'lank them for their response
to my appeal to faoilitate the work of the Assembly;
they kindly did not insist on taking the floor. I owe it
to them, however, to inform you that all the delegations whioh were unable to take the floor in the
Assembly wished to express their weloome and oongratulations to Tanganyilta, its Government and its
people.
134. I now have the honour to giVe the floor to Mr.
Julius K. Nyerere, the Prime Minister ofTanganyilta.
135. Mr. NYERERE (Tanganyika): I am afraid I have
to begin my remarks with an apology and a requestan apology because I am certain that I cannot hope to
equal the Members who have spoken before me in the
brevity of their speeches; mine is likely to be slightly
longer; and a request to the Members: should they
find that the speech is too long, they can go to sleep
provided they do not snore.
136. On behalf of my country, I wish to express the
gratitude we feel to the United Nations and to an our
sponsors and to all those whose support and help has
culminated in my presence here today as a representative of an independent Tanganyika and a Member
of this Organization. We feel a special gratitude and
loyalty to the United Nations because we are con. scious of the debt we owe to the Trusteeship Council
and, of course, to this General A:Ssembly.
137. Until 9 December Tanganyika was a True'.;
Territory administered by the United Kingdom. It
goes against my grain as a. nationalist to say thank
you to anybody for the achievement of our independ··
ence except to the people of Tanganyika. But I would
not be honest if I did not admit openly and graciously
that the fact that we have bet;ln a Trust Territory
under British administration has greatly helped us to
achieve our independence in the way in which we have
achieved it. It is for that reason that I want to expres;;;
our most sincere appreciation both to this Organization for the keen interest it took in our affairs and to
our former governors, and now our friends, the
British. I might say that I do congratulate the British
fOi' taking yet a further step towards their own
achievement of complete independence and freedom
because I believe that no country is completely free
if it keeps other people in a state of unfreedom.
138. When we welcome our admiSSion to the United
Nations, we are acknowledging our inter-dependence
with all other peoples. Truly we have claimed our
national independence, but our new consciousness of
nationhood does not imply a belief that we can now be

" '..

~~~ ...\:'~:Jr.w:_.,~~.;.-".#t': ,-,~"

;";..•'

•..•,...._.

.~ . . .

.

10S9

aelf..suffioient in any way, We know that independenoe
bringa with it responsibilities, worldreEjponsibilities,
Aa a Mamber of this Organization, we shall exeroise
the right to join in the deliber~tiona on major matters
of world politios as well as matters whioh have a
more obvious and direot impaot upon 0\,\1' own Stf,te of
Tanganyika. We shall do this not with any feeling that
we have in ou:, heads a solution to the great problems
whioh vex this Assembly, but beoause we know that
we Qannot sit unaffeoted by the great controversies
and oonfliots which send their reverberations to
every oorner of the world.
189. Our pleasure at being aooepted as a Member of
the United Nations ie a reoognition that we have been
given the right to join in the searoh for greater
understanding and greater harmony between the
peoples of the world. In trying to meet this responl3i...
biUty the polioies of my Government will be based on
an underlying faith in humanity and on four prinoiples
of aotion whioh follow from it. With your indulgence,
Mr. PreSident, I would like to state those prinoiples.
140. The basis of our aotions, internal and external,
will be an attempt, an honest attempt, to honour the
dignity of man. We believe that all mankind is one,
that the physiological differences between us are
unimportant in oomparison with our comm.on humanity. We believe that black skin or white, straight
or curly hair, differences in the shape of our bodies,
do not alter or even affect the fact that each one of
us is part of the human species and has B part to play
in the development of mankind. We believe that differenoes in our religions or our political ideologies may
cause difficulties for our small minds, but do not, to
our way of thinking, affect the rights of every individual to be treated as a man, with dignity and honour.
141. It may be, because of the history of Africa. that
we are particularly conscious of the need to reaffirm
this basic faith in relation to the racial divisions of
mankind. Yet we believe this is of fundamental importance. We believe-we know as a fact-that a man
may change his religion, that a man may ohange his
ideological belief, but he can never change the shape
of his face, nor the race into which he was born. That
is why we believe that it is evil for any people to illtreat others on the grounds of race. What we are in
fact saying is that we shall try to use the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a basis for both our
external and our internal policies.
142. That Declaration confirms the right of every
individual to many things, which we cannot yet provide for the citizens of our own country. In that
respect this document, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, represents our goal rather than something that we have already achieved. None the less,
the underlying theme of the Universal Declaration,
that of human brotherhood, regardless of race, colour
or creed, is the basic principle which we ourselves,
in Tanganyika, and we believe other peoples in Africa
and other parts of the world, have been struggling to
implement.
143. We accept without question as a basis, a basic
article of faith, that every individual has an equal
right to inherit the earth, to partake of its joys and
its sorrows and to contribute to the bUilding of the
sort of society which he desires for himself and also
for his children. In saying this, we have committed
our country to a grand endeavour, We are conscious
that the implementation of the spirit underlying lofty

o

,

'

'f'

~

8

•

,

-

General AlIIembly - S!xteenth Session - Plenary Meetings
ideas is not always aohieved without some diffioulty,
that we shall sometimes fail in our efforts. But any
apparent deviation from the artioles of this Deolaration wUl ha an honest attempt on our part to balanoe
oonflioting interests while preserving the major prin"
oiple itself. It will be in the light of this prinoiple
that we shall try at all times to determine our stand
on every international issue wbich we shall be oalled
upon to oonsider in this Assembly or elsewhere.
14l1. We shaH always "ry to understand the practical

difficulties which face Governments and nations in
the implementation of this principle, but we shall
never compromise with those who deny this basio
principle of human brotherhood. WfJJ aocept that the
United Nations oannot interfere in the internal affairs
of any State, and we believe that, under present
circumstances, that is as it shoula be. But we also
believe that it has an overriding interest in the preservation of peace throughout the world, and further,
that there is no internal conflict now which does not
have external reperoussions.
145. My Government has unfriendly feelings towards

no people, but it entertains bitter hostility towards
Governments whose policies are oased on l'acial discrimination. On this issue we oannot compromise.
We have inherited some racial difficulties in our own
country and we believe that our own ef~orts to exorcise the evii spirit of rauial prejudice from every
one of our citizens would be jeopardized by the
slightest compromise on our part on this matter of
racial discrimination in other parts of the world; and
we believe that our struggle for our own individual
and national dignity would be invalidated by the spread
of such poisonous spirit among our own people of
Tanganyika.
146. We believe, in fact, that the individual man and
woman is the purpose of society. All great philosophies in the world do agree on this simple statement.
The way they differ is how to carry out this principle
in actual practice. And we believe that every country,
because of the differences in history, the differences
of other circumstances, is trying in a different way
to organize itself in a manner that suits itself in
carrying out this principle. We do not believe that on
this matter an ideal solution has been found anywhere
in the world. We are convinced that mankind is still
groping forward in trying to find a solution, and it is
our ambition simply to join mankind in groping forward together in finding a solution.
147. I said that there were four basic tenets of our

policy. We are all concerned, first and foremost, with
the establishmtmt of world peace, for we know that
without peace all our plans for a better life, and
indeed in the modern world all our plans for life
itself, would be obliterated. We believe that, ultimately, the problem of world peace will have to be
solved in the same manner as it has been solved in
our own national States where Governments have been
established which give security to every individual
within a national State. We believe that otherwise,
ultimately, the problem of world peace depends upon
the achievement of a state in the world where you
have a world government. But that state of affairs
does not exist at present. We r~alize that the United
Nations itself is not a world government, but it is a
practical acknowledgement of the need for world
peace.

148. The first principle of a t1overnment1s foreign
polioy is, therefore, a reoognition of the fundamental
importanoe of the United Nations. We believe that it
is easier for any of \\13, and espeoially for us young
people without very much experienoe, to oritioize
oertain facets of the United Nations. Inevitably there
are things whioh oould impx'ove its effioienoy and the
implementation of its deoisions. The diffioulty is in
agreeing what would oonstitute improvement and what
would damage the struoture that now exists. But
we believe that, in oomparison with the need of an
organization that oan help to maintain world peace,
suoh matters are ml'l.tters of detail. The basio fant
remains that this international 01'ganizution has
great purpose and still greater potentiality. The faot
that representatives of so many different nations
large and small sit down together to disouss and
argue about the problems of mankind and also about
their disagreements is of major importance in the
world today. All nations and all individuals within
those nations have a common interest in the wellbeing of the United Nations.
149. Within this Assembly every nation is an equal,
and we believe that ill this lies the uniqut;l o1)araoter
of the United Nations and its greatest asset. I hope
I will be forgiven for saying that the nations represented in this Hall today are unequal in almost everything except the dignity and the respeot which you
Mr. President, and the General Assembly aocord to
each one of them individually. The nations represented differ greatly in size and in their military and
economic power. Before the power of some of the
nations now in this hall, some of us, especially small
countries like Tanganyika, do tremble. The Governments of countries like my own come at different
times before this Assembly or we visit different
nations pleading fo1' world consideration and assistance in overcoming the economic and social disabilities uhder which we now suffer, but this is the only
place where all of us can come and talk as equals and
search together for greater harmony and understanding on earth. However unjust it may in some ways
seem that a country like mine should have an equal
voice here with a country like the United States or
the Soviet Union, we believe that this in fact is a
great advantage to this Organization.
150•. The issues which we discuss are important to
us all, but I believe-and I say this with modestythat, .because some of us are so small and unimportant in terms of power, it is easier, or at least should
be easier, for us to consider such issues on their
own merits. In saying this we are not claiming any
particular merit or quality for the smaller States; it
is a result of the circumstances in which we find ourselves. Our ideas may be, and very often are, powerless without the co-operation of the larger States, but
when we are in process of developing those ideas and
putting them forward-and I think that this is an
important point-we do not stake our prestige on
every occasion on whether or not those ideas are
accepted. Our prestige can stem from nothing but
our honest endeavour to play our part, however small
it may be, in serving mankind. It camiot stem from
power, because, individually, we the small· nations
have very little power.
151. We believe-and again I say this with great
humility-that thi$ question of prestige is not a
matter to be taken lightly. No criticism, therefore,
is implied when I suggest that a country fears to.
endanger its standing in the eyes of the rest of the
j

world. Nuti
they ha.ve 0.
times, I 001
the less u f
to prevent·
believe it is
put in a posl
the small 8t
speat alone,
thing which 1

152. Yet or
:.atiolls haVE
lose, they I
nation in thE
future of thi
right to detE
it is to any
much conce
as any nati
country of T

153. The
opinion at tl
imperfectio
We believe
this, comin
believe I sa
ments to it
largely a
cannot be i
are contrar,
dence point
bly is\ incr
importance
depending 01
make it worI
we will do
t~ Organi'
policies. W
avoids any f
do much to
Tanganyika
sions in the
importance
154. The s

this opportu
follows fro
opposition t
or in any atI
155; There

tinuing any
expected to
who claim
support the
the world.
for anycoun
which the s
as wen as t
156. The 0
this questio
tween the
countries a
vision of a
that the ex
advantage
internationa
believe, tha
of time. In
ate returne

t

i

1
1
l

t
1

1

t

1

•

e

_

\

-

:

-

~

"

1078th meeting' - 14 Deoember__l_96_1~
world. Nations are like people in this matter in that
they hnve a dignity and can feellr"miliation-some..
times, I oolieve, ql.\ito 1mnecessarily-but it is none
the less a fa\.lt. Just as it is always good if possible
to prevent a man from feelinp; humiliated, so we
believe it is impol'tant that nations should never be
put in a position of being 1mnecessarily humiliated. If
the small States oan help the larger ones in this re...
speot alone, we believe that we shall have done something which is worth while.
152. Yet one thing is quite clear. Although the small
:.atiolls have no military or economic prestige to
lose, they have j1lst as much at stal~e as any other
nation in the maintenance of world peace and in the
future of this Orguntzation. Our independence and the
right to determine ('ur future is as precious to 11S as
it is to any of the great nations. We have at least as
muoh ooncern at the outcome of our discussions here
as any nation a hundred times larger than my little
country of Tanganyika.
153. The United Nations is the forum of world
opinion at the present time, and we believe that its
imperfections, if it has any, are irrelevant to this.
We believe that this Organization-and when I say
this, coming from a Trust Territory, Members can
believe I say it qUite sincerely-has great achievements to its credit. It is true that its authority is
largely a moral one and that some of its decisions
cannot be implemented if the larger States feel they
are contrary to their own interests. Yet all the evidence points to the fact that the voice of this Assembly i~\ increasingly listened to. We believe that the
importance of the United Nations can and will grow,
depending only upon the determination of all of us to
make it work. We can only say that, for our own part,
we will do what little we can to enhance the status of
f ,.:1 Organization and assist in the execution of its
policies. We believe that, because action through it
avoids any fear of domination by another State, it can
do much to contribute to the peace that we all desire.
Tanganyika will look at everyone of its policy decisions in the light of its recognition of the fundamental
importance of the United Nations.
154. The second basic principII;) which I want to take
this opportunity to state is again a simple one and it
follows from the first. It is our basic and continued
opposition to colonialism anywhere on our continent
or in any other part of the world.
155; There can be no question of colonialism continuing any longer. The colonial peoples cannot be
expected to continue to accept it. And no other people
Who claim to believe in the equality of man should
support the continuation of colonialism in any part of
the world. Attempts to maintain the colonial status
fot' any country can only provoke wars and conflicts in
which the suffering would be shared by the colonizer
as wen as the colonized.
156. The only choice which really lies before u~ on
this question of colonialism appears to us to be between the immediate independence of all colonial
countries and ordered independence under the supervision of an. international organization. We believe
that the example of Tanganyika demonstrates the
advantage of an orderly transfer of power under
international supervision. It also demonstrates, we
believe, that this does not have to take a long period
of time. In our own country, the first African graduate returned to Tanganyika in 1952. In 1954 it was

,

10_4_1

quite true that we had no qualified Afrioan personnel
to serve in the Government of Tanganyika, and people
then talked about our independence tnking us twenty
or twenty..five years. Todl\Y I am speaking here as n
representative of independent 'l'anp;anyikn. That is
why we believe in the importance ohnorderly supervision of uU the r~maining c(\10niu1 countries under
nn international orglmization.
157. We b!'lHove further that there is no question but
tha.t the maintenance of law and order in any society
depend!: upon there being one supreme authority
which i~ accepted by the majority and which, if need
be, can asseJ.'t its authorit~r on t1. dissenting minority.
There is the possibility that the sudden withdrawal
of one authority without its replacement by an indigenous one would leave behind the great danger of a
complete breakdown in the orderly economic and
sooial development of tht:) country, with the most
dreadful consequences to the people concerned. But
it is impossible for the colonial peoples in some
areas now to believe in the good intentions of their
metropolitan Power, even if the metropolitan Power
has such good intentions, and this is natural, fot' it
is inevitable that an alien Administering Authority
should be most conscious of the dangers and dUficulties of the transfer of power, and it usually talks
about nothing except those dangers and those difficulties and it is always inclined to exaggerate them.
But what is felt to be possible would naturally vary
according to the basic interests of the persons concerned. We do not see how it is possible for any
single nation to be the judge of its own cause, as
some colonial Powers decide to be judges of their
own causes. We would therefore like to see the United
Nations assume the responsibility of being judge. We
suggest that every nation which genuinely wishes to
further the development of peoples now inhabiting
their colonies should treat those colonies as if they
were Trust Territories. This means that they should
submit annually for discussion by the United Nations
a report on the progress toward the establishment of
an indigenous authority to which the transfer of power
can be made.
158. I was extremely pleased to hear that the
Government of the United Kingdom, which had for
long opposed this suggestion, has now declared that
it intends to submit such reports on all territories
still under its control. We hope that this example will
be followed by all the other colonial Powers. We
believe that if this were done the suspicions of
insincerity which are now directed against spme of
them would be overcome, because Wf\ would ourselves
have a chance to consider those matters and give our
assistance in any difficulties which might arise in
particular cases. Such a development would have
advantages for both sides. On the one hand the
colonial Powers would be freed from the suspicion
which how beclouds any good intentions that they may
have-and we believe some of them do have good
intentions-and, on the other hand, this Assembly and
all colonial peoples would have the opportunity to
press for a speedy transfer of power.
159. When I speak of colonies I am not using this
term to include only those countries which have such
a legal status in the eyes of their own metropolitan
Powers. Legal pretentions that vast areas are mere
provinces of tiny States are to us mere quibbles which
cannot be allowed to affect the realities of the situation. Angola and Mozambique, to take two examples, .

. .

•

~

1042

General Assembly -.~ixteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

are in our eyes and in the eyes of the people of those
territories colonies of anothel' State. The3' must be
treated as suoh in regard to their progtel:<s towarus
independenoe. This Assembly and aU Member States
should exert every effort to ensure that thi~ is done.
160. We, in TanganyUm, in partioulal' oannot be
expeoted to aocept legal theories as expllnnations of
ruthless oppression taldng plaoe on OUl' borders.
These territories, together with aU othel' countries
which are at present oolonies, must be given the
right to determine their own future under condi..
tions in which a real freedom of ohoioe does exist.
Eleotions in whioh all oan take part without fear or
favour are essent~.'\l before we can believe that any
group of people WIshes to continue to be govel'ned by
a nation many thousands of miles away, partioularly
when we have before us ~vid.ence of restlessness and
resentment of that authorlty III these countries.

161. When I do advocate an orderly transfer of
power, it must bEi quite clear that I am not suggesting
that this is a ~atter whioh can b~ dea.lt with at a
leisurely pace. _he end of ooloninllsm must. come
quickly. We who are free have ~bsolutely no rIght to
sit comfc.rtably and counsel patlenc~ to those who do
not yet enjoy their free.do~. Th~s l~ a.matter of the
greatest urgency, for lt lS .a~ ~ntrmslc part o!.the
development of the human sp~rlt III t~is area. Nel~~er
oan we fail to oppose pohcies, III the transltlon
period ,from a colonial status to independence, which
leaves the new oountries in a position whel'e the
everyday lives of their p(~oples and the policies
of their governments are controlled by the economic
actions of another State. The word "neo-colonialism"
is one which I believe has some danger~ bue there is
also a reality: the replacement of political domination
by eoonomio domination. We believe that this is also
contrary to the principles of the United Nations and
of human equality.
..
.
162. I have spoken about our opposltlon, to colomalism and our determination to see that it (IOmeS to an
end rapidly. I hope that it is realized. however, that
nothing that I have said implies any hostility whatso...
ever to any people anywhere in the world. It is the
system which we are opposing, and not even the
servants of that system, provided they act with com'"
mon humanity in the exeoution of their duties. Some
Members here will be aware that some of the ser'"
vants of our old system are now working for us as
servants of the Government of Tanganyika. Our
opposition to oolonialism is total, and not confined by
space or time; but it is natural and ineVitable that we
should have a partioular concern for Africa. The
implementation of our third policy the attainment of
. African unity depends on the co~plete freedom of
our continent: It is not possible for Tanganyika to
remain an island of freedom and peace surrounded by
troubled and unfreed areas. On either side of all our
borders live people with a common language, and
common traditions. We cannot fail to be concerned
with what goes on in countries which adjoin Tanganyika, beoause their troubles are also our troubles.
The same is true of the countries which border our
neighbours. We are all involved together. The whole
of Africa is, in fact, interlinked. It cannot really be
split into small portions.
163., But there is another reason why we are partioul:?.!"ly interested in the freedom of our continent. We
are anxious to' join with other African States in
abolishing the artificial boundaries which were im-

posed upon \\s by the oolonial system. There now
exists a strong feeling of unity on the Continent. It is
an emotion whioh has, in one sense, grown out of
the struggle for freedom, but the sentiment is one
whioh is s\\pported by the faots of geography, of pre...
European history, and of modern eoonomios. The
boundaries whioh now divide Afrioan States bear no
relation Whatsoever to the ethnologioal divisions or
to the geographioal featuros of our oontinent. Further,
Afrioa is bedevilled by oonflicting treaties and other
arrangements made without oonsent but which none
the less leave a legacy of confliot behind them. These
pc,ssible sources of friotion between new nations "lnd
States can be settled by establishing new groupings
whioh would bring together nations between which
suspicion or hostility oould develop. The unity of the
whole of our continent is our ambition, and we know
that it has to be a unity based on the free decision of
independent, Afrioan States.
164. With a united Africa we believe that not only
will the danger of conflict on our continent be avC:'ided,
but that we shall find ourselves strengthened in the
fight whioh each of the African States is now waginga fight which some Members have already referred
to here: the fight against poverty, against disease and
against ignorance which we inherit from the colonial
system. Co...operation across national boundaries
would be easy if those boundaries were secondary to
our membership of a united African community
•
165. We are determined to co-operate with fellow
African States in an endeavour to achieve this unity,
because we know that it is not only Tanganyika which
desires this basic unity on our continent. Every free
African Sta~ has already spoken in favour o.f some
form of umty or other. We are merely addmg our
voice to theirs, and our efforts to their efforts,
towards unity on our continent. We believe that
organic unity will be achieved, but we also recognize
that it will be the more easily achieved the more
qUickly we can move in that direction.
166: Aga~n, it. may be necessary to add that we

deSIre thIS umty, not through any hostility towards
others, or through a desire to out ourselves off from
peopl?s of other continents, b1;1t because it is in the
best .lllterests ~f a large sectlc;lll of the hum~n race
to umte and, ulbmately,by the strength and umty that
it will give us, it will be economically in the best
interests of the entire world. We desire Afdcan unity
for its own sake, but we believe that it will have,
from our point of view, another advantage-and I hope
that older Members of this distinguished Organization will forgive me for having the cheek to mention
this. Internationally, we believe that we have entered
a world riven by ideological dissensions. We are
anxious to keep out of these disputes, and anxious to
see that the nations of our continent are not used as
pawns in conflicts which very often do not concern
them at all. We do not feel by our own principles
of action that we are reqUired to take part in this
conflict.
167. The fourth principle of our policy will be to
keep out of these automatic conflicts in the world.
Saying this does not imply that we do not care about
what happens in the world. We care very much about
the basic principles which I have tried to state. We
care very much 'about the future of humanity; but we
do not believe that the present divisions of the world
are between the good and the bad. They are not even
divisions based on the issues of tomorrow, that is,

the reIn
nots" of
one or t
States is
examinat
direoted
is a mo
would n
thilildng
not goin
sleep.

168. Ho'
Oome to
for any
the exPl'
prejudice
involved.
deoided
the issue
at every
consider
pretend f
I claim
involved
degree b
tics, the
appellant
as we ar
of doing
understan
In decla:r
so with a
world.

.

.

"

l',;(1,.":-:':>,;',~-f':>',r'

':c>"/:':~,1,;:-N!!<:?~·~."f~~<!~~,,!J}-··.~(;·;,:;;.·

·'//~'L;,!'f-'O;"?(,,:.

.

,'.

et
•..
,',' ,I
·//':"_.i•. ,,~g .-\~'~;;;'i~;~,·t'·;?>_:;-,
"', -,'_~ .' ", ".(/,:-,:P..,i#,

\

"(,t;~/.:I,'j;' ' ,~ t,I,',',~!,·!',~.<;,.',""~{~;~~1;;~:,p:,'~;';l%f}<~;tt~~~'IJi;''''f'I/!/J:''J;:lJb1I.1«.:>;1,'&1'/'1 'i .}·!~-~:; - ~ <;'.W-~~:J,
-.T"

-

<Y,~

,r

-

Il:?

~

~

1078th meeting - 14 December 1961
the relationship octween ·the "haves" and the "have
nots" of the world. The automatic aSIJumption that
one or the other of the contending major groups of
States is always right, or always wrong, cannot bear
examination. We believe that the propaganda whioh is
direoted ut making humanity believe this proposition
is a most hideous opium. If it were to suoceed man
would no longer be man beoause man would stop
thb,king for himself; but we also believe that it is
not going to be so easy to put the human mind to
sleep.
168. However, it does appear that things have now
come to a state of affairs where it is very diffioult
for any so-oalled-and I hope I will be forgiven for
the expl'ession-" oommitted nations" to look without
prejudice at any issue in which the other is also
involved. Many things whioh are to us important are
deoided on grounds that we believe are irrelevant to
the issue itself. We believe that we should try to look
at every matter which comes up for international
consideration on the basis of its own merits. I do not
pretend for one moment that we are infallible. Nor do
I claim that when Tanganyika's direct interests are
involved we shall always be unbiased. But, to a large
degree because we are small and new to world politics, the issues en which we ali'e going to be both
appellant and judge are likely to be very few. As far
as we are concerned it will, therefore, be a question
of doing our best in uShig our intel1igence and our
understanding in relation to the matters before us.
In declaring our intention to take this attitude, we do
so with a feeling of friendliness to all nations in the
world.

~

1043

169. We do not have feelings of enmity toward any
peoples in the world. Neither are we aware of any
feelings of enmit; toward us by any nation of the
world. We hnve inherited friendly relations withmany
oountries. It is our ambition to develop similar relations with o\11er countries. We shall not be able to
acoomplish this through the sending of large delegations or the maintenance of large embassies, and so
forth. Beoause of eoonomio neC€:lSSity, we hope to
acoomplish this through the employment of greater
discretion in our dealings with ~ople. But we are
confident that as we a~e able to make approaches to
different. peoples and their Governments, that we
shall meet with a friendly reception.
170. Finally, X wish to note that we come into the
free wol'1d today when the future of that world is
threatened because of the great knowledge that has
beep achieved by mankind. We find many problems in
the world but we come with a determination to learn
to co-operate and to contribute. i shall conclude as I
commenced by saying that we have faith in h\~manity.
that we shall endeavour to strengthen man's attempts
to progress spiritually as well as in material wealth
and that we shall try to play a full, honest and constructive part in this Organization.
171. I thank you for affording me the opportunity tc
state the principles by which the Government of
Tanganyika intends to be judged in the future and I
thank you for the kindness a::ld the courtesy with
which you have 1istened to me.

The meeting rose ,~6.25 p.m.

:l
77001-December 1962-2.175

•
