United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9276th meeting

Tuesday, 7 March 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dlhovo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Muniz Pinto Sloboda
Ms. Hang Su
Ms. Mendez Gruezo
Ms. Chassot
Mr. Nanga
Ms. Kesse Antwi
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Ciscaldi
Mr. Kashaev
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Alrahma
Ms. O’Kelly
Ms. Trinh

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Towards the 25th anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)
Letter dated 24 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/146)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-06829 (E)
*2306829*

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than three minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now call on the Minister for Social Development
of South Africa.
Ms. Zulu (South Africa): I would like to commend
Mozambique for convening this important meeting on
the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda on the eve of International Women’s Day.
We meet at a time when the international community
is at a crossroads, grappling with a number of global
challenges, including persistent armed conflicts and
enduring underdevelopment in many parts of the world.
Unfortunately, those challenges have a destabilizing
effect on women and have the potential to reverse some
of the gains made in the advancement of the rights of
women and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Despite that, we note that significant progress has
been made in advancing the women and peace and
security agenda since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), over 22 years ago, and other related Security
Council resolutions on women and peace and security.
As a result of those resolutions and the global focus
on women and peace and security, there have been a
variety of efforts and initiatives in the form of gender
strategies, gender quotas, justice and accountability
measures for crimes against women, international and
regional women and peace and security special envoys,
global networks and national action plans — all aimed
at promoting the women and peace and security agenda.
Those pertinent initiatives have led to the increased
participation and representation of women in peace
processes, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Some
efforts have also facilitated access to justice for victims
and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
However, we recognize that more remains to be done
to realize the agenda in its entirety. In that regard, let
me outline some of the areas that we believe require
more attention as we ponder the women and peace and
security agenda beyond 2025.
First, we believe that the New Agenda for Peace
proposed by the Secretary-General provides an
opportunity to further the women and peace and
security agenda. That is because the changing nature
of conflicts and emerging threats to international
2/56

07/03/2023

peace and security may require that we rethink how to
advance the agenda.
Secondly, we need to strengthen existing
partnerships and create new ones. In that regard, South
Africa believes that there is room for improvement in
fostering closer relations between regional groups and
the United Nations.
Thirdly, it would be useful to take stock of the
implementation of the recommendations emanating
from the 2015 global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), whose tenth anniversary
will coincide with the twenty-fifth anniversary of
resolution itself.
Lastly, the full and unconditional implementation
of all resolutions and decisions of the Security
Council is vital to the realization of the women and
peace and security agenda. A similar call was made
in resolution 2493 (2019), which was championed by
South Africa in 2019.
In its national capacity, South Africa will continue
to strengthen its existing national mechanism, which
focuses on training and building the capacity of women
in conflict prevention and mediation, deploying more
women to peacekeeping operations and promoting
women’s rights. We will also continue to galvanize
women to share ideas on peace and security matters.
The Gertrude Shope Annual Dialogue Forum — one of
South Africa’s flagship events on women and peace and
security and a platform for the exchange of ideas — has
continued to grow since its inception. South Africa
will soon be embarking on the process of reviewing
and developing its second national action plan. We
hope that our rich discussions today will contribute
to our national review process through the sharing of
experiences and ideas.
In conclusion, let us be absolutely clear. While it
is useful to commit to new obligations, we must first
focus our attention on implementing those that we have
already committed to.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Social Assistance, Family and Women`s Empowerment
of Angola.
Ms. Da Silva do Sacramento Neto (Angola) (spoke
in Portuguese) (English interpretation provided by the
delegation): Let me first congratulate Mozambique on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

for the month of March on the eve of our celebration of
International Women’s Day.
It is with great satisfaction that the Community
of
Portuguese-speaking
Countries
(CPLP)
acknowledges two of its member States — Brazil
and Mozambique — carrying out their duties on the
Security Council, following the recent memberships of
Angola and Equatorial Guinea. We hope to see such
contributions continue with Portugal’s successful
candidacy for the 2027-2028 term. The Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries welcomes the
ministerial-level open debate at the Security Council
on the theme “Women and peace and security: towards
the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)”,
which is timely and takes on particular importance at
this critical juncture for humankind, as the world is
facing myriad conflicts that have a direct impact on
the human rights of women and girls. We also reaffirm
our determination to promote, address and overcome
the challenges related to achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 5 — “Achieve gender equality
and empower all women and girls”. As we debate this
theme, thousands of women and girls are daily facing
various types of violence as a result of armed conflicts
and natural disasters that are wreaking havoc in various
regions throughout the world.
In compliance with resolution 1325 (2000), the
majority of CPLP member States have adopted and
implemented national plans of action. We must ensure
that women are no longer seen merely as victims but
as key actors in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
sustainable development. We therefore acknowledge the
importance of education and academic and professional
training as a means to dispel gender stereotypes,
including the involvement of men and boys as both the
agents and beneficiaries of change.
We reaffirm the need to incorporate gender
perspective in the reform of the security sector in
both peace processes and States’ military and security
structures, which was given priority by the adoption
of the action plan for the CPLP defence component at
the twentieth Meeting of Ministers for Defence of the
CPLP on 1 June 2021. I would also like to reiterate our
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now call on the Minister in the
Office of the Prime Minister with responsibility for
Gender and Child Affairs of Trinidad and Tobago.

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Webster-Roy (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago relishes the opportunity to contribute
to this open debate and would like to congratulate
Mozambique on its election to the Security Council.
The convening of this important debate on the eve
of International Women’s Day spotlights the urgency
for the international community to accelerate its efforts
to empower women as equal partners alongside men
on matters of peace and security. We believe that
the participation of women in the peace and security
agenda provides them with an opportunity to contribute
constructively and innovatively to the safety and stability
of their societies — an indispensable requirement for
achieving sustainable peace. Encouraged in its belief in
the importance of advancing gender equality in peace
and security at the United Nations, in 2010 Trinidad
and Tobago introduced the first General Assembly
resolution on women, disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms control (resolution 65/69). The resolution was
introduced on the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) with the strategic intention of
challenging the international community to adopt and
institutionalize the formula of equitable representation
of women at all levels, including in decision-making
processes related to peace and security.
However, the participation of women in matters of
peace and security goes beyond symbolic numerical
parity. It is therefore essential to intervene deliberately
to ensure the establishment over time of a pool of talented
female policymakers and practitioners with the requisite
skill sets, as a means of guaranteeing sustainability.
In that regard, Trinidad and Tobago reaffirms its
unshakable commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The guarantee of equal rights
to all our citizens on a non-discriminatory basis is
enshrined in our Constitution, and the goal of gender
equality is an integral component of our national
development policy.
We are pleased that the gap between policy and
practice is progressively being narrowed, as evidenced
by the ascendancy of women to the most senior offices
of State. In fact, it gives me great pleasure to inform
the Council that a few weeks ago, Trinidad and Tobago
appointed its first substantive female Commissioner
of Police. Furthermore, five years ago, Trinidad and
Tobago elected its first female Head of State and
Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. It is a matter
of great pride, and we are pleased to announce, that
later this month we will inaugurate our second female

23-068293/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Head of State and Commander-in-Chief of the armed
forces — evidence of our policy in action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Ms. Jorge Mera (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): On behalf of the Dominican Republic, I
would like to commend Mozambique for convening
today’s important and timely open debate, and I would
also like to thank the women who briefed the Security
Council today.
Since its adoption in 2000, resolution 1325 (2000)
has enabled important progressive changes in our
collective approach to addressing the important issue
that brings us together today. The implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda continues
to be our best opportunity to strengthen women’s
presence in assuming leading and central roles in
the areas of conflict prevention and resolution and
peacekeeping. Accelerating the implementation of the
agenda is our shared responsibility. It can be achieved
by demonstrating political will, breaking down the
persistent structural and practical barriers and opening
the way for women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace and security processes. Civil
society and women human rights defenders, as well
as their civic space, must be protected by States and
supported by the Council and the United Nations so that
they can carry out their work without fear of reprisals.
It is a matter of deep regret for the Dominican
Republic that women and girls are the main victims
of conflict and sexual violence — an unacceptable
harm that we must work tirelessly to address. We
need to continue to focus our efforts on enhancing the
protection of women and girls against that scourge by
equipping peacekeeping missions as best as possible
and empowering the women themselves, as well as
their communities, to develop mechanisms that can
help, with the support of States, to eliminate once and
for all that threat to women’s integrity and dignity and
put an end to impunity for the perpetrators. Violations
of women’s rights, although deeply rooted in the
widespread inequality and discrimination faced by
women, are often swept under the rug. We cannot ignore
the interlinkage in that regard with the commitments
made under the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and its general
recommendation No. 30.
4/56

07/03/2023

It is a priority for the Dominican Republic to
contribute to building a peace architecture that addresses
the issues I have mentioned, including the impact of
non-conventional threats such as climate change and
of new technologies in the digital era. We must also
deepen our efforts to enhance positive peacebuilding,
reaffirming our demands for women’s rights and for
the promotion and protection of the human rights of all
people, wherever they are. That is why my country, after
having demonstrated leadership on that issue during its
term on the Security Council, including as a co-Chair
of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, submitted for the first time its candidacy
to become a member of the Human Rights Council,
in which we are committed to continuing to promote
the women and peace and security agenda and all the
necessary actions for achieving its full implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Mr. Franco Sousa (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to commend Mozambique for convening
today’s open debate, as well as you, Madam President,
for your leadership today. On behalf of the Republic of
Panama and our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Janaina
Tewaney Mencomo, I would like to thank you, Madam,
for the opportunity to participate in a forum that
enables us to share our reflections on the extremely
important role that women play in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Resolution
1325
(2000)
encompasses
a
transformative vision, which highlights the systematic
and widespread practice of violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts. The resolution has become a
starting point for incorporating the gender perspective
into international humanitarian law, demonstrating that
the promotion of women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in decision-making processes is the only
way to achieve sustainable solutions for addressing
the causes of the violence within those conflicts. In
addition to the nine subsequent resolutions adopted in
the context of its implementation following its adoption
in 2000, the resolution has undoubtedly opened a
valuable path for addressing issues such as the gendered
impact of armed conflicts and the enormous capacity of
women around the world to coordinate peace initiatives.
However, despite the positive progress achieved, the
risks remain enormous, and gender equality in the
international arena, in particular with regard to peace
contributions, is far from being a tangible reality.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

I would like to emphasize that violence against
women is a violation of human rights, which means
that we need to distance ourselves from those views
that perceive and justify it as a manifestation of certain
cultures or as the unquestioned privilege of certain
groups or individuals in the exercise of power. Despite
the absence of bombs and shells, the bodies of women
and girls have become battlegrounds for unscrupulous
armed militias and those who take advantage of the
chaos of war to unleash violence against the most
vulnerable members of their communities. If there is
one thing we have learned, it is that peace and security
depend on the capacity of States to ensure inclusion in all
its forms and manifestations. As a demographic group,
women make up almost half of the human population,
yet they continue to face exclusion and inequality in
the political, economic and social spheres, a problem
that is even more acute in societies fragmented by
armed conflict.
It is important to emphasize that Panama recognizes
resolution 1325 (2000) from the two perspectives it
includes on women in situations of armed conflict — both
as victims and in their key roles in decision-making in
conflict prevention and negotiations for peacemaking
and peacebuilding. Our country supports the Council’s
comprehensive capacity to adopt actions aimed at
protecting and guaranteeing the rights of women and
girls, thereby strengthening democracy and the rule
of law. The positive effects of women’s inclusion in
transition and reconstruction processes in societies
that have been affected by hostilities and conflict
are very clear. Such effects contribute to ensuring
conditions conducive to negotiations and ceasefires,
and to disarming the parties to the conflict and
ensuring their return to society. The comprehensive
results of women’s participation, as actors for peace,
suggest that their proactive efforts have a direct impact
on negotiation and mediation activities, in which we
have seen the growing involvement of women experts
who have been specially trained in the development of
peaceful solutions to conflicts.
Recognizable progress has been achieved. Today
there can be no doubt that the empowerment of women
experts participating in Government delegations has
resulted in a genuine approach to conflict resolution
with a more human face. In addition, the provision of
support for women in conflict zones has been key to
the implementation of peace agreements. Empowering
women is the key to successful sustainable peacemaking.

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

That is why, if we want to ensure peaceful, inclusive
and democratic societies, we must defend women’s
rights in all contexts. We must uphold our commitment
to gender equality and be allies to women in our homes,
in our communities and in our workplaces. We advocate
for an inclusive human rights-based agenda in which
women, young people and girls have a voice and play a
leading role in building such an agenda for peace.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Digital Government and Gender Equality of Denmark.
Ms. Bjerre (Denmark): On behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my
own country, Denmark — I want to thank Mozambique
for convening this timely meeting on women and peace
and security.
More than 20 years ago, women peace activists
successfully advocated for the Security Council to
recognize the disproportionate impact of conflict
on women and girls and the crucial role of women in
peacebuilding and conflict prevention. Women are
still at the forefront of conflict and crises. In Ukraine,
following Russia’s full-scale invasion and war of
aggression, women are among the first responders
and front-line defenders and are at the heart of the
humanitarian response. That illustrates on a daily basis
why the Council has repeatedly called for women’s
participation in all aspects of peace and security.
Unfortunately, women’s participation in efforts
to uphold peace and security, whether in Ukraine
or elsewhere, are carried out under a constant and
unacceptable threat of conflict-related sexual violence.
We call on all parties to armed conflicts to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights law. The prevention of and accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence must be ensured,
everywhere and always.
Towards the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), the Nordic countries emphasize the
importance of the meaningful implementation and
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda. The Security Council must ensure that United
Nations peace operations have a comprehensive women
and peace and security mandate.
But our commitment to achieving the women and
peace and security agenda goes beyond the work of
the Security Council. In that regard, we would like

23-068295/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to highlight two areas of crucial importance for the
agenda’s implementation:
First, we must ensure women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in decision-making and
peacebuilding processes, including to secure the full
enjoyment of human rights for women and girls in
all their diversity. The participation and leadership of
local women-led and women’s rights organizations is
especially important. Women-led organizations should
have access to flexible financing for capacity-building,
participation and protection against reprisals.
Secondly, we must stop intimidation, attacks and
reprisals against all women human rights defenders,
peacebuilders and civil society leaders. We must
defend the defenders. In 2021, 35 women human rights
defenders, journalists and trade unionists were killed
in retaliation for their work. Those are just the women
we know of — we know that such incidents are heavily
underreported. Many more are threatened and harassed
into silence, both online and offline. The Council and
the United Nations peace and security architecture
as a whole needs to be informed by a diverse group
of briefers. In order to ensure that we protect their
participation, we, the Member States, must also ensure
zero tolerance for reprisals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Moreno Bau (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mozambique for convening this open debate.
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Spain is
more committed than ever to the women and peace
and security agenda — one of the five pillars of the
Government’s feminist foreign policy. Spain actively
participates in debates on women and peace and
security at Headquarters and in other forums in which
it is a member.
As leaders, together with Finland, of the
Commitment 2025 initiative, we are determined to
increase the significant and substantive participation of
women in conflict prevention and resolution, negotiation
and mediation processes by 2025, and we invite other
Member States to join that initiative. We recall that this
is ultimately a component of Sustainable Development
6/56

07/03/2023

Goal 5, target 5, which is to ensure women’s full and
effective participation and equal opportunities for
leadership at all levels of decision-making in political,
economic and public life.
Within the European Union (EU), it is worth
highlighting initiatives such as the EU Gender Military
Training Discipline, a course on a comprehensive
approach to gender in peace operations, which Spain
leads together with the Netherlands. Within NATO,
Spain has contributed greatly to the inclusion of the
women and peace and security agenda in the new
strategic concept and organized a side event during
the summit held in Madrid in July 2022 with women’s
organizations from the European Union, Ukraine
and Afghanistan.
In addition, the Spanish Government has supported
the launch of the Group of Five for the Sahel Women’s
Platform, and its Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
European Union and Cooperation organized the
“HearUS” Afghan women’s summit in 2022 to help
Afghan women in exile to safely denounce violations of
their rights in Afghanistan. Supporting Afghan women
will remain a priority for Spain in 2023.
Spain advocates publicly denouncing conflictrelated sexual violence, taking stronger action to prevent
it and cooperating to bring perpetrators to justice.
At the national level, in December 2022, I presented
the follow-up and review report of the second women and
peace and security action plan to the Spanish Congress
of Deputies. That follow-up has not only allowed us to
take stock of what has been achieved thus far, but also
shown the way to improve the next plan, which should
be drawn up by the end of this year and for which we
will once again be counting on civil society. Among
the lessons learned, which we believe are also useful
for the Security Council in general, is the need to have
a specific budget, with qualitative indicators that make
it possible to evaluate the effectiveness and impact of
the women and peace and security agenda and to have
broad civil society participation.
The President: I know call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan.
Mr. Zardari (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
the Republic of Mozambique, for convening this open
debate on women and peace and security on the eve of
International Women’s Day.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

The world today is facing a pandemic of conflict,
violence, war, hate, extremism and terrorism. Despite
the Geneva Conventions, civilians are increasingly the
primary targets of war and violence. As the Council’s
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) observed, women and
girls suffer disproportionately and inordinately from
war, conflict and violence.
The strategy adopted in resolution 1325 (2000)
and the 10 subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security have served to enhance national and
international recognition on the challenges and their
manifestations. Almost 90 States have adopted national
action plans to protect women and girls and empower
them to contribute to preventing and responding
to conflict, war and violence. The United Nations
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict has helped to enhance
recognition of this challenge. The larger presence and
role of women peacekeepers has visibly contributed to
preventing and containing conflicts and violence and
crimes against women.
Yet we are far from realizing the objectives of the
women and peace and security agenda. The sombre
reality is that women continue to be the principal victims
of war and conflict. We hear the cries of mothers,
sisters and daughters in Iraq, Afghanistan, Ukraine
and Africa, who are suffering from the consequences
of wars that have been imposed on them. We have yet
to implement the strategy to prevent wars, erase the
suffering they cause, establish accountability for the
crimes against women and girls, and empower women
through skills, access and leadership to contribute to
prevention, recovery and redressing their imposed and
disproportionate suffering.
We are disappointed at the restrictions imposed on
education and work on women and girls in Afghanistan.
The right of women and girls to access all levels of
education and work is a fundamental right in keeping
with Islamic injunction. We urge the de facto authorities
to take steps towards resumption of female education
and allow women to contribute to Afghan society.
The
most
egregious
autocracies
arise
from — and the worst crimes against women and
girls occur in — situations of foreign occupation
and suppression of the right to self-determination of
peoples. In this regard, the very object of violence is
to suppress the civilian population, which is manifest

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

most vividly in the occupied Palestinian territories and
occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
The women and peace and security strategy will
remain incomplete and unfulfilled so long as the acute
dimensions of the plight of women under foreign
occupation are not addressed frontally and vigorously.
Above all, occupation forces must be held accountable.
To ensure the implementation of the women, peace and
security strategy, it is essential to establish monitoring
mechanisms for crimes committed against women and
girls in territories under foreign occupation, including
occupied Jammu and Kashmir. The Security Council
called for improved monitoring in resolution 1888
(2009), through the deployment to conflict areas of
military and gender adviser teams, and in resolution
1960 (2010), where it endorsed measures to end the
impunity of perpetrators. These provisions must
be implemented.
Pakistan also supports effective implementation of
other measures in the Council’s resolutions on women
and peace and security: the deployment of women
protection advisers, a larger role for United Nations
women peacekeepers, especially in leadership positions,
addressing the root causes of conflict, increasing the
resources for women in conflict zones, providing for a
stronger and equal role for women in the prevention of
conflict, the delivery of relief and recovery assistance,
in forging lasting peace and in promoting the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in accordance with the United
Nations Charter and Security Council resolutions
by utilizing the various mechanisms available under
the Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Gil Savastano (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Colombia has made a “total peace”
commitment to the peaceful solution of conflicts
because we believe in the supreme value of life. The
“total peace” policy is wisdom, and we are calling for
wisdom in defence of life. We condemn all violations of
women’s rights in every corner of the world, and at this
time we remember with special empathy the women of
Iran. The struggle of Iranian women is the struggle for
all of us, and they are not alone.
The situation of women and girls in armed conflict
today could lead us to question the relevance of the
women and peace and security agenda. However, we
are in this Chamber today to reassure you, Madam

23-068297/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

President. While the women and peace and security
agenda needs updating — an injection of modern
thinking — it is still, even in current state, in force,
relevant and bearing fruit in Colombia. Let me therefore
share our experience.
As I said, Colombia is committed to “total peace”
and to the fundamental role that women play as agents
of change in this process. We have established as a
national priority the guarantee for women in all their
diversity to participate in the development of the “total
peace” policy. We wish to be an international reference
point for peace and life, and we believe that change
is for and through women. We are moving towards
structural transformations that will lead us to settle the
debt in political representation, equality and economic
autonomy owed to women and to guarantee to them the
right to a life free of violence.
Despite the fact that Colombia negotiated the
world’s first peace agreement with a gender perspective,
the debts owed to women in terms of peace and security
persist. We are pleased to announce that, 23 years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) — that is, 23
years late — Colombia is drafting its first national
action plan based on the resolution, and we are doing
so hand in hand with the women’s movement. With
the assistance of UN-Women, we are organizing — or
rather, the women of Colombia are organizing — five
regional forums, a national meeting and several sectoral
workshops. We want an exemplary national action plan.
It will have the victims of the conflict at its core, and it
will pay special attention to the use of sexual violence
as an instrument of war.
Resolution 1325 (2000) today, 23 years after its
adoption, has provoked an explosion of participation
in Colombia that has surprised, surpassed and
gratified us. Urban, peasant and rural women, mestizo,
indigenous and Afro-Colombian women, heterosexual
and LGTBI+ women, and workers and professionals
are meeting every day in every corner of Colombia to
discuss, exchange, coordinate and formulate a public
policy for peace and security. The very process of
formulation has become one of political participation
and therefore of empowerment.
Most important, the women of Colombia are
redefining the content of resolution 1325 (2000),
appropriating it and moulding it to their circumstances,
and, in so doing, they are bringing it to bear on the
8/56

07/03/2023

challenges they face in 2023. Resolution 1325 (2000) is
a living text in Colombia.
This process of formulating a national action plan
with this level of participation has allowed us to reach
some conclusions that we respectfully present to the
members of the Security Council. First, Colombia
believes that the women and peace and security agenda
lacks intersectionality. The Security Council should
recognize the multiple identities, such as race, ethnicity,
social class, nationality and sexual orientation, that
intersect to deepen discrimination. No Colombian
woman is only a woman. We are many women at the
same time, and we hope that the Security Council will
reflect our challenges as they are.
Secondly, Colombia believes that the women and
peace and security agenda lacks diversity. We believe that
the Security Council should address the differentiated
impacts of armed conflict on the LGBTIQ+ community
and consider a resolution that strengthens the previous
resolutions on the subject. In that context, we welcomed
resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security
and believe that the LGBTIQ+ community requires the
same attention from the Security Council.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has become a catalyst
for mobilization in Colombia, and we hope to return
in September to present our national action plan in
the General Assembly. Our national action plan is for
women and by women. To the women of the world and
the women of Colombia, we say do not give up, and
keep insisting. As our Vice-President Francia Márquez
Mina says, let us keep fighting until dignity has become
a habit.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Ms. Goula (Greece): I would like to warmly thank
Mozambique for organizing such an important event,
which is aimed at reinforcing the implementation of the
agenda on women and peace and security.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I
would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
My country emphasizes the importance of
accelerating the realization of substantive gender
equality both at home and abroad, as a means of
contributing to a gender-equal, peaceful and more
resilient world. The promotion of the women and peace
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

and security agenda is among the priorities of Greece’s
candidacy for election to the Security Council for the
2025-2026 term, as well as in view of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), coming up
in 2025.
Greece seeks to enhance the substantive and
meaningful inclusion of women in peace processes as
one of the most effective ways to achieve long-lasting
and sustainable peace and security. At the same time,
we advocate for ensuring the effective protection
of women from conflict-related, gender-based and
sexual violence. Furthermore, we underline the direct
connection between three of the Security Council
agendas — first, on the protection of civilians, secondly,
on women and peace and security, and thirdly, on
children and armed conflict. Greece has also been active
in highlighting the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women journalists, who often fall victim
to undocumented conflict-related sexual violence, as
well as discrimination and sexual harassment on- and
offline. In that regard, my country, together with a core
group of like-minded countries — Argentina, Austria,
Costa Rica, France and Tunisia — promoted General
Assembly resolution 76/173, on the safety of journalists
and the issue of impunity, which the Assembly adopted
unanimously in November 2021, with an unprecedented
number of 112 sponsors. The resolution makes explicit
reference to resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and
peace and security agenda of the Security Council.
Today’s event coincides with the sixty-seventh
session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which is focused on innovation, technological change
and education in the digital age for achieving gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls.
Greece is actively participating in it in support of the
Commission’s valuable work. We consider that closing
the gender digital divide and ensuring that no one
is left behind in the digital economy and society are
essential not only to achieving sustainable development
but also to promoting peaceful, secure and genderequal societies.
On a final note, I would like to express Greece’s
determination to contribute substantially to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and its core commitments, ahead of the twentyfifth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), which hopefully will coincide with Greece’s
participation in the Security Council.

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Ms. Velichko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
More than 20 years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, which was intended to reduce the potential
for conflict around the world and strengthen the role
of women in post-conflict recovery. However, current
global trends present a depressing picture and a
pessimistic forecast for the future. We are seeing trust
give way to confrontation and dialogue to accusatory
rhetoric, while a new arms race is spiralling. There
is a tendency to promote individual approaches to
the detriment of the interests of other members of the
international community. The vaunted instruments of
the European security architecture are cracking under
the strain. Europe is now siding with war. Whether its
security architecture will survive the current crisis is a
major question.
That is why the time has come to consider security
in a broader Eurasian context. As the current occupant
of the presidency of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, Belarus intends to host an international
conference in Minsk this year on the prospects for
security in Eurasia, with a view to holding an impartial
dialogue aimed at establishing the conditions for the
creation of a sustainable system of equal and indivisible
security with corresponding individual and collective
guarantees. We look forward to the active participation
of women in the conference, whose role in matters of
peace and security must be strengthened.
It goes without saying that in armed conflicts it is
women, especially women with children, who suffer
most of all. Every conflict should be resolved around the
negotiating table, and women must occupy their rightful
place in the peace process and become more involved in
post-conflict recovery. However, let us be honest. Are
women always only the victims of conflict? Are they not
often supporters of conflict as well? In that context, we
have to address the issue of some countries’ application
of illegal sanctions, which not only violate international
law and undermine the efforts of the countries affected
to achieve socioeconomic development, but also have a
negative impact on those who impose them. There are
women who are actively lobbying for those destructive,
opportunistic sanctions. We therefore find ourselves
in a paradoxical situation in which some women pose
a direct threat to global security, while others are its
victims. That is worth thinking about.

23-068299/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

We recently marked the International Day for
Disarmament and Non-Proliferation Awareness.
The Secretary-General called on women, as the
primary guardians of their families’ upbringing, to
participate actively in decision-making processes on
the implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. We are convinced
that the more people are educated about disarmament
issues, the fewer the conditions there will be conducive
to arms races, escalating tensions and unleashing
conflicts. And we will finally understand that there is
no alternative to a global security dialogue in the spirit
of San Francisco, and in that process, women also have
a role to play — one of creativity and harmony.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Ms. Vseviov (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement to be made on behalf of the European
Union, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Estonia welcomes the Security Council’s debate
on women and peace and security and remains fully
committed to standing firm on the advancement of
women’s rights, security and leadership. On the eve of
International Women’s Day, I am afraid we must admit
that despite some progress, we are still unable to always
protect women’s rights in violent conflict, as we are not
yet able to decisively advance equality across the globe.
For more than one year, Ukrainians have been
enduring unthinkable horrors in the Russian war of
aggression. Forty per cent of the Ukrainian population,
mostly women and children, are in need of urgent
humanitarian aid. Those who remain in Ukraine are at
the mercy of Russian soldiers and mercenaries, who use
sexual and physical violence, exploitation and abuse
against civilians as a war tactic. While their mothers are
being killed or raped, thousands of Ukrainian children
are being held in filtration camps, deported to Russia
and subjected to forceful adoptions. We call upon the
international community to do everything possible and
more to support Ukraine and the Ukrainian victims of
the aggression. In spite of that grim background, the
launch by Ukraine of an updated national women and
peace and security action plan to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in every aspect
of society deserves recognition.
Unfortunately, every single day, thousands of
women across the globe must fight for their fundamental
10/56

07/03/2023

human rights. In Afghanistan, the Taliban’s actions
seek to gradually erase Afghan women from public
life, depriving them of education and health care. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, conflict-related
sexual violence continues to affect a countless number
of women and children, who are in desperate need of
our support. The brave women of Iran, who despite
the harsh consequences they face have been at the
forefront of protests demanding their basic rights and
dignity, should be respected and supported. However,
today the European Union imposed sanctions on nine
persons responsible for committing sexual violence
and other violations of women’s rights. Among them
are two Russian commanders sanctioned for their
deeds in Ukraine. We must always hold perpetrators
accountable, as justice provides a glimmer of hope
to the victims, while impunity will only lead to new
crimes and violations.
In conclusion, Estonia affirms its efforts to
advance the role of women and girls and to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We will continue to support
UN-Women, UNICEF, the United Nations Population
Fund and the Offices of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict and for
Children and Armed Conflict in their activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Women’s Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine.
Ms. Hamad (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the State of Palestine, I would like to express our
sincere thanks to your delegation, Madam President,
for convening today’s important meeting on women
and peace and security. I thank Mozambique for its able
leadership of the Council in March. I would also like
to thank the Executive Director of UN-Women, Sima
Bahous, for her comprehensive briefing, as well as the
other speakers for their valuable contributions.
The State of Palestine agrees that the women and
peace and security agenda helps to prevent crises.
The State of Palestine has developed a national plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
all subsequent resolutions in a participatory way, in
cooperation with civil society organizations, in order
to build on the expertise of all stakeholders. We in
Palestine support human rights. We are committed to
doing our utmost to protect all women from violence and
discrimination, ensure their full and equal participation
at all levels of decision-making and empower them to
ensure their ability to contribute to national recovery,
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

reconstruction, reconciliation and the peace mediators
network. We are committed to supporting young
generations of women and girls.

worldwide. We welcome the fact that putting women
and girls at the centre has been outlined among six
potential areas for the New Agenda for Peace.

At its core, resolution 1325 (2000) seeks to achieve
just peace so that all peoples across the world can live
in safety. Women contribute effectively to that end.
However, the situation is very different in occupied
Palestine. Since 1948, Palestine has endured multiple
disasters and outrages, the most recent of which is the
statement made by the racist Smotrich, who called for
the village of Huwwara to be wiped out. He wants to
bring back the 1948 Nakbah. We have seen an attack
on the United States and European delegations that
visited to assess the scope of the damage. In the light
of those serious developments, we see that our path to
peace is uncertain and ambiguous, and our security
is at stake. We are now farther away from peace and
closer to the entrenchment of the occupation, the reality
of annexation, an apartheid regime and the acquisition
of land by force.

That is particularly important for us because, since
2014, Ukraine has been countering Russian aggression,
which in 2022 turned into a full-scale invasion. Along
with the temporary occupation of Ukrainian territories
and the resulting numerous casualties and mass
destruction, sexual violence has been a hallmark of the
Russian invaders.

The State of Palestine has joined and ratified
more than 87 international conventions and protocols
without any reservations. We are fully committed to
international legitimacy and United Nations resolutions.
We commend positions that support Palestinian rights,
and we are waiting for words to be turned into action
on the ground. We also thank all friendly countries that
have supported us.
In conclusion, we urge States to recognize the
State of Palestine, based on its international legitimacy.
We also call for the perpetrators of crimes to be held
accountable and for ending the impunity enjoyed by
the Israeli occupation, including settlers. We stress the
need to provide protection to our Palestinian people,
in particular women and girls, who are subjected to
killing on a daily basis and whose homes are being
demolished. We want them to live in peace, security
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Ms. Levchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to
the presidency of Mozambique for convening today’s
important open debate on the progress of the women
and peace and security agenda.
Ukraine has always been a staunch advocate for
the promotion of fundamental human rights, with
a particular focus on the rights of women and girls

Orders for sexual violence were given from the
top and pointedly applied in order to humiliate and
destroy our reproductive capacity. It happened in the
Kherson region, where, under threat of violence, a
Russian soldier repeatedly raped a 62-year-old woman.
It happened in the Kyiv region, where invaders raped a
girl and her mother, beat the father and forced him to
watch. It happened in Sviatohirsk, where a woman was
raped by three Russian soldiers. Now she works with
a psychologist and even helps other women who were
similarly abused.
In total, the Prosecutor General’s Office of Ukraine
has recorded 171 such incidents, involving not only
women, but also men and children. And we do not
know how many are suffering in silence, especially in
the temporarily occupied territories.
The entire free world must guarantee the most
important thing — justice. That is needed by all, not
only Ukrainians. It must serve as a precedent for any
potential aggressor and collective rapists throughout
the globe to realize that sexual violence will not
go unpunished. Ukraine fully endorses the global
campaign at the highest levels to ban sexual violence
and to ban rape as a weapon of war.
Ukrainian women, however, are not just victims,
as 61,000 women are members of the Armed Forces
of Ukraine and approximately 5,000 of them are
defending our country on the front lines. Ukrainian
women are pushing the volunteer response, they are
taking positions in governance, they are advancing our
economy as entrepreneurs, they are taking care of their
dependents, and they are engaging actively in all fields
of civil life. One of our women activists, Oleksandra
Matviichuk, leads the non-governmental organization
that was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2022.
That is the logic behind the second national action
plan under resolution 1325 (2000), amended and updated

23-0682911/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

in December 2022 in order to address the current needs
and context of the full-scale military aggression. The
current updated national action plan recognizes that
women must be actors and agents in the ongoing war,
as well as in the reconstruction of the country.
We appreciate the Organization’s engagement,
in particular within the Framework of Cooperation
between the Government of Ukraine and the United
Nations on the prevention and response to conflictrelated sexual violence. We invite one and all to attend
a side event that our delegation is holding today on
the implementation of this Framework and the role of
women’s civil society organizations.
We call on all States to recognize that women’s
voices must be heard in serious discussions and
negotiations for peace and that we must eliminate
all barriers that hinder their participation in politics.
We emphasize the urgent need for the international
community to prioritize the women and peace and
security agenda and to underpin it with concrete steps.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. RonnerGrubačić.
Ms. Ronner-Grubačić: I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries Türkiye, North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the potential candidate country Georgia, as well as
Andorra, Monaco and San Marino, align themselves
with this statement.
Assessing the disproportionate effect of armed
conflict on women and girls is more important today
than ever. The prevalence of sexual and genderbased violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, offline and online, demands our attention.
Implementing the full women and peace and security
agenda must be a core priority of the Security Council.
We face a changing security context, characterized
by hybrid threats, energy blackmail, disinformation,
food insecurity and the increasing weaponization of
suffering. Yet some problems are depressingly familiar.
Women human rights defenders and peacebuilders
continue to be targets of attacks and threats in many
parts of the world. That is unacceptable. We — the
EU, the United Nations, Member States and regional
organizations — need to work with academia, think
tanks, civil society, human rights defenders, activists,
12/56

07/03/2023

journalists and media workers who cover first-hand, with
high professionalism and self-sacrifice, the devastating
reality of conflicts. The EU approaches the twenty-fifth
anniversary with that mindset, encouraging everyone to
implement a zero-tolerance policy for reprisals against
women human rights defenders and peacebuilders.
The EU therefore welcomes the Secretary-General’s
initiative of a New Agenda for Peace. It is essential that
this New Agenda build on the existing women and peace
and security agenda and further strengthen the ability
of the United Nations to deliver it. Women and gender
equality must be at the heart of peace and security in the
coming years, including through the implementation of
the Peacebuilding Commission’s gender strategy.
The pursuit of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in Ukraine requires the full force of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law in order
to deal with the various types of violence faced there
by women and girls. But the same issues require equal
attention wherever they occur, on all continents.
The EU continues to contribute to advancing this
agenda by gender-mainstreaming the EU’s 21 civilian
and military missions and operations, deploying 5,000
women and men around the world; by placing the women
and peace and security agenda at the top of the EUUnited Nations joint priorities for peace operations and
crisis management, including through strengthening
cooperation at the field level; and by following up on
Council conclusions on women and peace and security,
adopted by European Union member States in November
2022, reaffirming our commitment to this agenda.
In sum, the EU will work actively with women,
all over the world, in all their various roles, on peace
and security, conflict prevention, countering violent
extremism and radicalization, peace negotiations and
peacebuilding, climate and developing humanitarianaction and development programmes.
I wish everybody a happy International Women’s
Day tomorrow.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s debate, express our
sincere appreciation to all the briefers and thank the
International Committee of the Red Cross, in particular,
for their important work.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Despite strong follow-up resolutions to resolution
1325 (2000), including on the participation pillar,
in many parts of the world women’s equal, full and
meaningful participation remains the exception rather
than the rule. That is unfortunate and unacceptable
in the light of the evidence we have accumulated
over the almost 25 years since the initial adoption of
the women and peace and security agenda. Women
peacekeepers, mediators, lawyers, journalists and
human rights defenders, among others, have been key
agents of political change and contributed significantly
to sustainable peace. Their inclusion in peace talks
has proven to be indispensable for forging lasting
peace agreements.
Women have also played an integral role in peace
movements and disarmament efforts. For decades, they
have been at the forefront of advocating for a nuclearfree world. With the Doomsday Clock set at 90 seconds
to midnight and “sounding an alarm for the whole of
humanity” in the words of Mary Robinson, Chair of
the Elders, such efforts are more important than ever.
Enabling women to be agents of change, including by
eliminating patriarchal patterns of decision-making,
is therefore not only our obligation under the women
and peace and security agenda and other relevant
international law, but urgently needed for a safe and
peaceful world.
In Myanmar, women and youth have played a
particularly important role in resisting the military
coup, peacefully standing up for democracy and the rule
of law and against crimes against humanity committed
by the military junta, including extrajudicial killings,
arbitrary detention and torture. By doing so, they have
also challenged long-prevailing age and gender norms
in their patriarchal society. Rather than receiving
recognition for their important role in the opposition
movement, however, they remain largely excluded from
formal political decision-making and face attacks and
retaliation. Any efforts to de-escalate violence and
reach a sustainable political resolution and democratic
transition of Myanmar requires women’s equal,
meaningful and effective participation at all stages
of decision-making. Only a fully inclusive civilian
Government can be representative of the will of the
people and lead towards a peaceful, just and inclusive
society. That was stressed in the General Assembly
resolution on Myanmar in 2021 (General Assembly
resolution 75/287) and reiterated at the end of last year
by the Council itself (see S/PV.9231). In that regard,

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

let me also emphasize once more the urgent need to
prevent the flow of arms into Myanmar, as called for by
the Assembly, as an effective way to stop the violence.
Leading up to the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
women and peace and security agenda, we must not only
do better in its implementation, but also apply it across
thematic files and country situations dealt with within
the Security Council and beyond. In that regard, we
commend the women and peace and security presidency
initiative — a creative, cross-regional and informal
way to bring heightened visibility to the agenda and to
create further momentum around its implementation.
We particularly welcome the promotion of the strong
representation of women among briefers to the Council,
as well as the more significant inclusion of gender
perspectives in Council meetings and products.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico is grateful to Mozambique for convening this
open debate and for the briefings made earlier.
During Mexico’s previous term as an elected
member of the Security Council, one of my country’s
priorities was to advance the women and peace and
security agenda in line with its feminist foreign policy.
As co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, we systematically advocated
for a gender perspective in the work and deliberations
of the Council. We advocated for an intersectional
approach, cooperation with regional and civil society
organizations and for the peacekeeping missions
approved by the Council to have the necessary capacities
to effectively fulfil their mandates to protect women.
More than two decades after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we note that, although progress
has undeniably been made in this area, enormous
challenges persist, and we cannot but help note the
setbacks with great concern. The first-hand accounts of
women who have been victims of sexual violence as a
result of the war in Ukraine and the measures adopted
in Afghanistan limiting the autonomy of women and
girls are unacceptable. It is time to redouble our efforts
to implement the measures that we have committed to
and adopted.
In particular, I will highlight three of them. The
first is the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women, in all their diversity, in decision-making

23-0682913/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

processes at all levels, including in peace processes.
The second is the prevention of conflict-related
sexual violence and access to justice and sexual and
reproductive health services for survivors and victims.
The third is the protection of women peacebuilders and
human rights defenders from gender-based violence.
We must overcome the structural barriers that
hinder gender equality, including the segregation of
women in the labour market and discrimination against
women in terms of their access to financial resources
and land use and tenure. With regard to the role of
women as mediators, I am pleased to announce that the
Ibero-American network of women mediators has been
registered and that it will soon be formally established.
We welcome the fact that 10 Ibero-American countries
have already expressed their interest in taking part in
the initiative, and we hope that others will join them.
Lastly, Mexico reiterates its commitment to
continuing to promote the women and peace and security
agenda from various angles, such as the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action,
adopted by the Generation Equality Forum.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Ms. Totladze (Georgia): At the outset, I would
like to express our appreciation to the presidency of
Mozambique for convening today’s debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
In my national capacity, I would like to add
the following.
The adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
and the subsequent women and peace and security
resolutions by the Security Council highlights the
importance of women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation at all levels of decision-making in order
to achieve sustainable peace. Despite the achievements
made thus far with women’s increasing participation
in areas pertaining to international peace and security,
progress in the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda remains slow. We share the
concerns raised in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/740) on women and peace and security with
regard to the numerous barriers, compounded by
predominate gender stereotypes, that girls and women
have to overcome in the realization of their right to
participate in public and political life.
14/56

07/03/2023

In turn, the Government of Georgia prioritizes the
issues of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
the meaningful engagement of women in peace processes
and fostering the women and peace and security agenda
in the process of peaceful conflict resolution. To that
end, on 25 October 2022, the Government of Georgia
adopted its national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security for the period from 2022 to 2024. The stated
action plan has been developed in close cooperation
with local non-governmental organizations that work
in women’s rights and women activists. One of its
priorities includes a focus on women’s participation in
peace and security processes. Furthermore, within the
framework of our commitments under the resolution,
we continue to promote conflict-affected women in
Georgia as a driving force of public diplomacy.
As we gather here to discuss the women and peace
and security agenda, Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine continues to rage. Russia’s illegal aggression
against Ukraine has thus far resulted in the forcible
displacement of more than 10 million Ukrainians, most
of whom are women and children, who are particularly
vulnerable, including to the risk of human trafficking.
We are horrified by sexual and gender-based violence
committed by the Russian armed forces in Ukraine.
At this juncture, I would like to emphasize that the
ongoing military aggression against Ukraine and
Russia’s continued occupation and creeping annexation
of the Georgian regions of Tskhinvali, South Ossetia
and Abkhazia clearly violate the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and undermine the
rules-based international order, imperilling regional
and global security. Regrettably, despite the efforts of
Georgia’s Government to empower conflict-affected
women, women and girls living in the Russian-occupied
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions of Georgia continue
to suffer from persistent violations of their fundamental
human rights and are unable to benefit from our
Government’s human rights protection framework.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
once again that in two years, when we mark the twentyfifth anniversary of the adoption of the groundbreaking
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, the Government of Georgia will do its utmost
to ensure the full integration of gender perspectives
into decision-making, as well as to protect the rights
of women and promote their meaningful participation
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

in conflict-prevention and peacebuilding, in line with
the resolution.

the only way we can preserve a healthy and coherent
society working to achieve sustainable peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.

Mr. Elshandawily (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mozambique for organizing today’s open
debate ahead of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security. I would also like to
thank all the briefers who spoke this morning. We are
proud that this open debate is being organized under
an African presidency. It is always worth recalling
the African role in bringing the women and peace and
security agenda to the attention of the Security Council.
Egypt commends every African effort aimed at fully
implementing the women and peace and security agenda
in Africa. Women’s participation in decision-making
at all levels will always remain at the core of our
discussions in our quest to achieve sustainable peace.

Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): I would like to
congratulate Mozambique on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March and to
express our appreciation to it for convening today’s
timely open debate. We thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the other briefers for
their valuable contributions to today’s discussion.

Egypt will always stress the importance of
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
from a holistic approach that aligns efforts across the
peace continuum so as to enhance their effectiveness
and impact. That is very relevant to our peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. In that
regard, Egypt takes great pride in its championing of
the General Assembly’s resolutions on United Nations
action on sexual exploitation and abuse adopted since
the Assembly’s seventy-first session, the latest of
which is resolution 76/303, adopted in September.
The resolution promotes a system-wide approach
to implementing the zero-tolerance policy aimed at
eliminating such heinous acts.
The President of the Arab Republic of Egypt was
one of the first leaders to join the Circle of Leadership
initiative to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations operations. Raising awareness against
sexual exploitation and abuse is an integral part of the
comprehensive training that Egyptian forces receive
prior to their deployment in peacekeeping operations.
Respect for national ownership and a full consideration
of the cultural and societal specificities of different
countries in armed conflict or emerging from it are
keys to the success of our collective efforts to advance
the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.
Let me conclude by stressing that investing in
women’s capabilities, resilience and leadership is

Armenia is committed to efforts to advance the
role of women in peace and security. To that end, we
recently adopted our second national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), with a
particular focus on ensuring the inclusive engagement
of women affected by conflict. Our national action plan
for the period from 2022 to 2024 sets comprehensive
objectives designed to address issues such as increasing
the involvement of women in our armed forces and
police systems, upholding the protection of the social
and economic rights of women and girls affected by
armed conflict and promoting awareness-raising and
effective international cooperation in that regard.
In our region, we are still facing the consequences
of the brutal and unprovoked violence launched by
Azerbaijan in 2020, which continues to take lives
and bring devastation, displacement and human
suffering, and which has had a disproportionate
impact on women and girls. During the large-scale
military offensive in Nagorno-Karabakh, among the
hardest hit were the women trapped between the war
and the pandemic. Conducted in gross violation of
international humanitarian law, Azerbaijan’s armed
attacks involved massive bombardments, artillery
and missile strikes that heavily damaged a number
of medical facilities, including a maternity hospital.
In September 2022, Azerbaijan launched yet another
criminal attack targeting civilian infrastructure and
densely populated areas in Armenia and capturing,
torturing and executing female soldiers. The videos of
such unspeakable atrocities have been applauded and
extensively celebrated on Azerbaijan’s social networks.
As we speak, a population of 120,000 continues to
be trapped in the conditions of the ongoing blockade,
imposed on 12 December 2022, of the Lachin corridor,
which has essentially disrupted the only lifeline

23-0682915/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

connecting Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia and the
outside world. In a February 2023 publication, Amnesty
International reported on the blockade’s disproportionate
impact on women in Nagorno-Karabakh, who are
dealing with a multitude of challenges, including in
terms of access to health care and essential services.
Eighty-six days into Azerbaijan’s barbaric, medieval
siege, mothers and children in Nagorno-Karabakh
continue to be shown to be the main targets of the
blockade, as the disruptions of cargo and supply chains
have affected families with young children the most,
with the risk of malnourishment and even starvation
becoming a real problem.
Two weeks ago, the International Court of Justice
indicated provisional measures, according to which
Azerbaijan shall
“take all measures at its disposal to ensure
unimpeded movement of persons, vehicles and
cargo along the Lachin corridor in both directions.”
(Application of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(Azerbaijan v. Armenia), General List No. 180,
para. 62)”
To date, Azerbaijan has failed to implement the Court’s
legally binding order, engaging instead in manipulative
interpretations, distortions and fabrications, which, as
we have seen, have little value in a court of law. Equally
disturbing are the attempts to instrumentalize the issue
of prisoners of war and civilian captives, whose return
Azerbaijan continues to deny, in defiance of the Geneva
Conventions and the provisional measures issued by
the International Court of Justice in December 2021.
That inflicts severe distress on the mothers, wives and
families of those held in captivity, who have been going
through trauma and pain for more than two years since
the establishment of the ceasefire and the termination
of hostilities.
Twenty-three years into the inception of
resolution 1325 (2000), women continue to be at an
increased risk of injustice and inequality. Outbreaks of
violence, as well as complex humanitarian emergencies
and their disproportionate impact on women and
girls, have clearly demonstrated that the United
Nations needs to re-equip itself to better deliver on its
preventive function and on the women and peace and
security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
16/56

07/03/2023

Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): Speaking on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
I congratulate Mozambique on convening today’s open
debate and thank the briefers for their presentations.
As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security
(S/2022/740) clearly highlights that much work
still needs to be done. It is important for us to leave
behind business as usual in order to enable us to make
meaningful progress. It is also important to enhance
cooperation with regional organizations on the women
and peace and security agenda, which has long been
a priority for ASEAN, given its full commitment
to ensuring the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions on women and peace
and security. In that context, allow me to highlight
three points.
First, strengthening women’s leadership and their
transformative role is key. Supporting initiatives led
by women and for women is important in that regard.
Under the umbrella of the ASEAN Institute for Peace
and Reconciliation, we established the ASEAN Women
for Peace Registry, which allows ASEAN countries
to pool their expertise and better integrate a gender
perspective into conflict-prevention initiatives.
Secondly, we need to enhance efforts to mainstream
the women and peace and security agenda in peace and
security decision-making processes. In December,
ASEAN established the ASEAN Regional Plan of
Action on Women, Peace and Security, which provides
a framework for the role of women in realizing inclusive
and sustainable peace in the region. The action plan
is also mindful of future challenges, such as climate
change, natural disasters and public health emergencies.
It will also be continuously monitored and evaluated
to ensure it remains relevant and forward-looking.
Such an action plan requires continued support for
its implementation, including the political support of
the Council.
Thirdly, we must capitalize on technology to create
a multiplier effect in terms of women’s participation in
the women and peace and security agenda. For a region
with more than 340 million women and girls spread
across the 10 ASEAN countries, the dissemination of
good stories that will encourage women’s participation
in the women and peace and security agenda is a
challenge. In order to overcome that, we launched an
ASEAN women and peace and security website in
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

2022, as a hub of knowledge for the women and peace
and security agenda. Through the website, we aim to
amplify good and encouraging practices on women and
peace and security for women in the ASEAN region
and beyond.
Regional platforms and mechanisms play a
significant role in pushing the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. ASEAN stands
ready to work together with the United Nations and
other regional organizations to advance it through
lessons learned and the sharing of best practices.
Together, we can do more.
Allow me to add some points in my national capacity.
After almost 25 years, various goals that we set
ourselves in the women and peace and security agenda
are still distant targets. The number of women mediators
and negotiators is negligible. The number of women
in peacekeeping is equally uninspiring. We are still
far from the target set by the Secretary-General in his
Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy to be achieved by
2028. Indonesia believes that two important approaches
are needed.
First, we need to intensify capacity-building across
the entire women and peace and security spectrum.
Greater efforts must be taken by all to ensure that
women have access to capacity-building programmes
throughout the peace and security continuum. Having
a greater pool of women with high capacity will create
more opportunities for their involvement in peace and
security processes.
Secondly, we must use the New Agenda for Peace
process as an opportunity to also contribute to the
women and peace and security agenda. In that context,
women’s voices must be heard in setting the course
of the New Agenda for Peace. Ensuring a greater role
and voice for women in areas such as peacekeeping,
mediation and peacebuilding, as well as in preventing
and countering terrorism and violent extremism,
is important.
Thirdly and finally, let me reaffirm Indonesia’s
commitment to supporting the full, effective and
meaningful participation of women in the peace and
security agenda. Indonesia believes that the role of
women in peace processes is not merely a form of
embracing gender equality — it is a transformative force
for more robust efforts to achieve sustainable peace.

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s open debate, and we
also thank the briefers for their valuable contributions.
Almost 25 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), States still have a long way to go to comply
with the provisions of that and subsequent resolutions.
However, the intervening years have reaffirmed
the important role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, as well as in peace negotiations,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. They are also key
actors in humanitarian responses and post-conflict
reconstruction processes. That is why we underscore
the responsibility of States and the Organization to
ensure the effective implementation of the provisions
of the global women and peace and security agenda.
Conflicts around the world continue to undermine the
negligible efforts that have been undertaken to enable
women to exert greater influence on our societies.
The Russian Federation’s unprovoked, unjustified and
disproportionate aggression against Ukraine is a clear
example. The population, especially women and girls,
are being affected and their rights violated.
We strongly believe that, in order to advance the
women and peace and security agenda, a holistic view
of both the problems and the opportunities at hand is
required. The full, equal, effective and meaningful
inclusion and participation of women is crucial for the
development of any country and therefore also for global
peace and stability. Guatemala is committed to and
prioritizes the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, with 300 women deployed as military
and civilian personnel in various United Nations
missions, demonstrating their dedication, leadership,
professionalism and humanity in all the actions they
perform. It is imperative that our countries continue to
hire, train and deploy women peacekeepers — not to
fulfil a quota but because of the positive impact they
have in those environments, which is supported by
concrete data.
Guatemala also highlights the important
complementary role that regional organizations and
United Nations entities play in that important agenda,
as stipulated in resolutions 2242 (2015), 2467 (2019)
and 2493 (2019), without losing sight of the fact that the

23-0682917/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

main responsibility for that global agenda lies and will
always lie with States.
National action plans are a vital product of
resolution 1325 (2000) as a valuable tool for States
to implement their commitments and ensure their
continuity. Those plans create spaces for civil society to
accompany that work and allow national stakeholders to
identify priorities, determine responsibilities, allocate
resources, and initiate strategic actions within a
defined time frame. My country has taken ownership of
its national plan, which remains in force and serves as
the basis for monitoring public policies for the integral
development of women, as well as for actions promoted
by the plan under resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions on women and peace and security.
Finally, Guatemala reaffirms the importance of
national ownership and leadership in peacebuilding and
emphasizes the inclusion of all segments of society and
the need to increasingly promote the participation of
women in order to ensure that the needs of all levels of
society, especially the most vulnerable, are addressed.
The New Agenda for Peace represents an opportunity
to strengthen those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): Poland would like to thank
Mozambique for convening this debate and all the
briefers for their insightful remarks.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered by
the representative of the European Union and on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Poland fully supports initiatives aimed at
increasing the role of women in building peace and
security. To that end, Poland is currently implementing
its first national action plan on women and peace and
security, which will run until the end of 2023. Polish
activities under the national action plan focus on
the enhancement of women’s participation in crisis
management and peacebuilding missions, in United
Nations, European Union, NATO and Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe operations, and
in the promotion of implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, both in Poland and through
our international cooperation activities. One of the
priorities of the Polish national action plan is raising the
effectiveness of efforts to prevent and combat conflictrelated sexual violence.
18/56

07/03/2023

The women and peace and security agenda
highlights the disproportionate impact of armed
conflicts on women and girls, the great benefits
of improving the involvement of women in peace
processes and the absolute necessity of tackling the
scourge of sexual violence as a weapon. Unfortunately,
we have witnessed a reversal of generational gains in
women’s rights. The use of rape and other forms of
sexual violence as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism
is widespread. Many communities are affected by the
threat, occurrence or legacy of conflict-related sexual
violence, including in Afghanistan, Libya, Myanmar,
the Sudan, Yemen and Ethiopia.
We are horrified by the growing number of accounts
of use of sexual violence by the Russian soldiers in
Ukraine as a tactic of war and as a deliberate way to
dehumanize victims. The reports, including the one by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine, describe appalling cases of rape committed
by soldiers of the Russian armed forces, with victims
ranging from four-year-old children to persons of more
than 80 years of age. It is therefore crucial to redouble
our efforts to fight all forms of conflict-related sexual
violence, address the issue of impunity of perpetrators
of such crimes and enhance support for victims.
The count of those forced to flee their homes has hit
the highest number since records were first kept — to
over 100 million last year. Emergencies in Ukraine,
Ethiopia, Afghanistan and other places have been
important factors behind it. Displacement heightens the
risks of all forms of sexual violence, so we must provide
greater support for those fleeing war and conflict.
There is no doubt that preventing women from
political engagement and curbing their public activity
has a negative impact on crisis prevention and postconflict recovery. We therefore need to introduce and
implement better protection mechanisms that will
empower all women and give them platforms to use
their natural resilience and strength to ensure peace for
us all.
The President: I now
representative of Germany.

give

the

floor

the

Ms. Leendertse (Germany): We are very grateful
to Mozambique and, in particular to you, Madam
President, for organizing today’s important and timely
debate on women and peace and security.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) 23
years ago, much has been accomplished. However, as
highlighted by previous speakers, much remains to
be done. Progress has stalled in some areas, and we
observe regression in others. The Taliban’s violations of
women’s rights in Afghanistan, rising levels of conflictrelated sexual violence — for example, in the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and Ukraine — and the
persistent difficulties in achieving equity of women in
leadership positions globally all underline the need for
further efforts. We all need to ensure that the frequent
references to women, peace and security in statements
at the United Nations and elsewhere do not remain mere
rhetoric but are implemented in practice.
Let me highlight three avenues forward.
First, we must start at home. Last week, German
Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock presented our
guidelines on feminist foreign policy. She highlighted
that feminist foreign policy is not a magic wand that can
conjure up change overnight. Rather, it provides clear
principles for using our existing toolkit in a smarter
manner and for cultivating a feminist reflex. To achieve
this we will, inter alia, train our staff, create incentives,
hire more women and promote multiplying networks
worldwide; ensure systematic gender-budgeting
towards equal access to resources for all genders and
marginalized groups; and monitor our efforts and
adjust where necessary in close coordination with our
national and international partners, including other
feminist foreign policy advocates. It is our hope that
more countries will join us in these efforts.
The second avenue is that we should reinforce
existing instruments. Peacekeeping missions already
do important work towards ensuring women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in peace processes
on all levels. We encourage senior leadership to
expand political spaces for women and marginalized
groups, and we remain engaged as an Action for
Peacekeeping champion.
And the third avenue forward is that we should, of
course, continuously push the policy agenda. We must
ensure that women, peace and security is advanced
in our joint policy documents, particularly the New
Agenda for Peace. It is not enough for everyone to
proclaim women, peace and security a priority; we need
to agree on how we will make it one. Germany remains
ready and eager to work with all of States Members of

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

the United Nations to bring the women and peace and
security agenda forward.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Zoghbi (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
thank you, Madam, for convening today’s important
debate on women and peace and security, entitled
“Towards the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000)”, which coincides with the celebration of
International Women’s Day tomorrow, as well as the
sixty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status
of Women.
At the opening of the new session of the Commission
on the Status of Women yesterday, the SecretaryGeneral recalled that if we continue at the pace we
are moving, it will take us 300 years to reach gender
equality. Even with the Security Council itself, the
statistics show a lack of gender equality. According to
UN-Women, from the inception of the United Nations
until last year, only 26 women have occupied the
position of Permanent Representative in the Security
Council. That figure shows that we are still far from
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 5, on gender
equality. It is clear that greater efforts need to be made.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was the first Council
resolution to recognize the role women play in achieving
international peace and security, their contribution to
preventing and resolving conflicts and their importance
to peacekeeping and peacebuilding — all of which
fall within the purview of Sustainable Development
Goal 5. Since its adoption, States Members of the
United Nations, including Lebanon, have relied on
resolution 1325 (2000) to establish national plans on
women and peace and security. Indeed, after adopting
our first plan in 2019, we have been taking practical
steps for implementing it.
Despite the many unprecedented challenges facing
Lebanon, we have been persistent in efforts to advance
the women and peace and security agenda. We have
achieved progress in terms of women’s participation
in the military, both with increased numbers and in
greater responsibility in the tasks assigned to them. As
a case in point, Cadet Jana Sader of the Lebanese army
recently graduated from a nearly two-year training
course at Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas. She is

23-0682919/56

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

07/03/2023

the first pilot in our army to fly an A-29 Super Tucano
attack aircraft. She is a proof that there is no limit for
what a woman can do.

political and peacebuilding missions; and ensuring the
support of regional organizations and Member States to
make those efforts sustainable.

We value the presence and efforts of women
soldiers within the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. While there are far fewer of them than their
male counterparts, it remains our hope that the number
of women peacekeepers will increase in future. Recent
official figures indicate that women soldiers constitute
only 4.8 per cent of the military units that comprise
nearly 95,000 peacekeepers.

Italy has a long-standing tradition of promoting
gender equality and women’s empowerment. We are a
proud supporter of the Mediterranean Women Mediators
Network, which we launched in October 2017 to promote
gender equality and foster women’s inclusion in peace
processes, mediation efforts and peacebuilding in the
Mediterranean region. The Network offers training,
capacity-building and networking opportunities and
has led to the establishment of the Global Alliance of
Regional Women Mediators Networks, uniting voices
from six different regions of the world in a call to
accelerate the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda on the ground. Peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and mediation are sectors in which
women have proved particularly effective. In that
spirit, we welcome the prioritization of the women and
peace and security agenda in the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and in mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

As we look forward to celebrating the twentyfifth anniversary of adopting resolution 1325 (2000)
in two years, Lebanon is working on implementing a
second national action plan on women and peace and
security, which we hope will complement the first plan
by updating the means with which emerging challenges
to the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in its entirety are addressed.
The President: I
representative of Italy.

now

give

the

floor

the

Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the representative of the
European Union in its capacity as observer and the
representative of Canada, who spoke on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and
would like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.
Italy commends Mozambique’s timely initiative
to convene an open debate on women and peace and
security right at the outset of the work of the sixtyseventh session of the Commission on the Status of
Women. Indeed, participation is the challenge at the
core of resolution 1325 (2000).
However, when we look at the data from the past
two years, we see that the rate of women’s participation
as party negotiators or delegates at peace processes
has decreased from 23 to 19 per cent, in spite of their
constructive contribution at the grass-roots level and
their presence on the front lines. Structural barriers to
implementation remain and need to be addressed. For
that reason, we welcome all efforts in that direction,
such as bringing in more technical expertise, higherquality data and adequate resources; promoting
strategy meetings on designing and supporting
inclusive processes to identify and then implement
measures with the greatest impact for each context;
strengthening gender mainstreaming across the work of
20/56

This is a time to engage to do things differently.
The intolerable consequences of the armed conflicts
in Ukraine and elsewhere demand that we promote
solutions to stop the suffering of women and girls in
conflict-affected situations. We must listen to the call
for action, accountability and justice coming from civil
society’s grass-roots women-led organizations, and
embed that call in our individual and collective action
to enable women to be not mere victims but actual
agents of change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): I thank all the
briefers for their insightful presentations.
We are approaching the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Since
then, the women and peace and security agenda has
been elaborated on in subsequent resolutions and
implemented in regional, national and subnational
action plans. Indeed, the effective implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda requires a
multifaceted approach to gender equality and women’s
rights, a process that includes strategic engagements
at the global, regional and national levels. It also
requires the commitment of various stakeholders to
working together and sharing resources, expertise and
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

experiences in implementing the women and peace and
security strategy.
The Philippines’ national action plan covering the
period from 2017 to 2022 recently came to a close, and
we are now formulating the plan for the next period, from
2023 to 2028. The Office of the Presidential Adviser
on Peace, Reconciliation and Unity leads our national
steering committee on women, peace and security. It
has conducted three comprehensive consultations to
assess the implementation of the national action plan
and the next round of consultations with civil society,
with the support of UN-Women.
In the Philippines, we continue to work to ensure the
meaningful participation and leadership of women and
girls as active change agents in conflict transformation
and post-conflict development by mainstreaming the
women and peace and security agenda in policies, plans
and programmes at the national, regional and local
levels. As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the agenda, the Philippines is crafting the next version
of its national action plan, which will stand alongside the
regional action plan on women and peace and security
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao. Working in conjunction with those plans is
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Regional Plan of Action on Women, Peace and Security,
launched in December last year. We also support the
ASEAN Women for Peace Registry, which aims to
build the capacity of women as peacebuilders and to
contribute actively to the maintenance and promotion
of peace in the ASEAN community. The Philippines
stands ready to implement those initiatives and to share
our experiences with regional and global partners.
The women and peace and security agenda has
evolved and strengthened in the past two decades. We are
now more aware of the differentiated impacts of armed
conflict on women and girls. Mainstreaming gender
in disarmament and international peace and security
instruments is a primary rather than a secondary issue.
We also know that the presence of women peacekeepers
can improve missions’ abilities to respond to the needs
of women and girls. The Philippines has deployed
women peacekeepers and military observers in United
Nations missions, and time and time again we have seen
the importance of women’s leadership in building fair
and peaceful communities. We cannot overemphasize
the importance of gender analysis in all aspects of
conflict prevention, peace and reconstruction.

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

At the same time, we have seen traditional and
emerging security challenges threaten global peace
and security. We encourage the Security Council to
explore ways to draw on the synergies of action plans
at different levels in order to reinvigorate the global
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. We should engage and empower young people,
especially young women, in peacebuilding and security
processes, as well as in preventing their recruitment
into gangs and violent groups. It is also important to
model women’s leadership and participation in defence
institutions and operations, and to enhance protection
for women and girls in conflict-affected areas.
By evaluating and improving the effectiveness
of national action plans on the women and peace and
security agenda through the use of evidence-based
indicators and participatory approaches, we can make
strides in ensuring that the goals of the women and
peace and security agenda make a positive difference
for people on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I thank you, Madam
President, and your Government for convening us
today. I know there has been a long list of speakers
already, and there are still many speakers to go, but
I beg the Council’s indulgence because I have two
statements to give — one on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security, which many
Member States have already referred to, and a very
brief statement in my national capacity. I promise to
be as quick as I can. I am pleased, as I mentioned, to
speak on behalf of 65 members of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security.
There remains a significant gap between the
ambition of our women and peace and security agenda
commitments and the realization of women and girls’
full, equal and meaningful participation in political,
peace and security processes. Regrettably, women and
girls continue to be excluded from decision-making
and face discrimination, sexual and gender-based
violence — both off- and online — as well as human
rights violations. That requires our urgent and concerted
action. In that regard, we reiterate our commitment to
protecting and promoting the autonomy, empowerment
and human rights of all women and girls. We will
advocate for and support women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation and leadership at all levels

23-0682921/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

and all stages of political, peace and security processes.
That includes United Nations-led peace processes,
which must ensure women’s participation. We will
promote a safe and enabling environment for all women
peacebuilders, mediators, human rights defenders,
civil-society leaders, journalists and media workers
by amplifying their voices, swiftly and unequivocally
condemning attacks, intimidation and reprisals against
them online and offline and ensuring predictable and
flexible funding for them.
We call on the Council to ensure that all United
Nations missions provide, monitor and report on support
for women peacebuilders and human rights defenders
and to fully ensure the independent contribution of
civil society to the Council’s work. We commit to
promoting the full, equal and meaningful participation
of uniformed women in peacekeeping at all levels,
including in leadership positions.
We will strengthen international support and
protection for women refugees and displaced women in
conflict and post-conflict settings, in particular with
respect to protection against human trafficking and
conflict-related violence. We will prevent and respond
to all forms of sexual and gender-based violence and
discrimination, including by ensuring survivors’ access
to essential services, such as sexual and reproductive
health, livelihood and mental health and psychosocial
support services, as well as remedy and reparations
services. We will promote accountability for sexual
and gender-based violence and encourage the Council
to pursue the fight against impunity with all the means
at its disposal, including by applying conflict-related
sexual violence as a designation criterion in sanctions
regimes. We will ensure women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in addressing terrorism and
violent extremism, as well as in tackling the adverse
impacts of climate change and in disaster risk reduction.
Finally, we will continue to develop, implement and
monitor action plans to implement our women and peace
and security commitments and to share best practices.
On the eve of International Women’s Day, we
commend Ms. Chiziane and all women and girls who
work tirelessly for justice, equality and peace. They
inspire us to intensify our efforts.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to say a few words in my capacity as the
representative of Canada. In the light of the increased
number of threats, reprisals and violence, including
22/56

07/03/2023

against women who provide briefings to the Council,
more must be done to protect women peacebuilders and
women human rights defenders. Canada has its own set
of practical guidelines — Voices at Risk — which are
designed to help Canadian diplomats to support human
rights defenders and peacebuilders. We also believe that
it is important to recognize the remarkable civil society
contributions that often go unnoticed. That is why, on
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
Canada launched the five-year women and peace and
security awards programme ahead of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the agenda. Canada is deeply committed
to continuing its work to make headway on the agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): I would like to extend
my warmest congratulations to Mozambique on its
presidency of the Security Council and wish it all the
best. We are also grateful to Mozambique for convening
today’s important and timely debate.
Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was a turning point for
foreign policy, declaring that the gender perspective is a
vital prerequisite for conflict prevention and resolution,
as well as for the promotion of peace and political and
social stability, including women at all stages of peace
processes and policymaking. But much still needs to
be done. Closing the gender leadership gap is essential
for national and global security. And it is our duty to
promote equality in the realization of civil, cultural,
economic, political and social rights. In a world in which
armed conflict is increasing and its devastating impact
unfolding before us with a disproportionate impact
on women and children, we cannot remain idle. It is
imperative to ensure the protection of women’s rights
in times of conflict and to empower them to become
peacebuilders and mediators. We must bring the women
and peace and security agenda into the core of the New
Agenda for Peace. It is imperative to intensify our
efforts to combat sexual and gender-based violence and
uphold all women’s human rights, including the right to
education and health. Further efforts are also needed to
close the digital gender gap, and we look forward to the
results of the ongoing session of the Commission on the
Status of Women.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

In Portugal, beyond the adoption of a national action
plan on women and peace and security, whose third
edition is now being prepared, the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has also led to the integration of
gender perspectives into the Portuguese armed forces. A
defence action plan for equality was created, outlining
measures aimed at boosting women’s involvement
in peacekeeping missions. Therefore, we have also
mainstreamed the gender perspective and the women and
peace and security agenda into our cooperation agenda
and in the area of security. The promotion of gender
equality and women’s empowerment was established
as a cross-cutting priority in the recently adopted 2030
Portuguese strategy for international cooperation.
I would also like to note that one year after the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Ministry of Defence
of Portugal will host an international seminar in Lisbon
on 26 April to discuss the preliminary lessons of the
war from a gender perspective.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that promoting and
protecting the human rights of all women and girls is not
only a moral imperative but also a strategic investment
to foster sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): It is good to see you,
Madam President, presiding over today’s meeting.
I thank you for convening today’s meaningful open
debate on women and peace and security on the eve of
International Women’s Day, which will be celebrated
on 8 March.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Since 2000, women and peace and security has
become a key agenda item for the Security Council,
involving 10 resolutions adopted by the Council, and
has been mainstreamed into most of its documents.
Great efforts have been made in that undertaking by
the international community and by women themselves
through their aspirations and willpower. That highlights
women’s important role in peace and security and their
contribution to building and reinforcing peace.
In every part of the world, women have taken
up an active role in conflict prevention, settlement
and post-conflict reconstruction. They have engaged
significantly in making, maintaining and building peace

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

and are taking the lead in shaping and promoting social
development and progress. However, the road from
political will to action has not been easy, with many
challenges remaining. Some countries and regions are
still embroiled in war, conflict and poverty. Genderbased violence remains a scourge. The lives and dignity
of women are still under threat. Many girls are unable to
go to school. Women are still confronted with political,
economic and cultural barriers and are deprived of the
necessary support for playing their rightful role or even
marginalized from social development.
Even in that context and looking forward to the
twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
we should reaffirm our commitment to coordinating
policy orientations and actions in order to promote
cooperation on global gender equality on the matter.
We should adopt measures to mobilize resources to
ensure that women assume a more substantive role
and greater participation in fostering and enhancing
peace. In that regard, we call for more programmes
and capacity-building for women at the local, national
and international levels so as to help ensure sustainable
peacebuilding and women’s economic empowerment,
in line with resolution 1889 (2009).
Viet Nam underwent the immense pain of war
to achieve peace and independence and surmounted
countless hardships in the course of its successful
reconstruction and development. That process witnessed
the sacrifice and contributions of Vietnamese women
over generations. Vietnamese women peacekeepers
are now present in various United Nations missions,
contributing to the maintenance of global peace
and insecurity.
Therefore, women and peace and security has long
been high on Viet Nam’s agenda, including during
our two terms in the Security Council. Viet Nam will
continue to work with Member States to ensure that
women all over the world are able to make momentous
changes for a brighter future for generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Copus Campbell (Australia): Australia thanks
Mozambique for convening this open debate on women
and peace and security.
As we move towards the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we are reminded
of how far we have come as a global community but, at

23-0682923/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

the same time, how far we have yet to go. As the world
continues to confront conflicts and threats to peace and
security, such as climate change and pandemics, our
collective commitment to advancing gender equality
and the women and peace and security agenda must
remain a priority.
As the women and peace and security agenda
makes clear, our ability to address those challenges is
more effective if we have the fullest representation of
leaders in our society at the decision-making table. We
will be more effective in achieving and maintaining
peace and security when our actions are systemic and
sustained, with adequate resourcing of the four women
and peace and security pillars.
That includes the full and equal participation and
leadership of women and girls, as well as people of
diverse gender identities, in the security sector, military
contingents, peacekeeping forces and in peacemaking.
It also requires consistent and concerted mainstreaming
of gender across peace and security processes.
As we respond to the climate crisis, we must
acknowledge the impacts it will continue to have on
global peace and security. That starts with recognizing
that the impacts of the climate crisis and natural hazards
differ by gender and can have a disproportionate impact
on women and girls.
The women and peace and security agenda also
provides a clear framework for bringing our efforts
together. With this, the capabilities, insights, strengths
and leadership of women and girls and persons of
diverse gender identities are critical to driving effective
strategies for change.
Advancing the women and peace and security
agenda also demands addressing all forms of genderbased violence, including sexual violence in conflict.
To do that effectively, we must partner with civil
society and support human rights defenders. Australia
does that through our work with the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund and regional women peace mediator
networks, as well as support for the development and
implementation of women and peace and security
national and regional action plans.
We welcome collaboration with other Member
States to accelerate action and achievements towards
an inclusive, equitable and sustained global peace and
security agenda.
24/56

07/03/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I congratulate Mozambique
for its presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for convening this debate on the eve of International
Women’s Day. I also thank Ms. Bahous, Ms. Diop and
Ms. Spoljaric Egger for their insights on the topic of
today’s discussion.
The cultural ethos of India has taught its people to
regard our planet Earth as a mother. As a nation with
a strong civilizational character rooted in women’s
empowerment and equal participation in social and
economic life, we strongly believe that the progress
of women is the very basis for the empowerment of
a nation.
We all agree that resolution 1325 (2000) was
pathbreaking, as it ushered in a gendered perspective
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
For the first time, it recognized that women are
disproportionately affected by violence and that their
participation in peace processes is indispensable for
forging lasting peace and security.
Over the years, we have seen a strengthening of
the normative framework of the women and peace and
security agenda. However, women are still routinely
underrepresented in, and excluded from, formal peace
processes, political dialogues and peacebuilding.
The gender perspective is still neglected in conflict
prevention, recovery and reconstruction.
It is our collective responsibility to take the women
and peace and security journey forward at a pace that
fully harnesses its transformative potential. Four issues
are particularly relevant in that regard.
First, Member States must provide a conducive
environment for the participation and inclusion of
women in political processes and decision-making. To
foster such an enabling environment, the principles of
democracy, pluralism and the rule of law are essential
prerequisites. In that context, as the Council is aware, we
have been emphasizing the importance of an inclusive
and representative governance in Afghanistan, with the
meaningful participation of women, in accordance with
resolution 2593 (2021).
While supporting political participation, we
must also equally focus in a holistic manner on the
socioeconomic empowerment of women, including
their access to credit, finance and technology. Digital
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

technologies have enormous potential to empower
women by providing women greater access to education,
finance, credit, social services, the marketplace
and employment.
Secondly, the United Nations and regional
organizations must assist national authorities, upon
their request, in developing capabilities to strengthen
their national legal frameworks and related institutional
structures for ensuring accountability and fighting the
impunity of those perpetrating violence against women.
Member States should also be provided support
for capacity-building in post-conflict situations in
order to meaningfully and institutionally address the
inequalities and violence faced by women and to ensure
their full participation in decision-making. A focus on
women in peacebuilding efforts is absolutely crucial.
Thirdly, women police officers and peacekeepers
play an indispensable role in furthering the women
and peace and security agenda in post-conflict
situations. India welcomes efforts towards a Uniformed
Gender Parity Strategy that leads to an increase in
the deployment of women peacekeepers. In January
2023, India deployed a platoon of women peacekeepers
in Abyei as part of the Indian battalion in the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei. That was our
single largest deployment of women peacekeepers since
2007, when India was the first country to deploy allwomen formed police units in Liberia. Those initiatives
are reflective of our intent to increase significantly the
number of women in peacekeeping contingents and
our commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda. India also supports increasing the deployment
of women protection advisers for effective monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on sexual violence
in conflicts.
Fourthly, terrorism and violent extremism
continue to be the biggest violators of human rights
and a persistent threat to global peace and security.
Needless to say, women and girls suffer invariably
and disproportionately. Violence against women and
girls perpetrated by terrorists remains rampant. That
deserves the strongest condemnation and calls for the
adoption of a zero-tolerance approach to all forms
of terrorism.
Before I conclude, let me dismiss the frivolous,
baseless and politically motivated remarks made by the
representative of Pakistan regarding the union territory
of Jammu and Kashmir. My delegation considers it

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

unworthy to even respond to such malicious and false
propaganda. Rather, our focus is where it shall always
be — positive and forward-looking. Today’s discussion
is critically important to strengthen our collective
efforts to accelerate the full implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda. We respect the
topic of the debate and recognize the importance of
time. As such, our focus shall remain on topic.
I conclude by reiterating India’s firm commitment
to contributing further to the normative and practical
aspects of the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia.
Mr. Vorshilov (Mongolia): Mongolia is grateful
to Mozambique’s presidency for organizing this welltimed debate on landmark resolution 1325 (2000),
which streamlined the women and peace and security
agenda worldwide. We would also like to thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and the briefers for their
valuable remarks.
In the past 23 years, both the Security Council and
national Governments have made significant efforts
towards the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Nevertheless, today women
remain the segment of society most affected not only by
armed conflicts, but also crises and disasters, including
the coronavirus disease pandemic and the floods and
earthquakes in different corners of the world. Therefore,
the issue of strengthening women’s representation and
participation in peace and peacebuilding processes
requires renewed commitment from both the
international community and national Governments.
Mongolia is firmly committed to the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda across all
its pillars — prevention, protection, participation, relief
and recovery — and at all stages of the peace process.
For more than two decades, Mongolia has contributed
to United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
sacred cause of strengthening international peace and
security, sending its male and female peacekeepers.
Since 2006, when Mongolia sent its first female officer
to a United Nations peacekeeping operation, in terms of
the number of female peacekeepers, it has ranked among
the top 20 of the more than 120 troop-contributing
countries. In addition, we are committed to fulfil the
call by the Department of Peace Operations to increase
the number of women serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations by 15 per cent by 2027. Within

23-0682925/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

the framework of that objective, Mongolia successfully
hosted an international conference on strengthening the
role of women in peacekeeping in June 2022, with the
participation of female peacekeepers from more than
30 countries.
All of us recognize today the fact that women’s
leadership has a positive impact on all spheres of life.
Likewise, women’s participation at the decision-making
level is attaining ever-increasing importance, owing to
the problems and challenges as a result of the current
global crises, including the pandemic, geopolitical
conflicts and humanitarian disasters. Therefore,
the Foreign Minister for Mongolia, Mrs. Battsetseg
Batmunkh, has proposed the initiative to hold a
female Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Mongolia on
29 and 30 June in order to discuss issues concerning
international relations and to seek possible solutions.
We firmly believe that the meeting will provide an
opportunity for participants to deliberate and exchange
information on, and share their best practices of,
feminist foreign policymaking. Most important, the
consensus and solidarity of female Foreign Ministers
will serve as a great impetus to promote multilateral
cooperation to address global challenges.
We believe that, in cooperation with and with
the support of the Member States, the United Nations
system and the Security Council can achieve more as we
approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) through the accelerated implementation of the
1995 Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the New
Agenda for Peace and other internationally agreed
development goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mrs. Mihail (Romania) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mozambique for having chosen the subject
of this debate and taking this early stocktaking initiative
in anticipation of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. As we know, when it comes to
women’s rights, we can never stop moving forward.
The women and peace and security agenda is at the
heart of today’s global peace and security challenges. It
is clear that protecting women and girls from conflictrelated violence is more critical than ever. We must
also promote and ensure their participation in conflict
prevention and resolution. In taking into account the
26/56

07/03/2023

commitments undertaken thus far with regard to women
and peace and security since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we hope that further reflection will be
accorded to the subject on the agenda of the peacekeeping
ministerial meeting to be held in Accra in December, as
well as the preparatory meetings, especially given the
fact that we will be commemorating the seventy-fifth
anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping this year.
In order to implement resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national level, Romania adopted in 2020 its national
strategy and national action plan for the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda. They are
based on several of the agenda’s pillars, including the
incorporation of a gender perspective in security and
defence policies; increased women’s representation and
participation in peace negotiations, mediation processes
and peacekeeping missions; the prevention and fight
against all forms of violence stemming from gender
discrimination and harassment and sexual violence;
and cooperation with the civil society to that end.
The development of the second national action
plan on the implementation of the women and peace
and security resolutions has been Romania’s most
recent priority in focusing on the agenda. In addition to
focusing on women’s participation in order to increase
their involvement in a decision-making space where
men’s influence has predominated, emphasis will be
placed on medical, psychological and social support
for victims of sexual violence. In order to encourage
international cooperation for the implementation of
the agenda in 2023, Romania and the United States
are co-Chairs of the Women and Peace and Security
Focal Points Network. Furthermore, Romania has
incorporated the goals of the women and peace and
security agenda in its efforts to promote gender equality
and increase the role of women during its 2023–2025
term on the Human Rights Committee.
Armed conflicts continue to have a disproportionate
impact on women and girls throughout the world,
owing to the prevalence of sexual violence, including
in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Myanmar, the Sudan,
Syria and Yemen. The repercussions for women and
girls of Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
are deeply concerning. Romania stresses the need to
ensure full accountability for those responsible for
crimes and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): Austria aligns
itself with the statements delivered earlier by the
Ambassador for Gender and Diversity on behalf of
the European Union and the representative of Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security, respectively. And Austria very much
appreciates Mozambique’s efforts and initiative
to enable this stocktaking discussion of efforts to
implement the women and peace and security agenda.
We also thank the briefer, Leymah Gbowee, for sharing
her experiences and insights. Austria also commends
the continued commitment of Executive Director
of UN-Women Sima Sami Bahous, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross Mirjana
Spoljaric Egger and Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission Bineta Diop to the women and peace and
security agenda.
As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the thirtieth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, we
are witnessing a significant backlash against the rights
of women and girls, especially in conflict-affected
countries. The Taliban’s ascent to power in Kabul
has wiped out gender equality and women’s rights in
Afghanistan in mere months, effectively banning women
from participation in social and political life. Austria
strongly condemns the recent decree barring women
from working in non-governmental organizations,
constituting a further major blow to women’s rights in
Afghanistan, with devastating consequences for access
to humanitarian aid.
Russia’s illegal invasion of Ukraine and continued
targeted attacks on civilian neighbourhoods and
institutions, including schools and hospitals, as well as
its use of sexual and gender-based violence as a weapon
of war, is another painful example of how the situation
of women and girls in conflict has worsened. Austria
is very committed to ensuring that those responsible
for war crimes and crimes against humanity are
held accountable. We therefore strongly support the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine in Vienna and the ongoing investigations
of the International Criminal Court in Ukraine. We
also firmly condemn the disproportionate use of
force against protesters of the Woman, Life, Freedom
movement and the Iranian authorities’ executions of

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

death sentences, which are vivid demonstrations of
how women’s attempts to achieve meaningful and equal
participation and to assert their rights over their own
bodies — such as the right to wear or not to wear a
hijab — are forcibly struck down. While it is important
to ask ourselves where we have gone wrong in letting
such situations persist, we must also be action-oriented
and focus on the question of what we can do better.
We believe that we can and must do better to
promote the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Austria takes a holistic approach
to issues of women and peace and security, with clear
commitments in its foreign security and development
policies, as well as its humanitarian assistance. The
meaningful implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
serves as a pillar for the sustainable development of
countries into stable societies built on the principles of
the rule of law, human rights and gender equity. In 2022,
Austria provided €124 million in humanitarian aid to
Ukraine and its neighbouring countries, making it the
number-one donor country of humanitarian assistance
based on gross domestic product, the majority of it
delivered to women and children. Austria also provided
€5 million of emergency assistance to UN-Women in
Afghanistan in 2022. Those funds have been used to
establish day-care centres to respond to basic needs and
to establish an Afghan women advisory group for the
humanitarian coordination team. Furthermore, Austria
is supporting women journalists, who often encounter
obstacles to their ability to pursue their profession, in
finding alternatives in the digital space.
In peacekeeping, Austria has also continued to work
on increasing the number of uniformed women in its
military personnel. Our armed forces therefore remain
committed to integrating a gender perspective into their
military operations to enhance situational awareness
and improve preventive and protective measures. To
that end, we recently established a permanent advisory
office within the Austrian armed forces to consider the
gender perspective.
Together let us harness the valuable exchanges
taking place during the sixty-seventh session of the
Commission on the Status of Women. Let us make use
of the insights gained for the women and peace and
security agenda and continue discussions in the Security
Council on how information and communications
technologies and digital platforms can help empower
women and girls in contexts affected by conflict and
on developing measures to mitigate risks. I want to

23-0682927/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

assure the Council that Austria will continue to be at
the forefront of the collective efforts to put the women
and peace and security agenda into practice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mrs. Zin Zawawi (Malaysia): Malaysia would like
to express its appreciation to Mozambique for convening
today’s open debate on women and peace and security.
We also thank the briefers for their insights.
Our delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Indonesia on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Almost 23 years have passed since the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 1235
(2000). It affirmed the important role of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as
in peace-building initiatives. Regrettably, we heard
earlier in today’s open debate that the global efforts to
advance the women and peace and security agenda have
regressed. The fact remains that women continue to be
largely excluded from processes aimed at achieving
peace and security, and we have seen that some peace
agreements lack provisions that prioritize the security
and safety of women and girls. Malaysia is concerned
about the degree to which rhetorical support for the
agenda has continued to outpace its actual achievement.
Advancing the women and peace and security agenda
should work in tandem with efforts to implement the
Sustainable Development Goals, and specifically
Goal 5, on achieving gender equality, and Goal 16, on
promoting peaceful and inclusive societies. The fact is
that gender equality should be systematically integrated
into all agendas in order to further empower women in
achieving sustainable peace.
The importance that Malaysia attaches to the
protection of women’s rights is reflected through its
national policy on women, which was formulated
in 1989. Its key objectives are ensuring access to
opportunities, the equitable sharing of resources and
the integration of women into every possible sector with
a view to promoting an inclusive and prosperous nation.
Within that framework, Malaysia equally recognizes
that women have a critical role to play in helping to
end wars and maintain peace. As of November 2022,
of the 849 personnel from the Malaysian Armed Forces
and Royal Malaysia Police deployed to five United
Nations peacekeeping operations, 11.5 per cent — 98
of them — are women. Malaysia has observed that
28/56

07/03/2023

the presence and active participation of women
peacekeepers in conflict zones can facilitate interaction
and confidence-building with local communities and
the populations affected, particularly among women
and children. In that regard, Malaysia firmly believes
that women’s active participation and positive role are
critical success factors in peace processes.
The Secretary-General has stated that achieving
gender equality and empowering women and girls is
part of the unfinished business of our time and our
greatest ongoing human rights challenge. At the current
rate of progress, Malaysia wholeheartedly agrees with
the Secretary-General’s statement that more needs to be
done to achieve meaningful gender equality. Excluding
women from contributing to and playing constructive
roles in peace and security is no longer an option.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Liepnieks (Latvia): I would like to start
by thanking all the briefers, as well as Mozambique,
for giving us the opportunity to reflect on the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. We welcome the continued practice of inviting
women representatives of civil society to brief the
Security Council.
Latvia aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and by the representative
of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
The women and peace and security agenda is an
important contributor to tackling today’s global peace
and security challenges. Women’s participation in
peace negotiations, mediation and conflict resolution
has increased, and so has the inclusion of gender
perspectives in peacekeeping operations. More
countries, including Latvia, have developed national
action plans on women and peace and security, which
serve as a road map for ensuring that women’s needs and
priorities are integrated into all aspects of peacebuilding.
However, despite those achievements, much remains
to be done. Women continue to be underrepresented
in peace negotiations and in decision-making roles in
the security arena. In the past 25 years, women have
made up just 13 per cent of negotiators, 6 per cent of
mediators and 6 per cent of signatories in major peace
processes. At that rate, it may take close to 300 years
to achieve full gender equality, and meanwhile, women
and girls are disproportionately affected by conflict.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Sexual and gender-based violence remains pervasive in
conflict situations, and while women and girls are often
its primary victims, their voices are often silenced
or ignored.

Board of UN-Women, Latvia has worked diligently to
promote gender equality and plays an active role in
shaping and enforcing global standards and policies for
gender equality.

In the years to come, one of the main indicators
of the success of the women and peace and security
agenda will be the international response to the crimes
committed by the Russian Federation in Ukraine.
In resolution 1325 (2000) and the nine subsequent
resolutions adopted in the past two decades, the Security
Council recognized the effects of armed conflict on
women and girls and declared sexual violence a war
crime. The Council has called on the parties to conflicts
to respect international law and to take measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
and yet a member of this very Council, the Russian
Federation, has increasingly targeted women and girls
by using sexual violence as a tactic of war, as we have
seen in its war of aggression against Ukraine. It will
be critical to ensure effective prevention and protection
systems and practical and immediate assistance for
the victims, as well as to end impunity and ensure
accountability for those crimes. The Russian Federation
must and will be held accountable for the crimes it has
committed, including through a special tribunal for the
crime of aggression.

Since the very first days of Russia’s war against
Ukraine, Latvia has continued to allocate additional
funds for the physical and emotional rehabilitation of
victims of the war, especially women and girls, who
have suffered from sexual violence committed by
Russia’s soldiers, as documented by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine.

We regret the ongoing crackdown on women’s
rights in Afghanistan and Iran. We should not stand by
and watch as their fundamental rights are taken away.
The near-total erasure of women and girls — half of
the population — from public life in Afghanistan is not
just a staggering human rights violation but a setback
for the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda that will be felt for years to come.
We cannot stress enough the central role of women in
promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. Latvia
supports international efforts aimed at ensuring that
women and girls reclaim their space and can fully
contribute to the future of Afghanistan. Women and
girls should not be seen merely as victims of conflict
and instability. We must take concrete steps to ensure
that they have a seat at the table and that their voices
are heard and considered in decision-making processes
related to peace and security.
Gender equality and women’s empowerment are
long-standing priorities for Latvia in international
organizations and development cooperation. As a
current member of the United Nations Commission on
the Status of Women and its Bureau and the Executive

In conclusion, I urge all members to take action
to support the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions. Without the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women, peace
agreements are less likely to be reached and less likely
to be sustainable.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Sowa (Sierra Leone): My delegation
congratulates Mozambique on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March and
commends it for organizing this open debate on
the women and peace and security agenda, which
celebrates the momentous adoption, nearly 25 years
ago, of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related
resolutions. We all share a fundamental responsibility for
taking regular stock of the progress that has been made
in improving the conditions of women and reaffirming
our commitment to overcoming the considerable
challenges that remain in the full implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda.
In societies where inequality, poverty and
underdevelopment are prevalent, there is a tendency for
women, girls and other vulnerable groups to be treated
unfairly. Tension, chaos and conflicts are commonly
associated with those societies. The negative effects of
such conflicts on women, girls and children cannot be
overemphasized. More than 50 per cent of the current
global migrant population, refugees and asylum seekers
are women, girls and children from conflict-affected
societies. The global community therefore needs to
adopt a unified solution to address those issues in our
efforts to attain our shared goal of international peace
and security.
The Security Council’s landmark adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) made manifest the global

23-0682929/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

community’s recognition of the disproportionate
burden that women and girls bear during conflict
situations, as well as the vital role that they play in
conflict prevention, mitigation and resolution. We
need to strengthen the meaningful participation of
women and the leadership opportunities for them in
tackling the root causes and impacts of conflicts and
other emerging crises. Within global, continental and
regional organizations, we should encourage more
gender-sensitive conflict analysis so that we can better
comprehend the progress that has been made but also
the outstanding challenges to implementation.
My delegation recognizes the significant progress
that has been made so far on the women and peace and
security agenda. The recognition of women’s issues
in the higher echelons of global, continental, regional
and national institutions has increased exponentially
in recent years. For instance, in building on progress
that has been made, the Government of Sierra Leone
is currently focused on strengthening institutional and
service delivery mechanisms to properly coordinate
and effectively deliver on its policies and the promise
of a more secure world for all, particularly efforts to
empower women and transform their lives. That was
reinforced when our 2021 gender equality and women’s
empowerment bill was enacted into law on 15 November
2022. The law is an unprecedented win for the women
of Sierra Leone, as it represents the single-largest
increase in women’s political participation and access
to finance, employment opportunities and equal pay. It
also establishes a 30 per cent quota for the participation
of women in Government for both appointed and
elective positions.
Recognizing the gender-specific impacts of climate
change and insecurity on women, men, boys and girls,
as well as the importance of women’s full and equal
participation in peacebuilding processes, we believe
it is imperative that climate security assessments and
interventions mainstream gender considerations in
all phases.
My delegation appreciates Member States’
numerous political statements on sexual violence
perpetrated against women and girls in conflict
situations. However, those statements must be
translated into concrete action, including by ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators and reparation and
assistance to the victims of that dehumanizing scourge.
30/56

07/03/2023

In conclusion, women and peace and security
remains high on the global agenda. Significant progress
has been made through the concerted efforts of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies, continental
and regional organizations, national Governments
and civil-society organizations. Notwithstanding that
progress, women still encounter a myriad of targeted
violations. My delegation implores the Council to
reiterate its call on Member States to domesticate
resolution 1325 (2000), craft national action plans
and establish effective monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. It is our hope that our collective resolve
will be translated into concrete action for the continued
improvement of those mechanisms and the provision of
periodic reviews of their implementation, which in turn
will lead to the continued improvements in the status
of women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Owing to a technical failure of the recording and
back-up systems during the meeting, no recording
was made of part of the proceedings. Written
statements furnished by the delegations in question
are published as annexes to this document, by
speaking order in the Chamber.
Ms. Nassrullah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): [missing
sound; see Annex I]
Mrs. Beshkova (Bulgaria): [missing sound; see
Annex II]
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): [missing sound;
see Annex III]
IV]

Mr. Gertze (Namibia): [missing sound; see Annex

Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): [missing sound; see Annex V]
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): [missing sound; see
Annex VI]
Mr. Aydi̇ l (Türkiye): [missing sound; see Annex
VII]
… education and health services are concrete
examples of our efforts to that end ... [missing sound]
... services to offer dignified living conditions to more
than 4 million refugees in Türkiye ... [missing sound]
... centres, institutions for children in need of care,
23-06829

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

socioeconomic support within families, livelihood
opportunities and social cohesion programmes.
During our Group of 20 (G-20) presidency in
2015, we pioneered the establishment of the Women 20
platform in order to ensure that gender considerations
are mainstreamed into G-20 work. We are also proud to
have played a leading role in the establishment of the
Women’s Consultative Council of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) will present a valuable opportunity to take
stock of that agenda and discuss how we can further
strengthen and streamline it in all our peace and
security-related work for the next decade. Türkiye will
continue to contribute to advancing the women and
peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
Mozambique ... [missing sound; see Annex VIII]
Recording was restored.
Chile, like other
its experience.

countries,

is

eager

to

share

National action plans should respond to one of
the concerns raised for this debate by planning and
developing effective measures to protect women and
girls during armed conflict. At present we see that
protection measures are becoming less and less effective.
The increase in sexual violence in conflict, threats and
attacks on women human rights defenders — virtually
and in person — and the spread of misogynistic
discourse on social media are strongly correlated with
the sense of impunity enjoyed by perpetrators.
The Council must make a firm and renewed
commitment to preventing impunity and seeking
innovative measures to bring perpetrators to justice.
It is also imperative for the Council to ensure that
all peacekeeping operations have personnel trained
in addressing gender issues and in the prevention and
response to sexual and gender-based violence, which
will provide robust protection for women and girls and be
a first step towards their empowerment and meaningful
participation. To enhance that participation, the Council
and the Secretariat can promote three specific measures
already discussed in this regard — supporting the
economic and social empowerment of women affected

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

by armed conflict, institutionalizing the participation
of local and international women’s organizations in
political processes related to peace and security, and
promoting women’s leadership at all levels of the
multilateral system.
Finally, we would like to draw attention to the
emerging threats affecting the security of women
and girls. The trafficking and diversion of small arms
and light weapons has plunged Latin America into
a situation of violence that must be addressed and
prioritized by the Council. The national action plans
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) should
set 2025 as the deadline to respond to that situation,
which, like other traditional and emerging threats,
affects women and girls differently.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): Let me begin by
congratulating Mozambique for assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of March. I
would also like to thank Mozambique for organizing
this important open debate on women and peace and
security. And I also thank all the briefers.
The equal and meaningful participation of women
is a cornerstone of lasting peace and stability. Sex-based
discrimination and the disempowerment of women
disrupt social cohesion and deprive our communities of
the perspective, inputs and indispensable contributions
of half of our population.
Equal rights and the participation of women in
times of peace, as well as during conflict resolution
and post-conflict reconstruction efforts, are therefore
extremely critical. Within the security and human
rights framework of the African Union, we continue to
attach great value to resolution 1325 (2000), the first
Council resolution on women and peace and security.
The Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
also known as the Maputo Protocol, acknowledges and
makes reference to resolution 1325 (2000). Furthermore,
African human rights instruments, including on the
rights of women and children, emphasize the value and
protection needs of the family that are the foundation
of every society. Those commitments have been
incorporated into the post-conflict reconstruction and
development policy, as well as the gender policy of the
African Union.

23-0682931/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Most notably, the African Union’s Agenda 2063,
a road map for Africa’s socioeconomic and political
development, provides for the meaningful participation
and leadership of women towards silencing the guns,
enhancing good governance, ensuring democracy,
respect for human rights, justice and the rule of law,
and promoting a peaceful and secure Africa. The
African Union has also recognized the Network of
African Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation,
also known as FemWise-Africa, as part of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, and is the first
intergovernmental organization to appoint a Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security.
Apart from the overarching institutional and
normative frameworks I have mentioned, the African
Union issued the Continental Results Framework (CRF)
for monitoring and reporting on the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda in Africa.
The CRF for the period between 2018 and 2028 provides
for 41 targets, categorized under the four pillars of
prevention, protection, participation, and relief and
recovery. The CRF presupposes the extensive policy
and legal measures in place and the urgent need for
concrete actions of implementation.
It is against that backdrop that I will raise three
main points that Ethiopia believes deserve greater
emphasis if we are to realize our aspiration for the
equal and meaningful participation of women.
My first point has to do with women’s agency.
Economic empowerment and equal opportunity are
key in ensuring long-term equity and lasting peace.
The participation of women and addressing all the
encumbrances to their progress is a matter of rights and
thus critical. Poverty reduction and the empowerment
of women, including through concerted action against
harmful practices, are necessary steps in unlocking the
full potential of every community. Equal opportunity
for women to participate in all State institutions and the
private sector is also imperative.
While national efforts are the centrepiece to
achieving that objective, international cooperation
should also align with national priorities. In that
regard, we must take all measures necessary to prevent
hindrances, including unilateral coercive measures,
that curb the economic and employment opportunities
of women.
My second point relates to indigenous mechanisms.
Indigenous institutions and conflict resolution
32/56

07/03/2023

mechanisms led by women have proven effective
in transitioning communities out of conflicts. It is
imperative that States give more emphasis in their policy
formulation and allocation of human, institutional and
financial resources to engendering local initiatives and
women-led programmes.
My third point relates to the need to embrace
progressive realization. It is becoming a trend for
countries emerging from crises to designate a quota
for female representation in State machineries. In
our subregion alone, three of Ethiopia’s neighbours
have incorporated such quotas as part of their peace
processes. The implementation of those commitments
deserve the maximum support of the international
community. Furthermore, considering the difficulties
even the most stable democracies face in ensuring
a sufficient level of women’s representation, it is
necessary to adopt a constructive approach on the basis
of the progressive realization of such goals.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Ethiopia’s
commitment to ensuring the full and effective
participation and representation of women in peace
processes, including conflict prevention, resolution
and management and post-conflict reconstruction,
as provided under our national laws and the Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkmenistan.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): At the outset, let me
express our gratitude to Mozambique’s presidency of the
Security Council and personally thank Her Excellency
Ms. Verónica Nataniel Macamo Dlhovo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Mozambique, for
convening this open debate.
More than 22 years have passed since the Security
Council adopted its landmark resolution 1325 (2000)
on women and peace and security. And we can say
today that the agenda has proven its practical value.
For Turkmenistan, it has had significant implications
both at the regional and national levels. Regionally,
we are proud of the Central Asian Women Leaders’
Caucus, which was established in December 2020 with
the support of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia. That
platform reaffirms women’s important role in conflict
prevention and resolution, peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and humanitarian responses, and promotes their equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

maintenance and promotion of peace and security in
the region. It was a major landmark event when, in
November 2022, the Women Leaders’ Caucus stepped
into peacebuilding deliberations by taking part in a
dedicated session of the Peacebuilding Commission
and its preceding side event, both of which were held at
Headquarters in New York.
In my brief observations today, I would like to
focus on some of the potential opportunities that we
have within the United Nations system to further
advance our joint activities on the women and peace
and security agenda.
First, we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
has hidden potential to apply in this field, in particular
within the Commission’s gender strategy, with progress
tracked through its action plan. Let me remind the
Council that, in 2021, 54 per cent of the Commission’s
meetings were briefed by women peacebuilders. We
lost that focus in 2022. However, it is the right time
to return to that nexus and consider what we can
implement in practice.
Secondly, I see good opportunities for promoting
women’s participation in formulating the New Agenda
for Peace. As we are participating in the sixty-seventh
session of the Commission on the Status of Women
(CSW), it is of crucial importance to consolidate the
efforts of Member States in ensuring that the voice
of specialized structures such as UN-Women and the
CSW is heard at the stakeholders’ conference on the
New Agenda for Peace.
Thirdly, there is indeed untapped potential in
informal groups to push forward the women and peace
and security agenda. I would emphasize one of them,
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security,
which comprises more than 60 Member States.
We remain committed to the work of the Group in
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
through partnerships.
In conclusion, let me assure the Security Council
of Turkmenistan’s overall support in promoting
and increasing support for women’s role in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Ms. Jarbussynova (Kazakhstan): We commend
the presidency of Mozambique for convening this

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

ministerial open debate and thank all the briefers for
their in-depth and insightful remarks.
In October 2000, I was in this Chamber at a Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.4213), when resolution 1325
(2000) was adopted. At that time, I was the Permanent
Representative of Kazakhstan to the United Nations. I
would say that, since its adoption, much progress has
been made to achieve the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes, but we
still have a long way to go before we fully implement
the women and peace and security mandate. The
expectations of those who were in this Chamber in 2000
have not been realized. As noted in the most recent
annual report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2022/740), many regions of the
world are experiencing a reversal of generational gains
in women’s rights. Gender perspectives remain at the
margins of conflict prevention. In order to bridge the
gap between our commitments and actual action, we
believe that every Member State and region needs to
fully integrate a robust normative framework of the
women and peace and security agenda with its four
pillars — participation, protection, prevention and
relief and recovery — in their programmes and policies.
Since its independence, Kazakhstan has been
consistently working to ensure the highest standards
in framing gender policy. We have achieved significant
progress in addressing gender issues on several fronts.
We have reduced our gender inequality index by
60 per cent, introduced a 30 per cent quota for women
and youth in Parliament and local representative
bodies and increased the proportion of women
managers in State-owned corporations to the same
level — 30 per cent. In December 2021, our country
adopted its first national action plan for the period
from 2022 to 2025 on resolution 1325 (2000), which is
a whole-of-Government strategy developed in inclusive
consultations with relevant United Nations agencies
and civil society organizations.
Kazakhstan has been deploying women to several
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We expect
that the adoption of a national action plan will increase
their number, and not only improve gender-sensitive
trainings for the armed and security forces, which we
conduct, but attract more women in that respect. We
also believe that a national action plan will contribute
to expanding women’s engagement in decision-making
at all levels. We have strong and sustained political

23-0682933/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

will, all the necessary resources and a results-based
monitoring and evaluation plan to achieve those goals.

Friends of Women, Peace and Security, and I would like
to add the following remarks in my national capacity.

National efforts must be reinforced by commitments
at the regional level, with strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
In that context, Kazakhstan, with United Nations
support, has created the Act for Equal platform to
develop effective ways to fully realize the peacemaking
potential of women throughout Central Asia and
Afghanistan. We have also contributed financially to
the joint United Nations-European Union Spotlight
Initiative, a regional programme for Central Asia and
Afghanistan, and joined the multi-stakeholder Compact
on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, launched at the Generation Equality Forum in
July 2021.

Since the moment of Israel’s establishment,
female leadership and participation has been a
championed value. Gender equality is enshrined in
Israel’s Declaration of Independence, and we are
proud and fortunate to have a legacy of strong female
leaders. The State of Israel was one of the first United
Nations Member States to incorporate the principles of
resolution 1325 (2000) into its law with the adoption, in
1951, of the Women’s Equal Rights Law of Israel. Work
is currently under way for the implementation of the
national action plan for gender equality, led by Israel’s
Authority for the Advancement of the Status of Women.
Moreover, our Ministry for Foreign Affairs appointed a
special envoy in order to ensure the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on a global scale.

At the regional level, our country is focusing
on Afghanistan with a multidimensional approach
to conflict prevention and resolution, recovery,
reintegration and humanitarian assistance. During the
turmoil in Kabul, my Government issued visas and
provided safe passage through our territory for 99
Afghan women judges and their families.
It is evident that lack of access to a quality and
inclusive education, especially in rural areas, remains
the main obstacle to achieving women’s empowerment.
Therefore, my country, together with the European
Union and United Nations Development Programme,
is implementing the second phase of its programme to
educate Afghan young people — including girls — in its
universities. We encourage donor countries to allocate
a greater number of scholarships for women and girls
from conflict-affected countries. Kazakhstan was
also among the first countries to carry out the Zhusan
and Rusafa humanitarian operations to repatriate,
rehabilitate and reintegrate its citizens, mainly women
and children, who had fled to Syria and Iraq. That
serves as a good model for other countries, and we are
ready to share our experiences and lessons learned with
the international community. Kazakhstan will continue
to support the women and peace and security agenda
and the multilateral efforts aimed at achieving gender
equality, peaceful societies and inclusive governance.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Mimran Rosenberg (Israel): Israel aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf the Group of
34/56

Recalling the efforts to streamline the gender
perspective into peacekeeping operations, in line
with the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
agenda, we echo our call for the development of a new
mental health strategy, which should be formed with a
gender perspective in order to increase support for all
peacekeepers, regardless of their gender.
The involvement of women in conflict resolution and
resilience-building is crucial, and in order to guarantee
their involvement in those processes, the first step must
be to empower them. Israel’s Golda Meir Mount Carmel
International Training Centre aims to promote gender
equality globally. It has carried out hundreds of training
activities for more than 30,000 women and men across
the globe, providing them with tools for women’s
empowerment and development. In the past decade, for
example, MASHAV — Israel’s agency for international
development — has supported the establishment of
the Africa Centre for Transformative and Inclusive
Leadership in Kenya, which aims to enhance women’s
leadership and economic independence across
the continent.
While empowering women is critical to ensuring
female involvement, there are still places in which
women continue to fight for their most basic human
rights, such as Iran, where women have been brutally
suppressed, and in Afghanistan, where the Taliban have
cruelly prohibited women from accessing education or
employment. It is our duty to stand united against such
crimes, which violate the basic principles of human
rights, as well as the Charter of the United Nations.
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Investing in women’s full participation is critical
to preventing violence and promoting peace. Anyone
who wishes a harmonious future for humankind must
protect women’s freedom and seek to ensure gender
inclusion. A peaceful and prosperous future is possible
only if everyone is involved. Do not underestimate the
power of believing in women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Mozambique for organizing today’s open debate. I also
thank the briefers for their informative briefings.
Armed
conflicts
have
devastating
and
disproportionate effects on women and girls, who are
often the primary victims of violence, displacement
and human rights abuses. They also face economic
hardships, limited access to health care and education,
and increased vulnerability and marginalization. To
prevent and defuse violent conflicts, we must address
their underlying causes, such as terrorism, violent
extremism, and foreign occupation and interference.
Similarly, women’s involvement in conflict prevention
and resolution is crucial, as they bring unique
perspectives and experiences. Women should also be
at the forefront of development, peace and security.
Therefore, the international community should use
diplomacy and dialogue to find political solutions to
conflicts in hotspots and engage women in all stages of
the peace process. In that regard, the Security Council
has recognized the need to protect women in conflict
situations and to empower them in conflict prevention
and resolution.

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

conflicts, it is important to recognize that those issues
are the responsibility of other United Nations bodies,
such as the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. The Security Council should address
such issues that directly affect international peace
and security, in addition to collaborating with other
United Nations bodies to ensure that women’s issues
are effectively addressed. My delegation categorically
rejects the unjustified references made by certain
Member States about Iran during today’s open debate.
Iranian women are active in various fields, including
science, education and politics, and play a crucial
role in society. Despite facing challenges such as the
inhumane unilateral sanctions imposed by the United
States, Iran remains committed to promoting women’s
rights and has made significant progress in empowering
women. As a responsible Member State, Iran recognizes
that there is always room for improvement in terms of
protecting and promoting women’s human rights. We
continue to work to empower Iranian women and girls
and to ensure that their rights are upheld, while actively
taking into account the concerns voiced by our women
and girls. That is one of our top priorities, and we will
endeavour to make progress in that regard.

In our volatile region, women’s empowerment
and development are crucial, despite the region’s
instability. Women and girls in Afghanistan have been
severely affected by recent bans and restrictions, and it
is essential that the de facto authorities in the country
honour their obligations to ensure women’s access to
education, work and political participation. In Palestine,
foreign occupation is the most significant threat to the
security of Palestinian women and girls, particularly
in Gaza, where they are the main victims of a longstanding blockade and bombings by the Israeli regime.
The Council should compel the Israeli regime to end its
occupation of Palestine, lift the inhumane blockade of
Gaza and stop its crimes against women and girls.

Against that backdrop, we must address the double
standards and political hypocrisy of a number of States,
which selectively apply international law and human
rights to advance their political interests. They often
use United Nations platforms to push their agendas,
while remaining silent on the human rights violations
and atrocities committed against Palestinian women
and girls by the Israeli regime. It is concerning that
those States shamelessly support the Israeli regime’s
apartheid policies as self-defence, while disregarding
the suffering and oppression of Palestinian women.
Such political approaches can erode the credibility of
the United Nations. Finally, it is ironic that the Israeli
apartheid regime is attending such an important
meeting as this one and speaking about women’s rights,
while Palestinian women and girls continue to suffer as
a result of its decades-long occupation and its colonial
apartheid policies and practices in occupied Palestine.
The representative of the Israeli regime should have
spoken about the countless Palestinian women and girls
who have been victims of its atrocities in Gaza and
other parts of occupied Palestine.

While women’s issues are discussed in the context
of peace and security when they are related to armed

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.

23-0682935/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Mr. Gunaratna (Sri Lanka): Permit me to extend
my best wishes to the Republic of Mozambique on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March. I also extend my appreciation for
the convening of this open debate on the theme “Women
and peace and security: towards the twenty-fifth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000)”, which coincides
with the sixty-seventh session of the Commission on
the Status of Women.
Although significant strides have been made in
executing the women and peace and security agenda
over the past 23 years, a gap remains with regard to the
core commitments of the resolution. Today the direct
participation and representation of women in formal
peace processes continues to be the one area that lags
behind in the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda. Between 1992 and 2019, women
served as only 6 per cent of mediators, 6 per cent of
signatories and 13 per cent of negotiators globally. The
outbreak of the coronavirus disease shed even greater
light on the full extent of gender inequality. Concerns
have therefore been raised with respect to how far the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
peace processes and decision-making has progressed,
and what actions States should already have taken and
should take in the future to achieve gender parity in
that important activity. As noted in last year’s annual
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2022/740), the world is currently
experiencing a reversal of the generational gains
in women’s rights, while violent conflicts, military
expenditures, military coups, displacements and
hunger continue to increase. Therefore, empowering
women leaders to participate in peace processes and
peacebuilding becomes increasingly crucial in order to
accelerate the commitments of resolution 1325 (2000).
The Sri Lankan Government has achieved
substantial progress towards establishing gender
equality and security by adopting and developing
critical policies, such as its national policy for women,
which is a general policy framework, and a national plan
of action to address sexual and gender-based violence in
Sri Lanka. It has also made available legal protections
to protect women from all types of discrimination.
Sri Lanka’s constitutional guarantees assure the
principles of gender equality and non-discrimination as
a fundamental right. There has also been a conscious
effort to strengthen and reform legislation that
directly enhances women’s empowerment and rights
36/56

07/03/2023

in recognition of those constitutional guarantees. As
it continues to engage in post-conflict nation-building
with a view to empowering women leaders and
enhancing women’s participation in decision-making
processes, Sri Lanka introduced a 25 per cent quota
for women candidates at the parliamentary, provincial
and local government levels. Women were given the
opportunity to run for office in the local government
elections held after 2017, and the necessary measures
are currently being taken to increase the representation
of women in the provincial councils and Parliament.
Sri Lanka also has been an active participant in
United Nations peacekeeping operations for many
decades and is a member of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations. To promote the role of
women in conflict prevention, Sri Lanka has increased
the proportion of female contingents in its United
Nations peacekeeping deployments.
In conclusion, as we meet at the mid-point between
the twentieth and twenty-fifth anniversaries of
resolution 1325 (2000) today, it is incumbent upon all
stakeholders to take stock of the commitments made at
its twentieth anniversary by identifying the gaps and
addressing those issues in a meaningful way so as to
achieve its envisioned outcomes. Sri Lanka encourages
all parties concerned to actively engage and synergize
efforts at all levels for the mobilization of resources and
the leveraging of partnerships towards the realization
of that objective as a priority.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Vichankaiyakij (Thailand): Thailand aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Indonesia on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.
At the outset, Thailand wishes to express its
appreciation to Mozambique for convening this
important open debate on the women and peace and
security agenda.
Thailand reaffirms the vital role of women
as active agents for transformative change in our
efforts to achieve peace and security and sustainable
development. The year 2025 will mark the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, which has provided the
bedrock for women’s protection and empowerment in
the realm of peace and security. For its part, Thailand
is fully committed to that very important agenda and
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

continues to look for ways to strengthen the obligations
set forth under the resolution. In that light, Thailand
wishes to highlight the following four points.
First, as women are a key pillar of every
society, it is crucial to promote their leadership and
meaningful participation in peace processes and in
decision-making at all levels. For Thailand, our national
measures and guidelines on women and peace and
security set out a clear framework for a coordinated,
whole-of-Government approach, in partnership with
the international community. In collaboration with
UN-Women, we are developing new measures and
guidelines for the next cycle and seeking to strengthen
the role of women in addressing conflict and political
and social unrest.
Secondly, Thailand supports the Uniformed
Gender Parity Strategy to increase the representation of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations in a
sustainable manner. We also support the incorporation
of gender perspectives in all United Nations peace
and security efforts. The number of Thai women
officers in United Nations peacekeeping operations
has continued to increase as a result of Thailand’s
efforts to empower and equip them with the skills
required for their active participation. Currently,
Thailand deploys 18 women military personnel
and six women police personnel in United Nations
peacekeeping operations — approximately 8 per cent
of our troop contribution, the highest proportion of
Thai women personnel to date. Our experience in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan, and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan shows that women peacekeepers can help to
build trust, provide gender-sensitive responses and
address the vulnerabilities faced by women and girls in
host communities.
Thirdly, capacity-building and adequate funding
remain critical factors for promoting the women and
peace and security agenda. It is imperative that capacitybuilding be relevant to the context and situation of each
conflict area. It is also crucial to promote cooperation
with various stakeholders, including civil society, local
communities and the private sector.
Fourthly, Thailand believes that regional
perspectives and engagement are of particular
importance for the successful implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). The ideas and concerns of

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

women in different regions, from leaders to those at the
grass-roots level, must be taken into account.
In conclusion, Thailand reaffirms its commitment
to the full implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, as it is our conviction that a society
can enjoy enduring peace, stability and sustainable
development only through the realization of diversity,
equality and inclusion.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Through resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
recognized for the first time the central role that
women must play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. Since then, the world has become more
aware of both the plight and the positive contribution of
women in conflict situations, and as a result why their
meaningful participation in prevention, peacebuilding
and peacekeeping processes is necessary. However,
significant gaps remain. We have faced many challenges
in implementing the four pillars of resolution 1325
(2000) over the past 20 years. Women are often excluded
from negotiating tables and decision-making processes
in the area of peace and security. Similarly, conflictrelated violence continues to affect women, despite
our commitment to preventing such violence. Finally,
gender perspectives often continue to be ignored in
the development and implementation of post-conflict
recovery measures.
The most glaring problem in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) has been the large gap between
the ambitions set out in the resolution and the results
achieved to date. Regrettably, women remain largely
underrepresented in the peace and security sphere, and
stereotypes about women in that field persist. Women
continue to be perceived as passive victims of conflict,
rather than as drivers of change. In fact, recent studies
show that women’s participation in peace agreements
makes them 64 per cent less likely to fail. As a result
of women’s underrepresentation, the vast majority of
peace agreements adopted over the past three decades
have not addressed their concerns and therefore have
not reflected the interests of society as a whole.
As an international community, we must anchor
our vision of security to the inclusion of women in all
our activities. It is women who serve as mediators of
disputes at the community level, who hold families
together in times of conflict, who manage resources

23-0682937/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

when they are scarce and, in many cases, who defend
and protect their communities. Given the impact of
conflict on women’s lives, it is essential that those who
have the power to influence the composition of the
negotiating table ensure that women have a seat and
equal and substantive participation.
Let us not forget that there are also a growing
number of armed groups for whom gender inequality
is a strategic objective and misogyny a part of their
core ideology.
One of the keys to the successful implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda is action
by States at the domestic level. One of the specific
ways in which States have been encouraged to show
their commitment to the resolutions on women and
peace and security is through the development of
national action plans. That is why, in September 2022,
Argentina approved its second national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
This second plan was adapted to the new realities and
existing needs both externally and internally through
an intersectional approach to violence and cross-cutting
security. It is also sensitive to gender and such other
identity categories as race, class and sexual orientation,
as well as to the particularities of local, regional and
international environments. It highlights the situation
of rural, Afro-descendent, indigenous, migrant,
displaced populations as well as diverse women.
This second plan also introduces specific actions on
preventive diplomacy and mediation, cybersecurity and
climate change.
For our country, the implementation of the set of
Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security is not only of the utmost importance in our
foreign policy, but it is also part of the commitments
assumed through various international instruments
for the protection of women’s human rights, several of
which have constitutional status in my country.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that, as Argentina
is a country in a region of the global South where
armed conflicts are not widespread, the strengthening
of regional policies on women, peace and security
with a preventive approach is one of the most valuable
contributions that our country makes to the women and
peace and security agenda, as it aims to prevent social
conflicts that could lead to outbreaks or other forms of
violence that could potentially destabilize the region.
38/56

07/03/2023

The women and peace and security agenda should
be one of the priorities, not only of this Security
Council, but of the United Nations as a whole. Women
are agents of change and pillars of the community.
Argentina remains committed to this vision and
understands that the women and peace and security
agenda is a key element in efforts to build international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Ahangari (Azerbaijan): We would like to thank
you, Madam President, and your country, Mozambique,
for convening today’s open debate on this very important
topic. It provides a welcome opportunity to review the
implementation of commitments under resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent Security Council resolutions.
Although international law and standards have
significantly developed over the years, women
and children account for the vast majority of those
adversely affected by armed conflict and hate-driven
violence. Non-compliance by States with their
international obligations and the lack of accountability
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law continue to remain a serious challenge.
While maintaining a consistent focus on advancing the
women and peace and security agenda, it is important
that the Council persistently reiterates its demand for
strict compliance with international obligations and the
end of impunity for serious violations.
Women and girls in Azerbaijan have seriously
suffered from the devastating effects of the Armenian
aggression over the past three decades. The occupied
territories of our country were ethnically cleansed of
their population of more than 700,000, half of whom
were women. The war claimed the lives of thousands
of women and girls. Last month marked the thirty-first
anniversary of the genocide committed in the town of
Khojaly, where hundreds of civilians, including 106
women, were brutally killed within a very few hours by
the invading Armenian forces.
The tragic consequences of the occupation also
include almost 4,000 missing citizens of Azerbaijan,
among whom are 267 women. It was established that
98 of those women were taken as hostages. Although
they were seen alive at the moment of captivity,
their whereabouts are still unknown. We continue
to raise awareness on this issue, including through
annual resolutions of the General Assembly and the
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

Commission on the Status of Women on the topics of
missing persons and women and children taken hostage
in armed conflict.
The perpetrators of brutal crimes committed
against Azerbaijani women continue to enjoy impunity.
To date, Armenia has taken no steps to bring the
perpetrators to justice or to investigate and prosecute
the numerous horrific offences for which its military
is responsible.
Even after the end of the conflict, 276 civilians of
Azerbaijan, among them one woman, were killed or
wounded by mine explosions in the liberated territories.
Massive landmine contamination and continued
refusal by Armenia to provide accurate and complete
information about the minefields in these territories are
among the major impediments to the ongoing recovery
and reconstruction efforts and the safe return of the
internally displaced persons.
With the end of the conflict, it is high time for
Armenia to honour its international obligations, take
practical steps to shed light on the dark pages of its
aggression against Azerbaijan and cooperate in good
faith to eliminate its harsh consequences, so that we
can build a better future for our peoples and the region
as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): First, allow me
to thank you, Madam President, for organizing today’s
very important debate on the eve of International
Women’s Day.
My statement complements that of the European
Union, to which we fully subscribe.
Almost 23 years have elapsed since the unanimous
adoption by Security Council of resolution 1325 (2000).
This was a historic moment, as it was the first time
the Security Council recognized the role of women in
peace and security. As we come closer to the twentyfifth anniversary of the resolution, it is imperative
to take stock of what we have achieved so far, but
mostly to consider where we need to be by 2025 for the
resolution’s full implementation.
Despite positive steps and progress taken since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we are sliding back.
It is undeniable that women and girls continue to be
dramatically affected by armed conflicts; their rights are

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

violated, and they are excluded from decision-making
processes related to peace and security. Furthermore,
we are witnessing the rise of conflict-related violence
around the world. Women and girls continue to be
exposed to sexual and gender-based violence — online
and offline — while these acts of violence remain in
many cases unpunished. In this regard, we need to step
up our efforts as States. Sexual violence in conflicts
cannot be addressed in isolation, nor can it be separated
from the status of women and the deeply rooted
inequalities afflicting them. Perpetrators of these acts
should be held accountable, and justice must prevail.
It is widely recognized that women have an
indispensable role to play in the women and peace and
security agenda, especially in prevention and conflict
resolution. Still, we are experiencing a gap between
the adoption and the full implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda. The gloomy reality is
that women are still excluded from peace processes and
negotiating tables, which is detrimental to the efforts
to achieve lasting peace and prosperous societies.
Without the full, meaningful and equal participation of
women in decision-making structures and negotiation
processes, there is a risk that this objective will
remain unaccomplished. In that regard, more actions
are needed at the national, regional and international
levels for gender mainstreaming and the inclusion of
gender issues in the global agenda.
Cyprus welcomes all 105 national action plans
that have been adopted in relation to resolution 1325
(2000). Cyprus is one of those Member States, as we
adopted our first national action plan in 2020. The
action plan to be implemented for the period 2021
to 2025 consists of four pillars — first, women’s
participation and empowerment; secondly, protection;
thirdly, prevention and, fourthly, advocacy. Cyprus is
determined to intensify efforts to eliminate all forms
of discrimination against women and provide equal
access to opportunities, including in the peace and
security agenda.
As we move towards the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we have
many challenges to overcome. It is our collective
responsibility to amplify our efforts in achieving the
full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
adopt gender-sensitive approaches to create a more
peaceful and prosperous world for all. Now is the time
to translate our commitment to action.

23-0682939/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. González (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It
is a pleasure to see you, Madam President, presiding
over today’s meeting. First, my country would like to
congratulate you and Mozambique on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council this month. We would
also like to commend you for convening today’s open
debate. Members and non-members of the Council
have the opportunity to share their views on the very
important subject of women and peace and security
agenda on its twenty-fifth anniversary.
We align ourselves with the statement made on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
First, we would like to make some general remarks
and then a few comments in our national capacity.
It has been a difficult learning path over the past
25 years as we sought to implement the four pillars of
resolution 1325 (2000). We believe that we have made
considerable progress but much remains to be done,
both internationally and nationally. With regard to the
current situation, in the post-pandemic environment,
my country is concerned about the plight of women
and girls and the situation caused by the resurgence of
armed conflicts.
Uruguay is committed to continuing its
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). That is why
we have been promoting policies to facilitate women’s
access to the armed forces and law enforcement
and encourage their participation in peacekeeping
operations. Overall, we understand the crucial role
of women in the entire process of preventing and
resolving conflict. In that regard, in July 2022, we
adopted our first national action plan on women and
peace and security. After its approval, Uruguay once
again committed to meeting international standards on
gender equality in the area of peace and security and
non-discrimination.
The plan is an exercise in systematizing policies
and programmes related to the women and peace and
security agenda. Over the years, Uruguay has made
strides in areas such as the fight against genderbased violence and trafficking in persons and the
protection of civilians in situations of conflict and
cybersecurity contexts.
40/56

07/03/2023

At the same time, our plan opens doors to new
commitments, such as removing the structural barriers
that prevent an increasing number of women from
participating, without discrimination, in peacekeeping
operations. One of the most important contributions we
hope to make with our plan is to generate understanding
and acceptance of the fact that the women and peace
and security agenda can be applied above and beyond
conflict and post-conflict situations. It can also be
applied to strengthening the sustainability of peaceful,
just and inclusive societies.
We intend to promote and consolidate that concept
nationally to overcome major challenges, with the
support of our partners, such as the various United
Nations agencies, UN-Women and other relevant actors.
I would also like to mention that, in the context of the
Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations, Uruguay
now has reports on the Measuring Opportunities
for Women in Peace Operations Methodology at the
Ministry of National Defence and the Ministry of the
Interior, which has led to training for further work on
measuring opportunities. Those reports have identified
barriers to women’s deployment in peacekeeping
operations and issued recommendations so that each
institution can adopt the necessary policies to improve
the participation of women.
I would like to mention that we can continue working
to that end as these debates allow for discussion with
those dealing with armed conflicts on the ground and
for those of us who wish to participate and cooperate
in efforts to prevent conflicts. In that regard, members
can count on my country to continue working to that
end. We request the Security Council not only to
continue these open debates, but also to make a greater
commitment, according to the rules, to improving the
participation of women in peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s timely debate on women and peace
and security. I also thank the briefers for their briefings.
My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Although El Salvador recognizes the progress
that has been made in implementing the agenda, it
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

is important to acknowledge the long road ahead in
overcoming the barriers that prevent us from fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000). Against that
backdrop, El Salvador calls on stakeholders to address
the urgent challenges to the full implementation of all
resolutions related to the women and peace and security
agenda, which should lead to renewed commitments
and action at the national and international levels.

for organizing today’s important debate. I also thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings earlier today.

Firmly committed to moving the agenda forward,
El Salvador has implemented its women and peace
and security national action plan for the period 2022
to 2024. It is a tool that guides the implementation of
the agenda at the national level, including resource
allocation and strategic planning, to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in
peacebuilding efforts.

According to the Secretary-General’s report on
women and peace and security (S/2022/740), women
human rights defenders have increasingly been targeted
with attacks that silence their voices and prevent
them from participating in public life. In my country,
Myanmar, following the illegal coup d’état attempt in
February 2021, the military has killed many women
protesters, including women human rights defenders.
Thousands of women activists have been arbitrarily
arrested, and several cases of abuse and ill treatment
during detention have been reported.

With regard to international efforts, El Salvador
recognizes the important role and contributions of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations. As a
troop- and police-contributing country, we believe that
we must urgently identify and address the challenges
that prevent the full and meaningful participation of
women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
Furthermore, we underscore the need for adequate,
predictable and regular financing of peacekeeping
activities. El Salvador therefore recognizes and
highlights the Peacebuilding Fund, which is a
reference point for other United Nations joint financing
mechanisms. In my country, through the promotion
of gender issues initiative, the Fund will support, for
example, an increase in women’s participation and
presence in areas related to transitional justice, thereby
building the capacity of those who participate in civil
society organizations and women’s networks and of
leaders of territories that have been prioritized.

As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it is critical
and timely that we reflect upon the women and peace
and security nexus. The fabric of our society continues
to face threats from violent conflicts, military coups
d’état, forced displacement and climate crises.

Yesterday at the side event of the sixty-seventh
session of the Commission on the Status of Woman,
entitled “Using Technologies to Promote Gender
Equality, and the empowerment and participation
of women and girls in Myanmar”, the brave women
human rights defenders of Myanmar informed the
international community of the alarming human rights
situation of women and girls in Myanmar. In addition
to atrocities against women and girls, including mass
killings, rape, sexual violence and arbitrary arrests,
the junta’s forces conduct seizures of, and surprise
checks on, citizens’ mobiles on the streets and at their
homes. Women human rights defenders are facing huge
risks. The security forces have even arrested people for
having a Facebook post that was critical of the illegal
coup d’état attempt.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.

People in Myanmar are living with fear every day.
People reject the military rule. They know how their
basic human rights are being exploited under military
rule. The people of Myanmar have called for the
international community to take decisive action to save
lives. Thus far, the honest opinion of the people has not
been met with any effective action. As such, the people
have no choice but to take up arms to defend themselves
and their communities in order to restore democracy
and protect their freedom and basic human rights.

Mr. Tun (Myanmar): I wish to congratulate
Mozambique on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I thank you, Madam President,

Women and girls are at the forefront of the people’s
resistance to the military junta. They play various
important roles. One role that I wish to point out is

Lastly, we hope that today’s open debate, held on
the eve of International Women’s Day, will lead to
concrete action that enables us to make progress on the
women and peace and security agenda. Indeed, lasting
peace will be attainable only if we women take part in
negotiations and peacebuilding, as we aspire to do.

23-0682941/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

that women human rights defenders record the military
junta’s atrocities and disseminate them to the relevant
international organizations by using digital devices.
We are committed to creating a peaceful place
for everyone, including women and girls. While the
military desperately targeted civil society to diminish
the voices of women, the National Unity Government
of Myanmar, in line with the Federal Democracy
Charter, took a people-centred approach to advance the
women and peace and security agenda through civic
actors. Therefore, it is imperative to recall that the
international community should not be deceived by the
military junta’s unfounded promises. It is committing
international crimes, creating violence, burning
houses and villages, engaging in arbitrary arrests and
killing people.
The aspirations and determination of the people in
Myanmar are crystal clear. Our resistance will continue
until the end of the military dictatorship, the restoration
of democracy and the building of a federal democratic
union. In that regard, I appeal to the Council to use
all tools as its disposal to take decisive action to meet
the Myanmar people’s aspirations. In doing so, it will
create a civic space that is conducive to the meaningful
participation and contribution of women in the peace
and security sectors of Myanmar.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mrs. Nabeta (Uganda): Uganda congratulates the
Republic of Mozambique on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. We
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
meeting on the eve of International Women’s Day. We
also thank the briefers for briefing us on progress. I
assure members of Uganda’s full support.
Women, peace and security and development are
inextricably linked. Uganda remains committed to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, as enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions. The Government of Uganda
launched its third national action plan on women and
peace and security in March 2021, for the period 2021 to
2025. Uganda’s third action plan is one of the first in the
world to address women and peace and security issues
related to climate change and outbreaks of diseases and
pandemics, such as Ebola and the coronavirus disease.
42/56

07/03/2023

The overall goal of the plan is to promote sustained
peace and security through the enhanced meaningful
participation of women in peace and development
processes. The plan has four outcome areas, namely,
preventing all forms of violence, promoting the
meaningful participation of women in leadership and
governance at all levels, strengthening the capacity
of women to mitigate and prevent natural and humanmade disasters and strengthening the institutional and
coordination mechanisms of the women and peace and
security agenda at all levels.
Uganda has made significant strides not only in
supporting the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda, but also in promoting women’s full
participation in governance, stability and development.
The number of women in the Cabinet increased from 28
in 2016 to 35 in 2021, including by filling the positions
of Vice-President, Prime Minister and two Deputy
Prime Ministers out of three.
Critical ministries, such as education, health and
energy and lands, are led by women. Women are also
well represented in the judiciary, business, academia and
the diplomatic service. That has put Ugandan women at
the centre of ensuring peace and security, as well as
tangibly contributing to policy development, planning
and the implementation of development processes.
During the two decades of war waged by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) in northern Uganda, women
at the grass-roots level in the local areas of Acholi,
Lango and Teso risked their lives and worked hard to
convince the mothers and wives of LRA combatants to
persuade their sons and husbands to end the insurgency.
Subsequently, through the Uganda Women’s Peace
Coalition, women played a central role in the peace
process, which ended two decades of a brutal war. Their
contribution to post-conflict transformation, through
the Women’s Task Force for a Gender Responsive
Peace, Recovery and Development Plan for Northern
Uganda, was crucial in rebuilding normalcy, ensuring
peace and promoting development.
Uganda is party to a number of regional and
international instruments relevant to the women and
peace and security agenda, including the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, the African Union’s Solemn Declaration on
Gender Equality in Africa, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region’s Pact on Security, Stability
23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

and Development in the Great Lakes Region and the
Protocol on the Prevention and Suppression of Sexual
Violence against Women and Children, among others.
The displacement of people due to armed conflict,
terrorism and food insecurity, among other things,
disrupts lives and livelihoods. Uganda is currently
hosting 1.5 million refugees, the majority of whom are
women and children from neighbouring countries. The
specific protection needs for women in such displacement
situations will require strengthened support from the
international community. Uganda maintains a generous
open-door policy towards refugees and asylum seekers,
making it the largest refugee-hosting country in Africa
and among the top three hosting countries in the world.
Furthermore, working in partnership with State and
non-State actors, the Government has put in place a
number of measures to ensure that gender provisions
in peace agreements are addressed at the national,
regional and international levels.
In conclusion, we wish to make the following
recommendations. There is a need to mainstream gender
in early-warning systems, peacebuilding and conflictresolution processes and recovery and reconstruction
programmes including disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration. Secondly, there is a
need to implement interventions that enhance women’s
economic empowerment as a means to increase their
bargaining power in domestic settings and promote
self-reliance as a way of promoting peace in the home.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I express my
appreciation to you, Madam President, for presiding
over today’s debate until this late hour. I also thank
the presidency of Mozambique for organizing this
ministerial open debate on women and peace and
security. I thank the briefers for their comprehensive
briefings earlier today.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
As we approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we recall the contribution of the
delegation of Bangladesh to that groundbreaking agenda
as a non-permanent member of the Council in 2000. As
the President of the Council in March 2000, Bangladesh

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

led a presidential statement (S/PRST/2000/10), which
was the precursor to that historic resolution.
Our commitment to that agenda stemmed from the
spirit of our liberation war in 1971. It was not just the
victimhood of more than 200,000 women in the world
that makes that resolution relevant for us. Over the
years, the women of Bangladesh have taken the role of
protector, be it in complex theatres of peacekeeping in
the remotest parts of the world or at home, participating
in disaster management, relief and recovery efforts,
providing support to the forcibly displaced Rohingyas
sheltered in Bangladesh or taking part in prevention
efforts against violent extremism. Women in
Bangladesh truly represent what the resolution aimed
to achieve in 2000.
In the past 22 years, several resolutions have been
adopted to buttress the process initiated in resolution
1325 (2000), which is a manifestation of the strong
political commitment of the international community
to the women and peace and security agenda. However,
despite all efforts, the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) remains uneven, with multifaceted challenges.
Women continue to bear the brunt of conflict, which
they have no role in starting. Their participation in
peace processes is far from equal. In most cases, they
also remain deprived of the dividends.
Against that backdrop, allow me to highlight a
few points.
First, despite adopting 10 resolutions on women
and peace and security and incorporating related
language in many Security Council resolutions in
the past five years, the implementation of the agenda
remains unsatisfactory. We emphasize the importance
of more systematic follow-up on the provisions of the
women and peace and security agenda in Council
resolutions, including through close coordination with
the Peacebuilding Commission and UN-Women. We
also take interest in the ongoing process of developing
the New Agenda for Peace, in which the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized putting women and girls at the
centre of the security policy.
Secondly, ensuring gender-responsive peacekeeping
is essential in enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. We encourage the further strengthening of
women’s participation in peacekeeping operations, in
quantitative and qualitative aspects alike, through the
full incorporation of the women and peace and security
agenda in the mandates of peacekeeping operations.

23-0682943/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Thirdly, one of the most important tools for
implementing the women and peace and security agenda
is the development and implementation of national
action plans. It is encouraging that 103 countries
have formulated such plans. More efforts are needed
to support countries in developing and implementing
national action plans, as well as regional action plans,
where applicable. Moreover, we underscore the need to
extend financial support to national Governments for
the implementation of national action plans.
Fourthly, increased efforts are needed to harness the
potential of the women and peace and security agenda
in various prevention and protection measures. In that
regard, investing in women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation; preventing violent extremism; addressing
the adverse impacts of climate change; disaster risk
reduction, as well as in humanitarian emergencies, is
critical. Bangladesh has made significant progress in
that regard. Our Ministry of Disaster Management
and Relief received the United Nations Public Service
Award 2021 for ensuring gender equality in disaster
preparedness. We are ready to share our experiences
and best practices with other countries.
Finally, we call for redoubled political commitment
at the global and national levels to realize the objectives
of resolution 1325 (2000). I thank you, Madam President,
and congratulate you and all women and girls of the
world on the eve of a happy International Women’s Day.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Holy See.
Monseigneur Quirighetti: As we approach the
twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), it
is both timely and appropriate that we reassess how
to best address the unique needs of women in conflict
and their important role in conflict prevention and
resolution. Over the past few years, violence, including
sexual violence, against women and girls has increased,
while women’s representation in peace processes has
declined, demonstrating that the current approach is
falling short.
As Pope Francis noted in his January address to
the diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, when

44/56

07/03/2023

human rights are fully recognized for all, women can
offer their unique contribution to the life of society and
be the first allies of peace. Despite that, he observed
that in many countries women are considered secondclass citizens, facing violence, abuse and limited access
to education, employment, health care and other basic
necessities. The Holy See condemns such treatment and
deplores the situation faced by many women and girls
who are systematically denied the benefit of education.
During his recent Apostolic Journey to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan,
Pope Francis highlighted the potential of women to
transform violent societies into peaceful ones, in which
they are protected, respected, valued and honoured.
To unlock that potential, the Council must ensure
that women, especially mothers, who know how life
is generated and safeguarded, receive opportunities
to participate more fully in peace processes and in all
facets of political life and decision-making processes.
The women and peace and security agenda cannot
be successfully implemented unless the primary
drivers that contribute to the worsening circumstances
of women and girls are addressed. Those include not
only conflict, such as the war in Ukraine and the oftenforgotten conflicts in Africa and the Middle East,
but also extremism and the diversion of ever more
resources towards arms expenditures, including for
nuclear weapons, whose effects have a disproportionate
impact on women and girls.
In conclusion, allow me to return to the words of
Pope Francis, who recognizes that the tender love of
mothers, who give life to the world, and the presence of
women are the true alternative to the baneful logic of
power that leads to war.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I wish to thank all participants
for attending today’s meeting and for their support to
Mozambique’s presidency of the Security Council. I
thank all participants for their important contributions.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Annex I
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to congratulate the Republic of Mozambique for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March and to wish
its delegation all success. I should also like to thank the Republic of Malta for having
successfully led the Council over the past month.
Tomorrow we commemorate International Women’s Day, as we believe in
the importance of the leading role of women and their efforts towards achieving
development as well as their efforts in all areas of life. The delegation of Iraq
appreciates the sacrifices and efforts made by Iraqi women in supporting the march
undertaken by the Republic of Iraq.
In that regard, we need to emphasize women’s rights to use all their talents and
skills to achieve their goals and aspirations for building communities and making
their dreams come true.
As for the twenty-fifth anniversary of adopting resolution 1325 (2000), Iraq
was one of the first Arab States to respond to the call to put in place a national plan
for the implementation of that resolution with a view to ensuring the effective and
meaningful participation of women.
In that connection, my country’s delegation would like to make the following
points.
In Iraq, 97 women hold seats in the current session of the Parliament. That
number is greater than the quota allocated for women, which accounts for 83 seats.
That underscores that women have a more effective role. My Government is proud
that a significant number of women hold leadership positions throughout the executive
and legislative branches.
Iraq launched its second national plan (2021–2024) for the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), with a view to ensuring the effective
participation of women. That plan incorporates a number of items noted in the joint
communiqué signed between Iraq and the United Nations in 2016 towards ensuring
reparations for the victims of sexual violence and following up on the implementation
of programmes and activities in coordination with the Government and civil society
organizations.
The Iraqi Government is developing a national strategy for Iraqi women for
the period 2023–2030 that addresses the issues of participation, economic and social
empowerment and the challenges that women face. That strategy includes, inter alia,
reviewing scientific and humanitarian courses for ensuring awareness about women’s
rights and social justice. It also includes reviewing the law on mandatory learning to
cover the intermediate level. The Ministry of Higher Education highlights the plans
that support the participation and building capacity of female students in universities,
while protecting them through holding seminars that deal with electronic extortion.
One of the noteworthy measures that the Government has taken is the
establishment of centres for protection from domestic violence. Such centres were
23-0682945/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

opened in four governorates, and we are working on issuing standard instructions on
organizing the work at those centres.
The Iraqi Parliament has activated law No. 8 of 2021, concerning the
compensation of Yazidi women survivors, and established a directorate within
the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs for the protection of Yazidi women.
Instructions were issued to facilitate the implementation of that law with respect to
the victims. Approximately $19 million of the budget has been allocated to pay the
salaries pursuant to that law.
On the occasion of the sixth anniversary of the victory of Iraq in its war
against the terrorist organization Da’esh and the recovery of its territories, we recall
the patience and suffering that women and girls in Iraq have endured after Da’esh
terrorists came to Iraq.
Iraq has been making concerted effort to address the harm done by terrorism
and complete the process of bringing justice to the victims and their families, while
ensuring that the process is not drawn-out, as delayed justice might enable perpetrators
to escape punishment and undermine the essence of achieving justice. In that
connection, my country’s delegation reiterates that is important and necessary for the
United Nations Investigative Team to hand over all evidence from the investigations
to the judiciary of Iraq, in accordance with its mandate and competence, with a view
to trying the accused in a comprehensive, just and transparent manner and without
delay.
My country’s delegation believes in the important and effective role of women
in development and construction. Prosperity and progress cannot be achieved without
enabling women economically and socially. That is possible through realizing gender
equality, equal opportunities and eliminating all kinds of discrimination, while
providing women with all the tools needed for letting them play an effective and
influential role in the society.
In conclusion, my country’s Government commends the international efforts
and those of civil society organizations to establish gender equality and empower
women and girls.

46/56

23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Annex II
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Bulgaria to
the United Nations
Bulgaria aligns itself with the statements made by the representative of the
European Union and the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security. I would like to further emphasize a few points in my
national capacity.
At the outset, allow me to thank Mozambique for convening today’s highly
relevant open debate and to welcome the recommendations set forth in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General. I would also like to acknowledge the participation in
this debate of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Mozambique, Her
Excellency Ms. Verónica Nataniel Macamo Dlhovo, and thank the briefers for their
clear-sighted and enlightening briefings.
As a strong supporter of the women, peace and security agenda and as a
current member of the Peacebuilding Commission, Bulgaria would like to make the
following observations.
First, today’s debate is taking place at a crucial juncture. As the concept note
contained in document S/2023/146 rightly points out, we are at the midpoint between
the twentieth and the twenty-fifth anniversaries of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). We have also travelled halfway through the decade of implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and we are in the process of actively
engaging with the implementation of the Secretary-General’s comprehensive vision
for effective multilateralism as described in his report Our Common Agenda.
As we approach these important milestones, we are sadly observing that,
despite the progress made, we continue to lag behind in terms of the full, equal
and meaningful participation of all women and girls in peacebuilding, security and
political and social life. We are even witnessing a clear rollback of women’s rights
in many places around the globe; Afghanistan, Myanmar, Yemen and Syria are just
a few cases in point. Further, conflict-related incidents of sexual and gender-based
violence are reported on a daily basis as a result of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine, which has taken the heaviest toll on women and children.
In the 23 years since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we have learned
that no matter how dangerous it might become, women will continue to be at the
forefront of peacebuilding efforts and remain firm in rejecting political settlements
that do not guarantee their rights. It has become equally clear that merely including
women in peace negotiations does not in itself ensure that gender issues are integrated
into the peace process. What is required is real gender expertise in each step of the
process.
In a further effort to respond to the guiding questions in the concept note for
today’s debate, I would like to emphasize the need for gender data and analysis to
inform each phase of the adoption and implementation of peacekeeping mandates
and in the pursuit of national peacebuilding priorities. Such an approach would
also be indispensable for expanding gender-responsive financing and increasing
donor support for such dedicated financing mechanisms as the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund.

23-0682947/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

Turning now to our national implementation of the woman, peace and security
agenda, I would like to point out that our current national action plan already includes
policies that promote the meaningful participation of women in decision-making in
conflict situations, for example, women mediators participating in programmes and
trainings on the non-violent resolution of disputes and conflicts; the application of
the gender-equality principle to the selection and promotion of staff in our security
and defence authorities; and applying the women, peace and security agenda to
issues related to migration, asylum and integration for women seeking international
protection in Bulgaria.
In conclusion, Bulgaria reaffirms its unconditional support for women’s rights
and the women, peace and security agenda and is convinced that the inclusion and
participation of women and girls would result in significant progress in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding and would inspire women and girls everywhere to
become game-changers and ethical leaders working to forge an equitable, sustainable
and peaceful future.

48/56

23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Annex III
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of the Republic
of Korea to the United Nations
I would like to express appreciation to Mozambique for convening today’s
open debate on this important matter.
The Republic of Korea aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security. I would like to deliver the following statement in my national capacity.
Resolution 1325 (200) has been a milestone for women and peace and security,
affirming that women should be key agents in all peace processes. In reality,
however, women are still disproportionately affected in conflict-related situations,
and that requires our redoubled efforts to protect their human rights and amplify
their voices in peace processes. The Republic of Korea has proudly increased its
endeavours to implement the women and peace and security agenda. Since 2014, we
have established and implemented three national action plans in collaboration with
civil society. In particular, we have been working to build international cooperation
on women and peace and security by hosting an annual international conference.
In December 2022, we held the fourth such conference in Seoul, which discussed
women and peace and security, focusing on Asia, including Myanmar, Afghanistan
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In parallel, we have also supported
the survivors of conflict-related sexual violence in Africa, such as the Sudan and
Cameroon, with our development projects in cooperation with the United Nations
Population Fund.
Furthermore, we plan to provide capacity-building training in Seoul for
women military officers, especially for future peacekeeping operations in Africa, in
collaboration with UN-Women.
In the context of women and peace and security, it is critical that voices from
every corner of the world be heard. Unfortunately, we cannot hear the stifled voices of
women in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, a hidden war zone in the world.
I recently met the co-author of a book about a North Korean female defector Jihyun
Park, entitled The Hard Road Out, which was selected as one of the most noteworthy
books by The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post. The defector describes
her life before settling down in the United Kingdom as “abandoned” and “betrayed”.
She says, “Life there is unimaginable, and no one has the right to complain.”
At the conference on the human rights of women and girls in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea held in Seoul a month ago, several United Nations experts
expressed their grave concerns about the deteriorating human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, especially with regard to women suffering
from routine and traumatizing sexual exploitation and abuses in prison camps. At
the same time, women escaping from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continue to face many acute challenges. Last month’s report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on promoting accountability
for human rights violations by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea highlighted
the heartbreaking cases of female victims of trafficking, forced labour, forced
marriages and forced repatriation by neighbouring State authorities.
In order to ensure that they do not remain mere victims, the international
community should pay special attention to the women defectors from the Democratic
23-0682949/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

People’s Republic of Korea, who have survived life-or-death crises and have chosen
to speak up for those who are being silenced. The Republic of Korea, as a candidate
for membership on the Security Council for the 2024–2025 term, is firmly committed
to continuing its support to raise the voices of suffering women around the world to
faithfully implement the women and peace and security agenda.

50/56

23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Annex IV
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Namibia to the
United Nations
Namibia thanks you for organizing this open debate on the issue of women and
peace and security. As a champion of the women and peace and security agenda, we
are, as always, encouraged by the overwhelming support for this open debate.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was borne out of the need to promote women’s
participation in efforts and processes aimed at pursuing peace and security, the
prevention of all forms of violence against women and girls and the protection of
women in conflict and non-conflict situations, including in the context of unauthorized
seizures of power.
Documented evidence demonstrates that, although peace is more long-lasting
as a result of women’s meaningful participation in peace, security and humanitarian
processes, that value does not consistently translate into women’s inclusion or
participation in peace negotiations and implementation mechanisms.
Namibia adopted its first national action plan in 2019 for the period 2019-2024,
which would take us to right before the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). That national action plan was developed not as a stand-alone tool, but as a
complement to other mechanisms and frameworks developed to advance women’s
rights in Namibia. In the national action plan, Namibia committed to creating “a safe
and peaceful Namibia, where all women, men, girls and boys have equal rights and
live without fear or want and in dignity”.
To achieve that, and ultimately the full implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda, Namibia has aligned its outcome indicators with the African
Union Continental Results Framework, where relevant, in line with our position that
integrating the women and peace and security agenda in regional organizations and
fostering implementation through the development of regional frameworks or action
plans remain essential to driving the women and peace and security agenda.
Namibia also places an important emphasis on the nexus between the women
and peace and security and the disarmament agendas. We note with particular
concern the strong impact of the global arms trade on the insecurity of women and
girls in and out of conflict situations, as well as the increasing impact of small arms
and light weapons (SALW) on women and gender-based violence, particularly the
impact of the illicit trade’s effect of perpetuating conflict and instability. We must
therefore mainstream the women and peace and security agenda in disarmament and
establish coherence between the women and peace and security and the disarmament
agendas, recognizing the existing links and reciprocal impacts on both agendas.
We also call on the Security Council to support the collection of data on SALW,
disaggregated by age and sex.
As we move towards 2025 and beyond, I would like to highlight some areas
in which a women and peace and security agenda lens could lead to more balanced
and sustainable solutions, particularly in the context of dealing with the challenges
of tomorrow. Those are cyberspace and security, climate change, countering violent
extremism and trafficking in persons.
Additionally, we must also adopt gender-responsive national budgets, designed
in collaboration with women and civil society, including at the local and grass-roots
23-0682951/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

levels, inter alia for national action plans on women and peace and security and other
relevant national mechanisms on women and peace and security.
There is no need to reinvent the wheel. We have the necessary tools to drive
the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda on hand. To see
tangible change, we must redouble our efforts to continue to advocate for the agenda
and promote the positive role that women do and can play in peace and securitybuilding efforts.
It is not only time, but in fact essential that women be adequately represented
in political decision-making and peace negotiations at the national, regional and
international levels. That is Namibia’s commitment, and we enjoin all of us to renew
and strengthen our collective responsibility towards the maintenance of international
peace and security and the promotion of the well-being of the peoples of the world
and international cooperation by further strengthening the women and peace and
security agenda and its implementation.

52/56

23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Annex V
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica to
the United Nations
[Original: English and Spanish]
For the past 23 years, in the Security Council, we have commemorated the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) — a resolution that has yet to deliver on its promise.
In that regard, let me make three points.
First, most resolutions under the women and peace and security agenda condemn
sexual and gender-based violence as a weapon of war. However, the Council has yet
to examine online gender-based violence within its normative framework, let alone its
cross-cutting aspects. While women and girls face serious barriers to Internet access
and connectivity in rural and conflict-affected regions, online violence prevents them
from participating in discussions, including in private and cordoned-off spaces, which
affects their full and meaningful participation in the full spectrum of negotiation,
finalization and implementation of peace agreements. Likewise, online gender-based
violence violates their fundamental rights, such as the freedom of expression and
political participation, without which there can be no lasting peace.
Costa Rica also regrets that online gender-based violence continues to be
perceived as less serious than violence that takes place in the “real world”. Both
emanate from the same root causes, including inequality in gender relations, patriarchal
stereotypes and the lack of prevention and accountability.
Secondly, the Council must acknowledge that denying education to girls and
women poses a threat to international peace and security, as women’s minds have also
become a new battleground. Such intellectual violence is linked to sexual violence and
other structural forms of violence against women. Costa Rica calls on the Security
Council to adopt a new draft resolution that acknowledges the importance of girls’
education not only as a fundamental human right, but as a decisive factor in achieving
the inclusion and political, social and economic empowerment of women.
Thirdly, Costa Rica calls on the Council to include once and for all the issue of
disarmament under this agenda item and the implementation of national action plans.
Women and girls are often described as “vulnerable”. But what makes them vulnerable to
gender-based and sexual violence is the availability of weapons and the lack of regulations
governing their ammunition. Furthermore, we must urgently consider the repercussions
of gender norms, including militarized masculinities, in terms of violence, armed conflict
and the production, manufacture, acquisition, possession and use of lethal weapons.
All of the resolutions under the women and peace and security agenda
focus more on protecting women’s bodies than on unleashing their full potential.
Evidence shows us that when women have access to opportunities and participate in
decision-making, their work has an enormous and positive impact on their families,
communities and countries. Undeniably, gender equality is one of the most solid
foundations on which we can build peace together. That is why we must continue to
redouble our efforts to eliminate the barriers, violence and discrimination that rob
them of their place at the decision-making table.
May this occasion serve to redefine and modernize the agenda and prioritize
women’s leadership and the defence of their rights, at a time when the most vulnerable
women and girls need us the most.
23-0682953/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

Annex VI
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Slovakia to the
United Nations
We thank the presidency of Mozambique for organizing this open debate,
which is intended to provide an opportunity to take stock of the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda and to reaffirm women’s key role in
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. It also highlights the need for the adoption of a
gender perspective in peace agreements and to protect women and girls from genderbased violence.
Despite the fact that the Security Council has adopted nine further resolutions
under the women and peace and security agenda since resolution 1325 (2000), the
Secretary-General, in his report from the last October, was unequivocally clear:
“Despite the normative agreement dating back to the year 2000 and the evidence
that gender equality offers a path to sustainable peace and conflict prevention, we
are moving in the opposite direction. Today, the world is experiencing a reversal
of generational gains in women’s rights, while violent conflicts and military
expenditures, military coups, displacement and hunger continue to increase”.
We could not agree more with his words. Contrary to progress made since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it would be irresponsible to cover our eyes from
statistics that reflect reality.
The reality is that we are facing the highest number of conflicts since the end
of the Second World War. We therefore consider it crucial to call on all stakeholders
once again to reiterate their strong support for the full and equal participation of
women in all efforts to create and maintain international peace and security, while
adopting and supporting concrete and targeted measures. It is essential that the
Security Council continue to systematically and consistently advance, advocate for
and promote the women and peace and security agenda in all its work.
We wish to stress that women not only contribute substantially to conflict
prevention and resolution, but also continue to be particularly affected by conflict
situations. In this respect, we are horrified by the allegations of conflict-related
sexual violence perpetrated by Russian forces. Slovakia calls for the immediate
cessation of Russian military activities in Ukraine and the unconditional withdrawal
of all Russian troops from the whole territory of Ukraine. In this regard, we urge the
Russian Federation to fully implement all relevant General Assembly resolutions,
including resolution ES-11/6, of 23 February. It is not only us who said it. The votes
of the other 140 States spoke for themselves, confirming that Russia’s actions are
unacceptable to the democratic world.

54/56

23-06829

07/03/2023

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Annex VII
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Türkiye to the
United Nations
We congratulate Mozambique for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March.
Let me also thank the presidency for keeping the focus of the Council on the
women and peace and security agenda this month, when we observe the International
Women’s Day and during the current session of the Commission on the Status of
Women.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), almost a quarter century ago, was a
milestone in addressing the disproportionate and unique impact of armed conflict on
women.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is also a landmark resolution, underlining the important
role of women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding.
The severe effects of conflicts on women and girls continue in various
geographies and need our thorough examination and gender-sensitive responses.
Those efforts should be based on women’s equal and full participation as active
agents in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, peace-building and peacekeeping,
as resolution 1325 (2000) underlines.
Women’s representation and active participation in decision-making processes
in the fields of diplomacy and security serve a vital function in addressing multifaceted
challenges and achieving sustainable solutions.
Türkiye actively promotes the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in
international platforms, including the United Nations, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and NATO.
In line with the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), Türkiye supports the
empowerment and well-being of women and girls in various emergency, conflict or
post-conflict contexts, through comprehensive development assistance programmes.
Our projects in Afghanistan and Somalia, especially in the fields of education
and health services, are concrete examples of our efforts to this end.
The Turkish Government also continues to provide multifaceted services to
offer dignified living conditions for over 4 million refugees who sought refuge in
Türkiye, the majority of whom are Syrians.
Refugee women and their children benefit from psychosocial support, protective
services in response to violence against women; child support centres; institutions
for children in need of care; socioeconomic support within family; livelihood
opportunities and social cohesion programmes.
During our presidency of the Group of 20 (G20) in 2015, we pioneered the
establishment of the Women 20 platform to ensure that gender considerations are
mainstreamed into G20 work.
We are also proud to play a leading role in the establishment of the Women
Consultative Council within the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the resolution 1325 (2000) will present a valuable
opportunity to take stock of this agenda and discuss how we can further strengthen and
streamline it in all our peace and security-related work for the next decade.
Türkiye will continue to contribute to advancing the women and peace and
security agenda.
23-0682955/56

S/PV.9276 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

07/03/2023

Annex VIII
Statement as provided by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Mozambique for convening this open debate. We also thank the
speakers for their presentations and background information.
Concerns about the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda is closely linked to the development of national action plans to guide local
work on gender mainstreaming in the armed forces and law enforcement, as well as
on the participation of women in peace processes, security institutions and leadership
positions that lead to the construction of more egalitarian societies.
Chile is currently developing its third national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), with a view to developing a transformative instrument in the
work of the armed forces and police and civilian institutions linked to the issue. An
intersectional and intercultural approach has been taken in developing the third national
action plan, with a view to addressing structural discrimination in the armed forces and
law enforcement and ensuring an effective State response to peace and security issues.
We invite States to develop a national action plan or to update it. Chile, like other
countries, is eager to share its experience.
National action plans should respond to one of the concerns raised for this debate
by planning and developing effective measures to protect women and girls during
armed conflict. At present we see that protection measures are becoming less and less
effective. The increase in sexual violence in conflict, threats and attacks on women
human rights defenders — virtually and in person — and the spread of misogynistic
discourse on social media are strongly correlated with the sense of impunity enjoyed
by perpetrators.
The Council must make a firm and renewed commitment to preventing impunity
and seeking innovative measures to bring perpetrators to justice.
It is also imperative for the Council to ensure that all peacekeeping operations
have personnel trained in addressing gender issues and in the prevention and response
to sexual and gender-based violence, which will provide robust protection for women
and girls and be a first step towards their empowerment and meaningful participation.
To enhance that participation, the Council and the Secretariat can promote three specific
measures already discussed in this regard — supporting the economic and social
empowerment of women affected by armed conflict, institutionalizing the participation
of local and international women’s organizations in political processes related to peace
and security, and promoting women’s leadership at all levels of the multilateral system.
Finally, we would like to draw attention to the emerging threats affecting the
security of women and girls. The trafficking and diversion of small arms and light
weapons has plunged Latin America into a situation of violence that must be addressed
and prioritized by the Council. The national action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) should set 2025 as the deadline to respond to that situation,
which, like other traditional and emerging threats, affects women and girls differently.

56/56

23-06829
