A/RES/76/227

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 January 2022

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 74 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 24 December 2021
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/76/462/Add.2, para. 114)]

76/227.

Countering disinformation for the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 3 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 4 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 5 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 6 the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 7 and all other relevant
international human rights instruments, including the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, 8
Recalling the universality, indivisibility, interdependence and interrelatedness
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling also its resolutions 75/176 of 16 December 2020, 75/267 of 25 March
2021 and 75/309 of 21 July 2021,

__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Ibid.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
6
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
7
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
8
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
1
2

21-19656 (E)

140122

*2119656*

Countering disinformation for the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms

A/RES/76/227

Recalling further the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, 9 as
endorsed by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011, 10
Recalling the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech of
June 2019, and acknowledging that hate speech and disinformation are distinct
phenomena which may overlap in some cases,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression on disinformation and
freedom of opinion and expression, 11
Reaffirming the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression and full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart
information can play in strengthening democracy and countering disinformation, and
reaffirming further that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression carries with
it special duties and responsibilities, in accordance with article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Recalling article 20, paragraph 2, of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, which states that any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred
that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence shall be prohibited
by law,
Stressing that responses to the spread of disinformation must comply with
international human rights law and the principles of legality, necessity and
proportionality, and underlining the importance of free, independent, plural and
diverse media and of providing and promoting access to independent, factual and
evidence-based information to counter disinformation,
Reaffirming the need to ensure that efforts to counter disinformation promote
and protect and do not violate individuals’ freedom of expression and freedom to seek,
receive and impart information, and noting that media and information-related
technology literacy can help to achieve this through independent and free media,
awareness-raising and a focus on the empowerment of people,
Highlighting the global concerns about the rapid spread and proliferation of
disinformation, thereby increasing the need for the dissemination of factual, timely,
clear, accessible, multilingual and evidence-based information, and emphasizing the
need for all relevant stakeholders to address the challenge of disinformation,
Expressing concern that the use of digital technology can enable new pathways
for intentionally false or misleading information to be created, disseminated and
amplified by State and non-State actors for political, ideological or commercial
motives at an alarmingly growing scale, speed and reach, and recognizing, in the
context of the challenges and opportunities arising from new and emerging digital
technologies, the need to counter disinformation, in a manner that complies with
States’ obligations under international human rights law,
Expressing concern also about the spread of disinformation on online platforms,
including on social media, which can be designed and implemented so as to mislead,
to spread racism, xenophobia, negative stereotyping and stigmatization, to undermine
public health messaging, to breach individuals’ right to privacy, and to incite all forms

__________________

Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Pro tect,
Respect and Remedy” Framework ( A/HRC/17/31, annex).
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53),
chap. III, sect. A.
11
A/HRC/47/25.
9

2/4

21-19656

Countering disinformation for the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms

A/RES/76/227

of violence, intolerance, discrimination and hostility, and emphasizing the important
contribution of journalists, civil society and academia in countering this trend,
Encouraging States, international and regional organizations, national human
rights institutions and civil society, business enterprises, including media, online
platforms, social media and technology companies, to foster respect for human rights
online and offline in the context of new and emerging digital technologies and human
rights due diligence processes,
Deeply concerned at the proliferation of disinformation about the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, including online, and stressing the importance of
providing science- and evidence-based data and information to the public to counter
such practices,
Recognizing with concern that online disinformation campaigns are increasingly
being used to deter women from participating in the public sphere and that women
journalists, politicians and advocates for women’s empowerment are particularly
targeted,
Recognizing the role played by all stakeholders through speaking out against
disinformation, expressing solidarity with those targeted by disinformation
campaigns, and amplifying messages that serve to counter disinformation,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United Nations system, including the
Department of Global Communications of the Secretariat, in helping to counter the
proliferation of disinformation, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, by sharing
accurate, timely, relevant and multilingual information, and in this regard taking note
of the statement by the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session
entitled “Responding to an ‘infodemic’ – sharing best practices” and the SecretaryGeneral’s message to the high-level conference on the theme “The danger of
disinformation – countering fake news and safeguarding health in the post-truth era”,
1.
Emphasizes that all forms of disinformation can negatively impact the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as the attainment of
the Sustainable Development Goals; 12
2.
Affirms the important role that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression and full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and impart information
plays in strengthening democracy, promoting pluralism and multiculturalism, enhancing
transparency and press freedom, and countering disinformation;
3.
Recognizes that disinformation has the potential to incite discrimination,
hostility and violence against vulnerable groups and people in vulnerable situations,
including humanitarian emergencies and conflicts;
4.
Affirms the responsibility of States to counter, as appropriate, and in
accordance with international human rights law, the dissemination of disinformation
which undermines the promotion of peace and cooperation;
5.
Condemns any advocacy of hatred that constitutes incitement to
discrimination, hostility or violence, whether it involves the use of print, audiovisual
or electronic media, social media or any other means;
6.
Expresses concern about the spread of disinformation and propaganda,
including on the Internet, which can be designed and implemented so as to mislead,
to violate human rights, including the rights to privacy and to freedom of expression,
to spread hatred, racism, xenophobia, negative stereotyping or stigmatization, and to
incite violence, discrimination and hostility, and emphasizes the important
contribution by journalists in countering this trend;
__________________
12

21-19656

See resolution 70/1.
3/4

A/RES/76/227

Countering disinformation for the promotion and protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms

7.
Welcomes civil society and media efforts aimed at identifying and raising
awareness about deliberate false news stories and disinformation;
8.
Calls upon States to counter all forms of disinformation through policy
measures, including education, capacity-building for prevention and resilience to
disinformation, advocacy and awareness-raising;
9.
Acknowledges the significant role of business enterprises in the exercise
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and in enabling access to
information, and recalls that all business enterprises have a responsibility to respect
human rights, as set out in the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights;
10. Expresses concern that globally disinformation is becoming increasingly
professionalized and in some cases is being driven by commercial motives;
11. Encourages online platforms, including social media companies, to review
their business models and ensure that their design and development processes, their
business operations, data collection and data processing practices are in line with the
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, and emphasizes the importance
of conducting human rights due diligence of their products, particularly of the role of
algorithms and ranking systems in amplifying disinformation, and calls upon them to
adopt and make publicly available, after consultation with all relevant stakeholders,
clear, transparent, narrowly defined content and advertising policies on countering
disinformation that are in line with international human rights law;
12. Urges all stakeholders to promote media and information literacy, as a way
to empower all people and facilitate digital inclusion and global connectivity, and to
assist in countering disinformation;
13. Underlines that countering disinformation requires multidimensional and
multi-stakeholder responses that are in compliance with international human rights
law and the proactive engagement of international organizations, States, business
enterprises and all other stakeholders;
14. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to promote international
cooperation in countering disinformation, and in this regard takes note of his call for
a “global code of conduct that promotes integrity in public information”;
15. Invites the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, special procedures, treaty bodies and all other human rights mechanisms and
entities of the United Nations, within their respective mandates, to consider, as
appropriate, addressing the impact of disinformation on human rights;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of States, United Nations
entities and relevant stakeholders and to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh session a report, within existing resources, based on information and
best practices shared by States, United Nations entities and relevant stakeholders on
countering disinformation;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the
attention of all Governments, relevant United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies, including the Department of Global Communications, and regional
intergovernmental organizations;
18. Further requests the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to
effectively coordinate and follow up on the implementation of the present resolution
and, in this regard, to consider briefing the General Assembly on its implementation,
as appropriate.
54th (resumed) plenary meeting
24 December 2021

4/4

21-19656
