General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

80

6. Expresses the ·conviction that the Committee, by
fulfilling its Tesponsibilities under the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, will contribute to the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3057 (XXVIII) relating to the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination;
7. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention as soon as possible.

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3135 (XXVIII). Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 3060 (XXVIII) of
2 November 1973 relating to the observance of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the General Assembly invited States
which had not yet done so to ratify, inter alia, the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, 30
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; 31
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports conecrning the state of ratifications of the Convention in
accorlance with its resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21
December 1965.
2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3136 (XXVIII). Creation of the post of United
Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2841 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 and Economic and Social Council resolution 1237 (XLII) of 6 June 1967,
Taking note of the deliberations of the General
Assembly, since its twentieth session, on the item entitkd "Creation of the post of United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights",
Taking note also of the note by the Secretary-Gen:.:ral on the question,:;z
Bearing in mind the Proclamation of Teheran of 13
J\fay l 968. 3 ~
Having regard to the existing machinery and procedmcc:, within the United Nations system for the implement1tion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
to the J)rnceedings of th-: various organs and bodies of
:i(,

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

the United Nations and to the various modalities suggested in the course of the deliberations of those bodies
for the more effective implementation of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Expressing the hope that the International Covenants
on Human Rights: 14 will enter into force in the near
future,
I. Reaffirms its conviction that further measures
should be considered to ensure universal realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all with:mt
distinction of any kind;
2. Decides to keep under review the consideration
of alternative approaches and ways and means within
the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Decides accordingly to include in the provisional
agenda of its thirtieth session an item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the
United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3137 (XXVIII). Question of the elderly and
the aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2842 (XXVI) of 18 December 1971 on the question of the elderly and the
aged,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1751
(LIV) of 16 May 1973 on the aged and social security,
Bearing in mind the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which emphasizes respect for the dignity and
worth of the human person, especially article 25 thereof,
Bearing in mind also that the protection of the rights
and welfare of the aged is one of the main goals of
the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, 311
Recognizing the growing interest for developing and
developed societies alike in the fuller participation of
the elderly in the mainstream of national societies,
Noting that the status of the elderly in society varies
from country to country,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and the aged:10 and
the recommendations contained therein,
Concerned about the growing magnitude of the problems of the aged accompanied by changes in the age
structure of societies and the consequent increase in the
proportion of the older sector of populations in a
growing number of countries,
1. Expresses appreciation for the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and
the aged::o and the note prepared by the World Health
Organization on the health concerns of the elderly and
the aged;n
2. Draws the attention of Member States affected
by the problem to the need for short-term and longterm policies and programmes for the elderly;

·11 A-"l\39.

:c A 1 9074.

Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.
:13 Final

34 Resolution 2200 A

35 Resolution 2542

(XXI), annex.
(XXIV).

so A/9126 and Corr.I.
87 Ibid., annex Ill.

81

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Recommends to Governments, in for- 1ating
such national policies and programmes, to take into
account the guidelines suggested in the Secretary-General's report and to take appropriate action:
(a) To develop, as [equired and in accordance with
their national priorities, programmes for the welfare,
health and protection of older people, and their retraining in accordance with their needs, including
measures aimed at maximizing their economic independence and their social integration with other segments of the population;
(b) To develop progressively social security measures to ensure that the aged, regardless of sex, receive
an adequate income;
(c) To enhance the contribution of the elderly to
social and economic development;
(d) To discourage, wherever and when'!ver the overall situation allows, discriminatory attitudes, policies
and measures in employment practices based exclusively
Oil age;
(e) To encourage the creation of employment opportunities for the elderly in :accordance with their
needs;
(f) To promote by all possible means the strengthening of the family unit;
(g) To stimulate bilateral and multilateral agreements of co-operation in the field of social security fOir
the benefit of the aged;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, with the resources at his disposal and in co-ordinated co-,)peration
with the specialized agencies concerned, to take appropriate action:
(a) To assist Governments, at their request, on
questions of planning for the older sector of the population in the context of over-all development programmes and to help them develop the manpower
needed to provide various functions in the field of
aging;
( b) To continue to monitor the present and prospective changes in the numbers and proportions of the
aged and their underlying demographic factors and,
for this purpose, to maintain a system of collection and
dissemination of information on aging;
(c) To undertake studies, drawing upon the expertise of the various competent bodies within the United
Nations system and in consultation with its regional
offices and with Governments, regarding the interrelationship between demographic, social and economic
factors in aging;
(d) To promote research, at the international and
national levels, for the further development of policies
and standards, planning and evaluation methods and
practical action in the field of aging;
( e) To promote scientific research on the subject
of aging;
(f) To co-operate with bilateral and appropriate
multilateral programmes interested in providing assistance to developing countries in the field of aging;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council in 1977, through the
Commission for Social Development, a progress report
on the action taken on the present resolution and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session;

6. Requests the O[ganizations of the United Nations
system concerned with aging, the regional economic
commissions ,and the appropriate non-governmental
organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social Council to give full support to the
Secretary-General in this task;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in the preparation of his report, to take into account the views expressed by Member States during the debate on the
item in the Third Committee.

2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3138 (XXVIII). Social security for t'1e aged

The General Assembly,
Taking into account its resolution 2842 (XXVI) of
18 December 1971 on the question of the elderly and
the aged,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1405 (XLVI) and 1406 (XLVI) of 5 June 1969 and
1751 (LIV) of 16 May 1973,
Taking note of the corresponding reports of the Secretary-General, particularly those on the question of
the elderly and the aged:c 8 and on the United Nations
lnterregional Seminar on Industrial Social Welfare, 30
Considering that social security and social welfare
are integral parts of the social and economic development of society as a whole,
Recognizing that adequate social security is of the
greatest importance to the aged,
Bearing in mind article 11 (a) of the Declaration
on Social Progress and Development, 40 which envisages
the provision of comprehensive social security schemes
and social welfare services, the establishment and improvement of social security and insurance schemes for
all persons who, because of illness, disability or old
age, are temporarily or permanenrly unable to earn a
l~ving, with a view to ensuring a propoc standard of
hving for such persons and for their families and dependants,
Affirming the importaJJt role of Governments in developing effective social security programmes through
concerted efforts of national and local authorities,
appropriate organizations and the population itself,
Considering that the protection of the aged is an
important part of any comprehensive social security
scheme, that such schemes should be an integral part
of the social and economic development of society as
a whole and that, therefore, the protection of the aged
cannot be dealt with in isolation,
I. Considers social security to be an integral part
of national programmes for improving the well-being
of the population, particularly of the aged, within the
framework of the State's long-tenn social and economic
planning;
2. Calls upon Governments to assume responsibilitv
for guiding and planning social security in all sector;
along with the development of legislation in the field
of social security pro~rammes;
as A/9126 and Corr.I.
S9 E/CN.5/484.
40 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).
