62

Genera I Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

2906 (XXVII). Programme for the observance
of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Univeri,al Declaration of Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that on 10 December 1973 the world community will celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling its resolution 2860 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, by which it expressed its conviction of the
historic significance and enduring value of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations and decided to consider at its twenty-seventh session the
question of the preparation of an appropriate programme to observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 containing suggestions as to a programme of
suitable activities which could be undertaken for this
purpose,
1. Reaffirms its adherence to the principles, values
and ideals contained in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
2. Reiterates the hope that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
will be celebrated by the world community in a manner befitting the occasion and serving the cause of
human rights;
3. Decides to hold a special meeting on 10 December 1973 at which will be launched the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
as and when approved;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the suggestions
presented by the Secretary-General in his report;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit his report to Governments, specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council
for such action as they may wish to undertake in order
to give effect to the suggestions contained in the report;
(b) To take the necessary measures for the implementation of those suggestions which fall within the
Secretary-General's area of responsibility or which require action by other organs of the United Nations;
(c) To organize as soon as possible seminars on a
regional level under the programme of advisory services
in the field of human rights with the purpose of studying new ways and means for promoting human rights
in the light of the present resolution, with special
attention to the problems and needs of the various
regions of the world;
(d) To submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session a progress report on the preparations made and the measures taken in accordance with
the present resolution.
2068th plenary meeting
19 October 1972
2919 (XXVII). Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Firmly convinced that racial discrimination in all
its forms and manifestations is a total negation of the
1 A/8820 and Corr.I.

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and that it militates against human progress,
peace and justice,
Believing that the continuation of national, regional
and international action against racial discrimination
in aH its forms is a matter of vital importance if the
world is to live in peace and justice,
Noting that a detailed draft programme for a Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination has been prepared by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 2
and that it has been submitted to the Commission on
Human Rights for urgent consideration at its twentyninth session,
l. Decides to launch the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to
inaugurate the activities thereof on 10 December 1973,
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Invites therefore the Economic and Socia~ Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to
give the highest priority to the consideration of the
draft programme for the Decade and to submit it to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session for
final consideration.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2920 (XXVII). Exploitation of labour throu~h
illicit ancl clandestine traffil'king

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 3
Recalling the provisions of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 ( LIII) of 28 July 1972 concerning illicit trafficking in foreign labour,
Noting that some States have acceded to the Convention concerning Migration for Employment (Revised 1949), 4 adopted by the International Labour
Conference at its thirty-second session,
Noting with interest resolution IV of 27 June 1972,
adopted by the International Labour Conference at its
fifty-seventh session, concerning conditions and equality
of treatment of migrant workers,
Deeply concerned by the de facto discrimination of
which foreign workers are the victims in certain countries of Europe and of other continents, despite the
efforts . ma~e by certain Governments, particularly at
the legislative level, to prevent and repress it,
1. Calls upon the Governments of the above-mentioned countries to take or supervise the application of
measures to put an end to the discriminatory treatment
of which migrant workers in their territory are the
victims and particularly to ensure the improvement of
arrangements for receiving such workers;
2. Invites all Governments to ensure respect for
the provisions of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
2 A/8805, annex.
3 Resolution 2106 A (XX).
4 International Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No. 97,
p. 743.
