S/2019/107

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 February 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 29 January 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), adopted
on 22 December 2010, establishing the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals (the Mechanism), and in particular, to article 10, paragraph 2, of
the statute of the Mechanism (annex 1 to the resolution), on the appointment of a
judge to fill a vacancy in the roster of judges of the Mechanism.
Article 8, paragraph 1, of the statute provides that the Mechanism shall have a
roster of 25 independent judges.
One of the judges of the Mechanism, Judge Christoph Flügge (Germany), has
resigned, with effect from 7 January 2019, owing to personal reasons.
Pursuant to article 10, paragraph 2, of the statute, “[i]n the event of a vacancy
in the roster, after consultation with the Presidents of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General shall appoint a person meeting the
qualifications of article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute, for the remainder of the term of
office concerned”.
According to article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute, “[t]he judges shall be persons
of high moral character, impartiality and integrity who possess the qualifications
required in their respective countries for appointment to the highest judicial offices.
Particular account shall be taken of experience as judges of the [International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia] or the [International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda] ”.
The procedure for identifying a candidate for consideration for appointment
under article 10, paragraph 2, which is applicable when a vacancy arises from the
resignation of a judge during his or her term of service, is not prescribed in the statute.
In accordance with the established practice regarding the appointment of a judge to
fill a vacancy at the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which was adopted for the purposes of
filling a vacancy in the roster of judges of the Mec hanism in 2016, the State of the
nationality of the judge to be replaced nominates another candidate. Accordingly, the
Government of Germany has nominated Ms. Claudia Hoefer to replace Judge Flügge
for the remainder of the term of office, which ends on 30 June 2020.
It is my view that Ms. Hoefer meets the qualifications that are prescribed in
article 9, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Mechanism.
In accordance with article 10, paragraph 2, of the statute, I look forward to
receiving your views on the appointment of Ms. Hoefer as a judge of the Mechanism.
(Signed) António Guterres

19-01694 (E)

050219

*1901694*
