UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

2510th

MEETING:

5 JANUARY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/25 10). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..........

1

Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16244). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

wPv.2510

Symbols of United Natik:documents
are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
.The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and .
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2510th
Held
President:

MEETING

in New York on Thursday,

Mr. Javier CHAMORRO
(Nicaragua).

5 January

ria, Nigeria, the Syrian Arab Republic, Viet Nam and
Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In .
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the’provisional
rules of procedure.

MORA

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Audu (Nigeria), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) and
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2510)

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16244)
The meeting

1984, at 3:30 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/16248, which contains the text
of a letter dated 3 January from the representative of
Jamaica to the Secretary-General.

was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption

4. The first speaker is the representative of Ethiopia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
5. Mr. SEIFU
(Ethiopia):
Only two weeks ago
[250&h meeting] the Co&&l
adopted resolution 545
(1983), in which it demanded that South Africa should
unconditionally
withdraw all its occupation forces from
the territory of Angola and cease all violations against
that State and scrupulously respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 1 January 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16244)

1. The ,PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
In accordance with decisions taken at the previous
meeting on this item 12509th meeting], I invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table. I invite the representatives of Ethiopia, Mozambique, South Africa, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Seifu
(Ethiopia), Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),
Mr. von
Schirnding
(South Africa),
Mr. Amega
(Togo),
Mr. Rupia (United
Republic
of Tanzania)
and
Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reservedfor them
at the side of the Council chamber.

6. In view of the developments
thereafter within
Angolan territory, however, one gets the impression
that the racist rGgime of South Africa is totally unaware
of the adoption of resolution 545 (1983). Indeed, all that
South Africa has done during the past two weeks and
what the Council demanded that it do are diametrically
opposite. By committing
thousands of its troops, the
rdgime has since 15 December 1983 intensified its unprovoked acts of aggression and extended its illegal
occupation even deeper into Angolan territory. In the
process many have lost their lives, including Angolan
civilians and Namibian refugees. Helpless women, children and the aged are among the victims. The destruction of property and the damage to other economic
infrastructures are quite extensive.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Spanish]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of Alge-

7. Under the circumstances,
one .cannot help but
wonder how the provisions of resolution 545 (1983)
escaped the attention of the racists in Pretoria, espe1

cially when their representatives had actually participated in the debate leading to the adoption of that
resolution. Of course, one does not have to think hard
or look far to get the answer. Time and again Pretoria
has told the world in no uncertain terms that it could not
care less what the Council does or what the international community at large thinks, so long as its important ally and its other Western friends stand by its side.
Indeed, South Africa’s intensification
of its war of
aggression against Angola is but that regime’s arrogant
response to resolution 545 (1983). By this action Pretoria is not only expressing its disdain for the Council
but is also, in a sense, throwing down the gauntlet. How
the Council responds to this challenge will no doubt
determine its effectiveness in the short term and its
long-term relevance in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Article 5 1 of the Charter of the United Nations are also
given uncomplimentary
labels and are made targets of
diplomatic harassment. And again when, pursuant to
the collective security provisions of the Charter, a small
and weak country resorts to the Council in search of
assistance and redress, as Angola is doing now, the
response it gets is more often than not commensurate
neither with what it had originally sought nor with what
the objective situation at the minimum demands.
12. In these times and under such circumstances
I must ask-and indeed, we all must ask-what small
nations victims of aggression ‘are expected to do.
Should they seek guarantee for their security in the
effectiveness of the Council and the authority of international law, as Angola is attempting to do? Alas, our
experience in this regard is very discouraging. Or, in
the circumstances, should such States pursue their security interests in military alliances with bigger and
more powerful nations? This undoubtedly will undermine not only the foundation of the very fragile international legal order but also that of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries, which we cherish and value
highly.

8. We all know that from its first day of independence
Angola has been denied peace and tranquillity
by the
racists of Pretoria. Why Angola has to be a primary
target for South Africa’s lawless conduct is, I am sure,
clear to all. What is not clear, however, at least to the
Ethiopian delegation, is why the Angolan people should
bear the brunt of the burden for Namibia’s
independence, particularly when that Territory is a unique and
legal responsibility
of the United Nations.

13. So the dilemma persists and the question remains
unanswered. It is therefore little wonder that what a
small and weak State should do when victimized by the
forces of imperialism,
short of abandoning its sovereignty and independence, is one of the burning questions of our time. You, Mr. President, coming as you
do from a country over which the very real threat of
imminent aggression and actual subversion hovers, are,
we believe, in a much better position to empathize and
sympathize with the plight of the suffering people of
Angola. That is why we feel fortunate in having you to
preside over these deliberations.
While wishing you
every success in your endeavours, the Ethiopian delegation would also like to express its satisfaction at the
excellent manner in which your predecessor, the representative of the Netherlands, guided the work of the
Council last month.

9. Aside from the oppressed people of Namibia,
I submit, no other people has suffered more and paid so
dearly for the just cause of Namibia’s
freedom and
independence as has the Angolan people. We in Ethiopia are therefore convinced that the time has come for
all of us to sacrifice a little more so that colonialism and
racism will be wiped out in the southern region of Africa
and so that Angola and the other front-line States will at
long last enjoy their independence in peace and tranquil
stability. In this regard the Council, we believe, has a
special responsibility.
10. That Angola, however, has come to the Council
twice in less than one month is, I dare say, a sad
commentary on the effectiveness of the Council and on
the respect its decisions command in certain quarters.
Angola’s frequent resort to the Council and South
Africa’s cynical, hypocritical and impudent response,as illustrated by the statement of its representative only
yesterday in the Council [2509th meeting], are also
signs of the times. These are times when the strong
recognize no legal or moral constraints on the exercise
of their military,
economic or political might and
influence. These are also times when the small and the
weak seem to have been denied the protection of legal
norms and moral precepts as well as of the international
bodies set up to implement those norms and precepts.

14. Finally, I should like to read the statement issued
on 28 December 1983 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the Ethiopian Government regarding the invasion of
Angola by the forces of racist South Africa. That statement reads:
“It is with deep shock and indignation that socialist
Ethiopia has learned of the latest aggression committed by the racist Pretoria regime against the People’s Republic of Angola.
“The apartheid regime has consistently carried
out economic sabotage and blackmail as well as
naked aggression against the front-line States. One of
the most frequent targets and unfortunate victims of
such blatant invasion has been the People’s Republic
of Angola. In collusion with the renegade organization of armed bandits-the
so-called UNITA [ Unido
National para a Independencia
Total de Angolal-

11. When, in the times in which we live, a small weak
State such as the sister Republic of Angola is subjected
to wanton acts of aggression, not only is that country’s
inherent right to seek outside assistance in legitimate
self-defence questioned by some, but those who come
to its assistance in accordance with the provisions of
2

the terrorist regime has repeatedly waged brutal
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola.

over the Council’s
December.

“This campaign against the sister Republic is not
only aimed at stifling the revolutionary process and at
the destabilization
of its progressive party and Government; it is also designed to delay Namibia’s independence.

18. Only last month [250&h to 2508th meetings] the
Council heard Angola’s complaint
regarding South
Africa’s continuing aggression against its territory and
strongly condemned South Africa for its acts of aggression against Angola and its occupation of parts of
Angolan territory. The Council demanded the unconditional withdrawal of South African forces from
Angola and the cessation of all violations of Angolan
sovereignty and territorial integrity, demands that were
embodied in resolution 545 (1983).

“As history has amply demonstrated
time and
again, the genuine struggle of the people in defense
of their sovereignty,
territorial
integrity and socio-economic
emancipation
is inevitably bound to
triumph. It is therefore self-evident that the victory of
the heroic people of southern Africa over the machinations of imperialism
and reaction is imminent.

deliberations

during the month of

19. The list of military acts of aggression by the armed
forces of South Africa against Angola annexed to the
letter dated 31 December 1983, from the President of
Angola to the Secretary-General
[S/16245], clearly
shows that South Africa not only continued its military
activities against Angola but also intensified its aggressive strikes against Angolan territory in insolent disregard of the Council’s deliberations and decisions.

“While
reaffirming
its support
for the recent
United Nations Security Council resolution 545
(1983), socialist Ethiopia once again calls upon the
international community to intensify the world-wide
campaign to isolate the Pretoria regime and urges all
peace-loving peoples and Governments to increase
their material and financial support to the front-line
countries, in particular to Angola, as well as to the
liberation movements of southern Africa.

20. Mr. de Figueiredo, the representative of Angola,
has informed the Council [250&h meeting] of the size
and scale of South African military intervention inside
Angolaand the extent and enormity of its acts of aggression since 1976. He has also described the latest operation undertaken by South Africa against Angolan territory as one of the largest such operations. In an editorial
today, The New York Times states that South Africa
appears to be digging in indefinitely in Angola and is
spending $1.5 billion a year to conduct that war.

“In vehemently condemning the latest dastardly
act of the terrorist regime against the People’s
Republic of Angola socialist Ethiopia reiterates its
support for the people and Government of that sister
country in the heroic struggle to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of their motherland.‘*
15. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): Allow me to begin
by extending to you, Sir, the sincere congratulations
of the Pakistan delegation on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of January which gives you
the opportunity of launching the Council onits activities for the new year. We wish you and the Council
every success in the new year and take this opportunity
to extend a warm welcome in our midst to Egypt, India,
Peru, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and
Upper Volta, which have been elected members of the
Council. At the same time, we shall miss the presence
of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire, with which
we worked in close co-operation,
greatly benefiting
from their outstanding contributions
to the efforts of
the Council to advance the cause of global peace and
strengthen the fabric of international
security.

21. It should be a matter of deep concern to the Council that South African can defy its decisions with impunity and engage in seemingly limitless acts of aggression
against a sovereign State. Nothing has emboldened
South Africa in continuing and intensifying its attacks
against Angola more than its comfortable feeling that
the Council will not be able to take strong action to
prevent it from doing so. Continued failure to take
effective action in this case would further undermine
the Council’s credibility as an instrument for the maintenance of peace and security, which has already suffered considerable damage by its inability to act firmly
in the face of grave crises afflicting several other regions of the world.
22. Last month the Council condemned for the sixth
time South Africa’s eight-year-old aggression against
Angola. It is now time that the Council’s verdict be
accompanied by a clear warning that, unless South
Africa heeds its call, the Council will proceed to mandatory action against it.

16. I have had the privilege and pleasure of working
with you in the Security Council, as well as in other
United Nations forums, throughout the preceding year,
getting an opportunity to become aware of your qualities of statesmanship and diplomatic skill which will
now enable you to guide the Council with success and
distinction during this month.

23. While we remain preoccupied with South Africa’s
renewed aggression against Angola and ask the Council
to act firmly, we should not fail to take note of the letter
of 31 December from the President of Angola to the
Secretary-General.
That important communication
revives hope for the reactivation of the diplomatic pro-

17. I should like also to express our profound appreciation of the excellent manner in which Mr. van der
Stoel, the representative of the Netherlands, presided
3

express to you, Sir, our greatest pleasure on your accession to the presidency of the Council for this month,
We sincerely hope that Nicaragua’s presidency, which
you so ably represent, augurs a new year free from
aggression, the threat of aggression, muscle flexing,
gun-boat diplomacy, occupation, foreign intervention
and oppression in all their forms.

cess to effect the withdrawal of South African troops
from Angolan territory and to achieve a peaceful settlement of the central issue of Namibian independence
on the basis of Council resolution 435 (1978).
24. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and Information
of South Africa, in his letter dated 15 December to the
Secretary-General
[S/26219, annex r], made a conditional offer of disengagement of its forces beginning
31 January 1984. It is to the credit of the Government of
Angola that it has given a positive and constructive
response even to an ambiguous offer, which has been
virtually nullified by the subsequent South African
attacks against Angolan territory.

31. I take this opportunity to express our thanks and
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. van der Stoel,
the representative of the Netherlands, who last month
presided over the Council’s work with wisdom and has
imprinted it with high and noble human values.
32. I take this opportunity
also to congratulate the
new members of the Council-India,
Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Upper Volta.

25. In his communication
to the Secretary-General,
the President of Angola stated that the Angolan Government would not oppose the establishment of a truce
of 30 days after 31 January 1984, if the Secretary-General obtained the agreement of the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO) and if the South African Government
withdrew its military units from
Angolan territory and solemnly promised to initiate the
implementation,
within 15 days after that period, of
resolution 435 (1978) on Namibia, without linking it to
extraneous considerations.

33. Angola’s new complaint against South Africa is
another step in urging the Council to put an end to
an aggression which has spread continuously since 1976
and is now escalating-aggression
aimed at undermining Angola’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The intensification of that aggression,
both qualitative and quantitative,
as well as its systematic character, indicates that its final objective is to
deprive the valiant people of Angola of the achievements it has made since the collapse of Portuguese
colonialism in 1975.

26. The offer of a truce of 30 days after the date which
South Africa itself has set for the disengagement of its
forces from Angola should create an opportunity for the
Secretary-General to ascertain whether South Africa is
genuinely interested in peace in the region and is willing
to co-operate with his efforts for the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) which approves the United Nations plan for Namibian independence.

34. This latest act of aggression, which has extended
200 kilometres inside Angolan territory, with the use
of the most modem means of warfare and destruction, must be analysed in the context of the repeated
attempts by the racist regime in Pretoria to spread its
imperialist hegemony. This is a concerted act, not only
against Angola but also against southern Africa as a
whole.

27. South Africa remains in illegal occupation of the
international Territory of Namibia and, by a convoluted
logic, seeks to use this illegality to justify its aggression
against Angola-yet
another illegality. It is incumbent
on the Council to act strongly to put an end to this
intolerable situation.

35. The latest act of aggression against Angola has
been characterized by unprecedented violence and barbarity; yet we must not forget that South Africa’s aggression last year involved a number of other African
countries-in
particular, Lesotho and Mozambiquewhich are facing a regime which basically does not
recognize the African person. How could it possibly
recognize independent African peoples?

28. The people of Angola have endured continuing
aggression at the hands of South Africa for supporting
the liberation of Namibia from foreign and colonial
domination
and for providing a shield to SWAPO,
which is leading the Namibian struggle for independence. We appreciate the courage and resolution of
the people and Government of Angola which, in maintaining their support of a just cause, are willing to face
the consequences of the hostility of a ruthless and powerful aggressor. They are on the side of justice. They
deserve our respect and full support.

36. Onlv a few davs ago, at the end of last month
[250&h heeting], the Council adopted resolution 545
(1983) in which it demanded that South Africa unconditionally withdraw forthwith all its occupation forces
and henceforth scrupulously respect the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of Angola. It is regrettable
that the United States abstained in the vote. A few days
later South Africa responded with a wide-ranging act of
aggression-even
more wide-ranging that the previous
acts of aggression-as
though South Africa wanted to
tell this Council: “You have no jurisdiction nor do you
have a mandate over my aggressive tendencies. There
is someone in your very Council who protects my arrogance and provides me with all my needs. My objective
meets my protector’s interests.”

29. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is my honour to invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
30. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) [interpret&ion from Arabic]: Allow me at the outset to
4

.

37. The aim behind the latest escalation of aggression
against Angola is to force it into submission so that it
may become another satellite, joining other African
States in South Africa’s orbit. Thus it is an attempt to
place the whole region under imperialist
hegemony.
Furthermore, this escalation comes at a time when acts
of aggression are being perpetrated against States in
Central America and in the Middle East by South Africa’s allies, with Israel at their fore.
38. Was not the “constructive engagement” between
international imperialism and South Africa an encouragement to the Pretoria Government to increase its acts
of oppression against the black majority? Was it not
also a signal as well as permission for Pretoria to dominate southern Africa both militarily and economically?
Was not the policy of “constructive
engagement”
a
green light allowing the violation of borders and sovereignty, the killing of innocents and the trampling underfoot of the ardent wishes of Namibia’s people for independence? Was it not a defiance of international law,
which one supposes that the Council will protect? Has
Namibia not become, through this “constructive
engagement”, a vast military base from which to attack
Angola? Who has made South Africa the tenth-largest
military Power in the world? Who today chooses to turn
a blind eye to Pretoria’s nuclear capabilities and even
extends co-operation in that regard? Who is providing
Pretoria with assistance so that it may spread its dominance and policy of blackmail and perpetrate acts of
subversion and terrorism?
39. As everyone knows, the racist regime, thanks to
the military power it has gained and to the assured
protection it enjoys from some Western States, in particular from the United States, now arrogates to itself
the right to sabotage and invade any African State that
commits itself to liberation in implementation
of United
Nations resolutions.
40. It is ironic that the Council, which has been unable
to impose comprehensive
sanctions against Pretoria
because of the well-known right of veto, now stands by
helplessly while Pretoria is inflicting all kinds of punishment on some African States.
41. It is truly regrettable that the United States should
withhold its aid from States which are in the front line
against the apartheid system, declaring that their voting
pattern in the United Nations was not pleasing to Washington. Is this not like imposing sanctions against the
victims of aggression rather than against the aggressor?
42. Pretoria shamelessly seeks to justify its acts of
aggression as anti-terrorist actions, whereas it is the
very State that perpetrates terrorism, institutionally
and constitutionally,
and could not exist a single day
without practising terrorism.
43. What about “linkage”?
That is but an attempt to
abort the struggle of the Namibian
people and of
SWAPO. This pretext of “linkage”
is totally unac-

ceptable: it is a transparent attempt to retain colonialism and encourage aggression against Angola.
44. My delegation is participating
in this debate to
declare once again its whole-hearted brotherly solidarity with the people and Government of Angola against
this aggression which aims, among other things, ‘at
undermining Angola’s independence as well as killing
innocent civilians and destroying the social and economic infrastructures of a young State that is mobilizing
its forces to overcome a period of backwardness imposed upon it by colonialism. We say to Angola that we
are at one with it in our common struggle against imperialism and colonialism.
45. We also believe it necessary to draw attention to
the coincidence and harmony between Pretoria’s acts,
the Zionist regime in Palestine and the tragic situation
suffered by the people of Lebanon because of Israel’s
invasion and occupation and the barbaric acts being
perpetrated
against civilians
inside and outside
occupied Lebanese territory. Through our own sufferings and our bitter experience, we can fully understand what Angola and the peoples and States of southern Africa are suffering. We cannot but find similarities
and concordances in the terrorist practices of the two
regimes of Pretoria and Tel Aviv. Both have acquired
land by force; both have deported the original inhabitants, the real owners of the land; both have exploited
the human and natural resources to line their own pockets; both have classified themselves as superior to other
human communities and have gone as far as to create
castes to separate them. In Africa, the racist minority
claims that it has been chosen to carry the message of
the white man; in occupied Palestine, racist Zionism at
times claims that it practises occupation, killing, deportation, usurpation and destruction in the name of an
invented divine message and at other times in the name
of a fabricated history invented and drafted by Zionism
to justify its aggression against our Arab people.
46. The Svrian Arab Reuublic. on the basis of its
principled stand, believes-in the unity of the ArabAfrican struggle against racism, apartheid and Zionism, all of which have the same aims and are in collusion, co-operating with an evil Power which has an
inherent interest in maintaining
exploitation,
dependence and slavery.
47. There is general agreement that it is impossible to
bring the racist terrorist leaders in Pretoria to order
except by imposing comprehensive and binding sanctions, in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. However, we know that the United
States and perhaps others will abort, through the use
of the veto, any constructive action by the Council to
fulfil its basic responsibility
of eradicating aggression
through binding collective action. We hope that the
Council will not produce a resolution similar to the one
it adopted three weeks ago [resolution 545 (1983)],
which Pretoria would interpret as representing the
Council’s inability to undertake its tasks in accordance

\

with the Charter vis-d-vis situations that now threaten
not merely the peace and security of southern Africa,
but of the whole world.

55. One of the pretexts put forward by the South
African authorities
is that their acts of aggression
against Angola are aimed at protecting the Namibian
people from attacks by SWAPO. This is a complete
reversal of right and wrong and a sheer confusion of
black and white. The prolonged occupation of Namibia
by South Africa is in itself an illegal action. SWAP0 is
the sole legal organization representing the Namibian
people, and it is recognized by the United Nations. It is
now leading the Namibian people in a struggle against
the South African occupation of Namibia and for national liberation. If the South African authorities’ brutal
slaughtering of the Namibian people is not to be regarded as terrorist activity, should we on the contrary
describe the latter’s struggle against South African colonial rule as terrorism? Is this not the colonialist logic
of might is right? This is something that the intemational community will never accept.

48. Come what may, however, we are convinced that
the valiant people of Angola and its Government, with
the support of peace-loving nations and people, can,
through the use of all the means at its disposal, defend
itself and eradicate the aggression imposed upon it.
Repeated acts of aggression are but an incentive to the
peoples of Africa to rise and defend themselves against
this mindless aggression. We are convinced that victory
will be our ally as long as our cause is the right one.
49.

Mr.

LING Qing (China) [interpreration
from
Sir, at the outset, please allow me warmly to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. I am convinced that with your competent guidance the Council will successfully discharge
its duties in the month of January.
Chinese]:

56. Another pretext used by the South African
authorities is that Angola sympathizes with and supports the struggle of the Namibian people for national
independence. The struggle of the Namibian people
against South African racist rule is ajust one. It has won
resolute support not only from Angola, but also from all
other justice-upholding
countries and peoples in Africa
and throughout the world.

50. By the same token, I should like to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Max van der Stoel, the President for
the month of December last year, for his outstanding
performance.
51. I also wish to take this opportunity to extend, on
behalf of the Chinese delegation, our warm welcome to
the delegations of Egypt, India, Peru, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic and the Upper Volta to participate in the work of the Council, and sincerely wish
that they will contribute substantially to the work of
the Council. Meanwhile, we thank the delegations of
Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire for the tireless
efforts they made in the past two years for the fulfilment
of the important tasks entrusted to the members of the
Council by the international community.

57. Both the General Assembly and the Security
Council have adopted numerous resolutions on this
matter. By pursuing policies of aggression and expansion, the South African authorities
have grossly
trampled underfoot the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international
law. All justiceupholding countries and peoples are determined to
wage unswerving struggles against the perverse acts of
the South African authorities.
58. The Chinese delegation
resolutely
supports
Angola in its struggle against South African aggression, strongly condemns South Africa for its new largescale invasion of Angola and demands that South Africa
withdraw all its troops from Angola immediately
and
unconditionally.
We hold that, should the South African authorities continue to act obdurately and refuse
to implement Council resolutions, the Council should
consider taking more effective measures according to
Chapter VII of the Charter.

52. The Council adopted resolution 545 (1983) on
20 December last year, in which it demanded that the
South African authorities unconditionally
withdraw
forthwith all their occupation forces from Angola.
Hardly had the ink of the resolution dried however,
when the South African authorities began to dispatch
more troops into Angola for an even larger-scale invasion of that country, penetrating Angolan territory as
deep as over 200 kilometres. Furthermore,
the South
African troops have been bombing and shelling AngoIan cities and towns almost daily, inflicting heavy loss
of life and property upon the innocent Angolan people.

59. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation
from Russian]:
In our first
statement this year, the Soviet delegation would like to
stress that as we enter this new year the Soviet Union
and Soviet people,express serious concern at the sharp
deterioration
in the international
situation and the
growing threat of nuclear war caused by senseless militaristic policies. These policies are revealed primarily
by the attempts at all costs to upset the military balance
that has evolved by deploying in Western Europe new
first-strike nuclear weapons and to force peoples and
States in Latin America, the Middle East and Africa to
submit to foreign diktat. In these complicated inter-

53. Such unbridled and criminal acts on the part of the
South African authorities in continued violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola and in
disregard of the solemn resolutions of the Security
Council have naturally met with strong condemnation
by the international
community.
54. In order to exonerate themselves from guilt, the
South African authorities have repeatedly resorted to
totally untenable sophism.
6

’

national circumstances the Soviet Union reaffirms its
constant policy to maintain and reinforce peace, to
rebuff aggression, to curb the arms race and to expand
and deepen co-operation among States.

66. Barely two weeks ago the Council adopted a resolution in which it decisively condemned South Africa
for the continued aggression against Angola and the
occupation of part of the territory of that country. The
Council called upon South Africa immediately
and unconditionally to withdraw all its occupation forces from
the territory of Angola, to cease all violations against
that State, and in future strictly to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic
of Angola. The Council stated that the continued illegal
military occupation of the territory of Angola was a
flagrant violation of Angola’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and that it posed a threat
to international
peace [resolution 545 (2983)].

60. The lofty, principles of the peace-loving foreign
policy of our country were reaffirmed in the decree of
the Supreme Soviet of the Union of.Soviet Socialist
Republics regarding the international situation and the
foreign policy of the Soviet State adopted on 29 December of last year.
,
_
61. In accordance with a good tradition, we should
like heartily to welcome to the Council the new nonpermanent members, the representatives
of Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
and the Upper Volta. We hope their participation in the
work of the Council will help to promote the solution of
complicated international problems and that it will be
constructive and in keeping with the major tasks that
confront the Council. For our part, we are prepared to
engage in close business-like co-operation with representatives of Member States in order to ensure that
the Council can successfully discharge its primary duty
under the Charter, the maintenance of international
peace and security.
.
:

67. What was Pretoria’s reaction to that clear decision
by the Council? Instead of immediately
heeding the
demands of the Council in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations, the South African aggressor cynically defied the Council, the countries of Africa and
all peace-loving mankind. Not only did Pretoria not
withdraw its troops from Angola or halt its aggression
against that State but, quite the contrary, it used these
last two weeks to mount another offensive deep into
Angolan territory, to bomb populated areas in that
country, killing innocent civilians and perpetrating further acts of State terrorism.

62. The election to the Council of four non-aligned
countries clearly attests to the role of the Movement of
Non-Aligned
Countries in our present world and is
recognition of its efforts to improve the international
climate, to halt the arms race and to bring about a
complete elimination
of colonialism.
Therefore, it is
absolutely natural that India-which
now occupies the
chairmanship of the Movement and is exerting a positive influence on developments in international affairs
at the present time-has
become a Council member.

68. The criminal aggression of South African racists
against the sovereign independent State of Angola is a
flagrant violation of the Charter and tramples underfoot
elementary norms of international law. The escalation
of aggressive actions by the Pretoria regime against
Angola has created a serious threat to peace and security not only in southern Africa but far beyond its borders. The aggressor acts in a manner clearly expecting
impunity. Its goal is the same one: to eliminate the
progressive regime in Angola.

63. ‘The Soviet delegation would also like to pay due
tribute to the contributions
of those countries whose
terms of office in the Council expired last year. The
representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and
Zaire contributed to the work of the Council in 1982 and
‘1983. Those years were some of the most tense in the
Council’s work for the past decade and reflected the
exacerbation of the overall situation in the world. We
wish the representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland,
Togo and Zaire every success in their future work.

69. Behind these actions lurk more far-reaching de.signs on the part of the South African leaders, aimed at
perpetuating racist colonial systems in southern Africa
through the systematic employment of military might,
destabilization
of the situation in neighbouring African
States, and destruction of the chances for a political
settlement in Namibia.
70. The South African racists undertook this recent
act of banditry only because they know full well that
they can count on the patronage of certain Western
Powers-foremost
among them the United States,
which collaborates with the Pretoria regime and gives it
support and political protection.

64.’ I wish, furthermore, to express gratitude to the
representative of the Netherlands, Mr, van der Stoel,
for effectively guiding the work of the Council in December last year, although he has not always able to
ensure that the Council began its work on time.

71: Members of the Council will remember very well
that two weeks ago the representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom spared no effort to get
the African countries to tone down as much as possible the original draft resolution before the Council
[S/Z@26], At, that time, Council members heard
statements to the effect that the most important thing
was not to miss the chance to negotiate with South

65. We are happy to welcome as President, of the
Council for this month the representative of Nicaragua,
Mr. Chamorro Mora, whose people is defending its
independence and freedom with such valour. We are
sure that he will guide the work,of the Council with his
well-known ability.
7

Africa and to take advantage of South Africa’s proposal
in respect of a so-called disengagement [see S/16219,
annex Z&although
even at that time it was perfectly
clear to everyone that the South African “proposal”
was nothing more than a ploy.

cause of peace has developed in southern Africa, and
that urgent and concerted international
efforts are
needed to eliminate it. In the present circumstances,
the proposals put forward by the Government
of
Angola in a message to the Secretary-General
of the
United Nations are timely and well justified. They
are: to put an end to the military operations in
Angola, to remove the South African invaders from
that area and at long last to set about the practical
implementation
of a political settlement in Namibia in accordance with United Nations decisions on
Namibia, including Security Council resolution 435
(1978).

72. Behind the smoke-screen created by that “proposal” and by the claims of Western countries about
the need to take advantage of it, South Africa mounted
a massive, large-scale offensive deep into Angolan territory.
73. At yesterday’s meeting, the representative of Angola, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Upper
Volta and many other speakers asked some legitimate
questions: How long will this flagrant international
lawlessness go on? For how long will the racist aggressor abuse the patience of African States and of the
entire international community?

“The Soviet Union believes that States which
cherish peace and the security of peoples and all
people of good will should raise their voices in the
defence of Angola and should, by their resolute
actions, frustrate the plans of the racist aggressors and their backers. Aggression must not go unpunished.” [See S/16254, annex].

74. Pretoria should understand that its entire policy of
piracy against African States is doomed to failure and
that it places a heavy lien on the future of South Africa
itself and on its relations with the world around it.
History and the peoples of Africa will not forgive the
crimes being committed by the apartheid regime.

79. We are convinced that the Council is duty-bound
not merely to adopt another resolution containing another condemnation
of the South African aggressors,
but to adopt decisive, effective measures under Chapter VII of the Charter in order to force South Africa
immediately
and unconditionally
to halt all acts of
aggression against Angola and forthwith to withdraw its
troops from the occupied territory of Angola. The
Council should seek reparations for the Government of
Angola for all the damage it has sustained.

75. The African countries and the overwhelming majority of other countries throughout the world are
very right in asking another, equally legitimate; question: ‘For how long will the Council be prevented from
adopting effective enforcement measures against the
South African aggressor? Certain people had the illusion that it was the concern of the West to normalize the
situation in southern Africa in the interest of the African
countries. But now, after so many years of the Western
Powers’ obvious pandering to Pretoria, that illusion
should be fully dissipated.

80. The Charter requires all Member States to abide
by Council decisions and to implement
them. The
Council should take due account of the refusal of certain countries-South
Africa in this case-to implement its decisions and should adopt appropriate measures against the violator, As was stated in the report of
the Secretary-General
on the work of the Organization
for 1982,

76. Whatever the sinister plans of the South African
racists and their protectors, Angola, the other front-line
African countries, jand the national liberation movements of southern Africa will not be broken. They have
many friends throughout the whole world. The staunchness of their resistance against aggression and their
valour in defence of their freedom and independence
have won general respect and are attracting growing
support.

“the best resolution in the world will have little practical effect unless Governments of Member States
follow it up with the appropriate
support and
action.?

78. As is stressed in a TASS statement issued today in
Moscow:

That comment is quite correct. It applies in this case
to Council members which, notwithstanding the Council’s condemnation
of South Africa for its constant
failure to carry out Council decisions, refuse to support
the adoption of effective measures which would force
Pretoria to abide by the requirements of the Charter. Is
it not ironic to hear representatives of those countries
complaining
about the ineffectiveness of the United
Nations when they themselves undermine the authority
of the Council?

“South Africa’s latest act of aggression against
Angola once again graphically demonstrates that,
through the action of the racist leaders of South
Africa and their backers, a situation endangering the

81. It is high time we saw to it that decisions adopted
by the Council were enforced. This is necessary in
order to strengthen the authority and influence of the
Security Council and of the United Nations in general.

77. The Soviet Union firmly sides with Angola and
with other African peoples fighting for freedom and
independence. Our country strongly condemns South
Africa’s continuing and escalating aggression against
Angola.

8

It is necessary for the maintenance
peace and security.

90. We greatly regret the loss of innocent lives. But
we should like to go beyond that. As this new year
starts, and despite its inauspicious beginning, there
must nevertheless be some room for encouragement in
that, in the space of two weeks, two new initiatives
have been publicly announced by the protagonists on
the spot, the most recent and the more generous by the
President of Angola.

of international

82. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): It gives me a great deal of
pleasure, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. I do so
with the happiest memories of the beauty of your country and the friendliness of its people.
83. 1 should like to affirm the debt of gratitude we owe
your predecessor, Mr. van der Stoel, representative of
the Netherlands, for the sterling service he rendered the
Council as its President for December 1983.

91. It is worthy of note that Angola, acting in defence
of its sovereignty, and upholding the sacred right of
self-determination
of peoples, is even more positive in
its attitude than South Africa, which illegally occupies
Namibia and illegally maintains troops in Angola.

84. I also wish warmly to welcome the representatives of the ,newly elected members of the Council
-Egypt,
India, Peru, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic and the Upper Volta-seated
around this table, and to assure them, as I assure you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council, of the readiness
of my delegation to co-operate fully with them in the
exercise of our heavy shared responsibilities.

92. We venture to hope that the Council may in the
near future devise more appropriate means than have
been utilized in the past to discern the positive elements, to build on them, to negotiate stumbling-blocks
and to encourage further dialogue and progress, relying
as always on the dedicated efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his able assistants in the pursuit of the
cherished objectives of the United Nations for southern
Africa.

85. Finally, I would thank the retiring members for
their dedicated service throughout their term of duty.

93. Peace is the common objective of all members,
but it requires understanding and restraint as well as cooperative and dedicated efforts by all if it is ever to be
attained. The people of Namibia, the nations of southem Africa and the whole world await a change in the
negative attitude so far maintained by the Government
of South Africa.

86. What a regrettable start to the year 1984. After
what was recognized as a restrained debate, the Council ended 1983 by sending a calm, studiedly clear and
measured message to South Africa, in the sense that the
policies of its Government were the object of the Council’s concern and indeed of its unanimous disapproval.
With calculated aloofness, the South African authorities once more decided to ignore that signal and instead
to escalate their armed intervention in Angola.

94. Perhaps the draft resolution that will be adopted
today, as well as the intelligently
perceptive editorial
entitled “Rewards for Coddling South Africa” that
appeared in The New York Times today, might finally
nudge South Africa into the necessary frame of mind.

87. As a result, more lives have been lost and more
property destroyed, as the representative of Angola
eloquently explained in detail yesterday. What is perhaps almost as regrettable, this chamber was subjected
yesterday to an intervention reminiscent of the attitude
of that Shakespearean character who would say, “I am
Sir Oracle, and when I open my lips let no dog bark.”

95. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation from Spanish]:
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
96. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam) [interpretation
from French]: Permit me first of all to congratulate you
warmly, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for the first month of the new year, 1984, and to
wish you every success in the fulfilment of your noble
task, which will certainly auger well for the cause of
peace and security in the world this year.

88. We had thought that this particular character, as
well as his attitudes, had long been buried and best
forgotten centuries ago, because surely it could not now
be more evident that what is required is not for lips to be
opened in expressions of injured innocence but rather
for eyes to be opened to the dangerous fires of resentment that are being fueled by South Africa’s attitude,
and for ears finally to become receptive to the cries of
anguish of the Namibian people seeking independence
and those of the black peoples in South Africa striving
peacefully for full emancipation in their own country.

97. I also wish to express my gratitude to the representative of the Netherlands for his effective guidance of the work of the Council last month.
98. I would take this opportunity to congratulate the
five new non-permanent members and to thank all the
members of the Council for giving me this chance to
take part in the debate.

89. Without repeating our previously stated positions
on these aspects, we shall on this occasion limit ourselves to joining ranks in condemning the current armed
intervention by South Africa and in expressing solidarity with and support for the helpless Angolan victims.
\

99. As is stated in the communication
of 31 December
1983 from the President of the People’s Republic of
9

Angola to the Secretary-General
[S/26245] and the
urgent message of 1 January 1984 addressed to the
President of the Council [S/16244], the military situation in southern Angola has worsened dangerously because of the escalating military aggression by South
African armed forces since 16 December 1983 deep into
Angolan territory, more than 200 kilometres from the
Namibian border. The fact that nearly two weeks,after
the adoption by the Council of resolution 545 (1983) the
Council has once again been requested to meet urgently
to consider a new Angolan complaint against South
African aggression bears, clear witness to the seriousness of the situation,in Angola, which entails disastrous
consequences for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a member State .of the Organization of African
Unity, the Non-Aligned
Movement and a Member of
the United Nations as well as for.peace and security in
southern Africa and throughout the world.

condemnation directed against it the South African rtgime, on the advice of certain of its Western allies, has
been forced to resort to a smoke-screen to conceal the
escalation of its military aggression while exerting
strong pressure in the hope of achieving a success that
has so far eluded it through force of arms, namely, the
renunciation by the Namibian people of their national
liberation struggle and the renunciation by the people of
Angola of their right to self-defence against aggression
as well as of their internationalist
obligation with regard
to Namibian independence. However, the threat insolently levelled in the Council yesterday by the .representative of Pretoria testifies to the utter impudence of a
criminal regime that has been outlawed by the international community and above all to its impotent rage at
finding itself unable to force the Namibian and Angolan
peoples to lay down their arms.
103. Faced with the current escalation of aggression
by South Africa, which poses a serious threat to the
independence ,of Angola and to peace in southern
Africa, what are we to do?..

100. By yet another insolent act of defiance towards
the Council’s most recent resolution in which the Council demanded the cessation of acts of aggression and
the immediate withdrawal of the South African occupation forces from .the territory of Angola, the Pretoria
racist regime is determined to further the realization
of its’ plans to destabilize and undermine Angola by
intensifying its war of aggression against that country
and by committing new offenses there, creating further
mourning and destruction. In so doing ,Pretoria is, on
the one hand, trying to consolidate its illegal colonialist
domination over Namibia and, on the other, to achieve
hegemony over Angola, in the form of the neo-colonialist reconquest agreed upon by international imperialism, as well as over other independent countries in
southern Africa. And by so doing Pretoria is continuing
to perpetrate a two-fold crime against humanity and
against peace, a notorious international crime that can
no longer be allowed to remain unpunished.
,:- .
1,Ol. ~Unfortunately , the reasons for such impunity are
basically to be found in the support and encouragement
proffered by international
imperialism
and, first and
foremost, by a powerful permanent member of the
Council which is using Pretoria in southern Africa as it
uses Tel Aviv in the Middle East and other reactionary
forces in Central America, in Asia and in the Far East to
tight against peoples struggling for national independence and social justice, and which at this very moment
is pushing the nuclear arms race into a new hysterical
spiral, creating ,explosive tensions throughout
the
world,:including
Europe, and even in space.

104. Notwithstanding’
seven. resoIutions adopted by
the Security Council since 1976, the aggressor’persists
.with its infamies and its arrogance. It is high time for
the international
community to turn to ,more energetic
actions to put an end to so intolerable a state of affairs.
The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries has already
expressed its firm support to the victim by declaring
that aggression against Angola is aggression against
the Movement asa whole. It is therefore up to us to
strengthen multilateral
assistance to the people of Namibia in their struggle under the leadership of SWAPO,
as well as to the people and Government of Angola, so
that they may more effectively intensify their resistance
to South African aggression. For their part, the people
and Government of Viet Nam .wish to reaffirm their
militant solidarity with and total support for this just
struggle, which will certainly, be victorious.
105. “The people of Angola are with great courage and
sacrifice facing aggression and are succeeding in
forcing the South African troops to retreat after their
advance deep into Angolan territory. At the same time,
the Government of Angola has demonstrated its good
will by informing the .Secretary-General that it would
have no objections to the establishment of a .30-day
truce, on certain precise conditions [see S/Z6245],.
106. Nevertheless, it is now abundantly clear that we
should cherish no illusions in the light of Pretoria’s wellknown arrogance and impudence. It ismore realistic for
the international
community to assist in strengthening
the ,SWAPO resistance forces and Angola’s defence
capability. It is also incumbent upon the Council. to
condemn South Africa’s acts of aggression against
Angola more strongly and to demand with greater firmness the immediate and unconditional withdrawal from
Angola of the South African occupation troops. At the
same time, we must envisage the need to resort to more
effective measures,.

102. .-The urgent’need
to put an .end to the acts of
aggression committed by the racist South African rCgime in Angola is commensurate with the vehemence of
the .brazen obstinacy with which-Pretoria
has carried
out its recent systematic.acts
of military aggression,
.which began on 16 December 1983, deep into Angolan
territory while having only the day before, on 15 December, put ,forward its impudent offer of a “disengagement of .forces”. [see $116219, annex I]. It is interesting to note that faced with the tide,of international
10

_

of the airspace, soveriignty and territorial integrity of
Angola. These despicable acts are not only iti contravention of the Charter of the United Nationsand ail
conceivable norms of iritematid law; they are&o in
contravention of ail the relevant Council decisions, the
latest of which is resolution 545 (1983) in which the
Council, inter a&z, demands the unconditional withdrawal of all the Sotith African occupation forces from
Angola.
’

107. That is why, while subscribing to the draft resolution submitted to the Security Council [S/16247],
my delegation would like to emphasize the importance
of operative paragraph 8, which provides for a future
meeting of the Council in the event of non-compliaxice
by South Africa for the purpose of considering “the
adoption of more effective measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations”.
108. For, in the final analysis, we must reply to the
series of burning questions that were put to us yesterday by the representative of Angola. And we must
support his militant slogan: “The struggle continues;
victory is certain!”

115. It is therefore with a senseof shock that we ha=
learned that, instead of withdrawing uncondition&g
from Angola in accordance with Council resolution 545
(1983), racist South Africa has chosen to escalate
its bombing mi.Gions and brought more troops into
Angola. This development has progressively worsened
the military situation in southern Angola to the extent
that the racist South African invading forces have gone
more than 200 kilometres inside Angola. It is against
that background that Angola would be justified in
invoking Article 51 of the Charter precisely to defend
itself, we urge the Council to support :Angola’s sovereign right in this regard. Furthermore, we still maintain
that Angola should be compensated by South Africa fof
the loss of life and destruction of property just as some
members around this table have asked for compeniation in situations of their interest. The Council should
.not be seen to apply double standards in the discharge
of its responsibility.

109. The PRESIDENT [interpretation
from
Spunish]: The next speaker is the representative of Zambia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
110. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia):, I wish ‘to thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Council for
allowing my delegation to participate in the current
debate.
111. I should like also to congratulate you, Sir, on
you? assumption of the office of President for this
month. In the same vein, allow me to pay a tribute to
the representative of the Netherlands, who efficiently
presided over the Council’s work last month.

116. The Council should strongly condemn racist
South Africa for its continued war against the peaceloving people of Angola. This war is a flagrant violation
of international law, the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola. My delegation views
with indignation the fact that the principle of nonintervention iri the affairs of other States, which has
served as one of the guiding principles of stable interState relations, has been completely thrown overboard
by racist South Africa. As a consequence,,racist South
Africa marches at will into the territories of its neighbours, such as Angola, Mozambique and Lesotho.

112. This is’one of those many occasions when the
Council has been called into session at the request of
Angola since that country attained independence in
1975. In fact, barely three weeks have passed since the
Council met last year to discuss racist South Africa’s
illegal occupation of southern Angola. Just as we ended
1983 discussing South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Angola, sadly we begin 1984 by discussing South
Africa’s continued occupation of and further aggression against Angola. This is a most revolting experience
for Angola.
’
‘113. As in the ptist, yesterday Mr. Elisio de Figueiredo of Angola vividly presented his country’s case
against racist South Africa. It is a case which is well
known to all of us. Once again Angola is seeking refuge
in the Council because of its belief in the.primacy of the
Council in terms of its responsibility ‘for the maintenance of international peace and security if only,
I might add, it can act decisively to correct the situation. My country, .Zambia; shares that belief. -At the
same time, however’, we cannot but express deep regret
and consternation at the persistence of racist South
Africa’s war of unprovoked aggression against Angola,
despite the existence of the Council, whose prime
duty is to redress such a situation.

117. The dastardly acts of aggression and occupation
of Angola by racist South Africa are now being made
into permanent features. These .acts are already
threatening peace and security in the’ region in particular and in the world in general.
118. In this regard, I should like to inform the Council
that my country, Zambia, has already experienced
some of the untold consequences of racist South Africa’s war against Angola. Two thousand Angoian refugees have fled from Angola to Zambia over the past
fortnight or so owing to the fighting in southern Angola
perpetrated by the racist troops against the people of
Angola. I need not over-emphasize the economic consequences attendant upon such an exodus of people
fleeing from racist South African terror in their own
country to freedom in neighbouring countries; but,
thanks to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, a major airlift of -Angolan refugees has

114. Zambia is very much concerned at the Pretoria
regime’s renewed escalation of unprovoked bombing
and persistent acts of aggression against Angola,
including continued military occupation and violation
11

Started to take them to Luanda from one of the cities of
Zambia. In this connection, we wish sincerely to com@rend the efforts of the Secretary-General and the High
Gommissioner
for alleviating the situation.

regime continues to gain more strength every day? It is
because a small number of members around this table,
even if they denounce apartheid, support the Pretoria regime politically, economically, diplomatically
and
militarily.

119. When I addressed the Council on 20 December
1983 on the occupation of southern Angola by South
tirican forces, I drew the Council’s attention, inter
alia, to paragraph 7 of its resolution 475 (1980) on the
decision made [2507th meeting, para. 93. For the benefit of those who may have forgotten I shall again, with
the Council’s permission,
quote that paragraph in
which the Council decided

124. The question I should like to pose at this point is:
Would we be wrong in suggesting that by the very fact
of these few members of the Council sustaining the
South African regime they are, ipsofacto,
sustaining
the apartheid system?
125. It might be useful for some members of the Council to reflect on this question and find out the extent to
which this state of affairs has contributed to the failure
of the Council so far in taking effective measures
against the Pretoria regime.

“to meet again in the event of further acts of violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola by the South African racist
regime, in order to consider the adoption of more
effective measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof.‘*

126. Finally I take this opportunity
to restate my
country’s support for and solidarity with the Govemment and people of Angola in their struggle against the
racist occupation which the Council must end so that
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Angola can be restored and respected.

120. The situation under consideration has really got
worse. The Council is therefore faced with a challenge
to move beyond the ritual of indignant condemnation of
the racist Pretoria regime for its aggression and occupation of Angola to taking effective measures which
should bring about the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of racist South African forces from southem Angola. Such measures should involve the application of Chapter VII of the Charter.

127. Mr. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) [interpretation
from Russian]:
Mr. President,
the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic is extremely pleased to be commencing its work
in the Council under your leadership. You represent a
country the valour and resolve of whose people in
upholding their independence and own path of devel-’
opment have won for it sincere sympathy throughout
the world, far-reaching in understanding and support.
The Ukrainian SSR hopes that the people of Nicaragua
will fully resolve the difficult tasks confronting it. Allow
me sincerely to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of January
and to wish you every success in this difficult but highly
esteemed and important work.

121. We can no longer condone having a Council that
has been turned into a talking forum only. There is no
justification whatsoever for retreating from taking such
appropriate measures in the light of racist South Africa’s persistence, with impunity, in defying the Council
over the years.
122. It is the belief of my delegation that the racist
Pretoria regime has always indulged in belligerent and
intransigent behaviour because of the lavish support
and comfort it enjoys from some Western Powers,
including a few represented around this table. The refusal, for instance, of some members of the Council
in the past to support necessary strong measures provided in the Charter has undoubtedly emboldened racist South Africa to persist in its commitment
of international crimes which, aside from those committed
against Angola, include the illegal occupation of Namibia, the practice of the apartheid system and the
general destabilization
of the independent
African
States in the region.

128. We should like to congratulate also the representative of the Netherlands, who ably guided the work of
the Council in December.
129. We join in the congratulations
addressed to the
delegations of Egypt, India, Peru and the Upper Volta
on their election to the Council. We wish them fruitful
work and pledge our co-operation.
130. The representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland,
Togo and Zaire, whose terms of office in the Council
expired only a few days ago, deserve our recognition
and thanks.

123. I wish to leave a thought which I consider important with the Council. As the Council is aware, the basis
of the South African regime’s behaviour both inside and
outside South Africa is apartheid. All members around
this table have condemned apartheid either as a crime
against human conscience or as a crime against humanity. But why is it that in spite of this consensus of the
international community % against apartheid the Pretoria

13 1. Our delegation is extremely grateful to you, Sir,
and to all delegations that welcomed the Ukraine after
our election to the Council. In this post the Ukrainian
SSR replaced Poland, a .fratemal socialist country to
which we are closely bound by our common commitment to the cause of peace and international
security.
I should like to transmit our gratitude to Mr. Wlod12

139. The recent escalation of aggression by South
Africa against Angola, with the connivance and suppon
of its protectors, primarily the United States, is a ver)serious danger for the cause of peace and security not
only in southern Africa but throughout the world.

zimierz Natorf for the contribution made by Poland to
the Council’s work over the last two years and during
its previous years of membership in the Council.
132. For the Ukrainian SSR to participate in the work
of the Council is a great honour. I should like to assure
members that we view our participation in the work of
the Council with a great sense of seriousness and responsibility and will try to discharge our duties in the
best possible manner.

140. One would need to have incredible impudence
and cynicism to state that these operations in southem
Angola were a prerequisite for South Africa to guam
tee its security, but that was precisely what was stat&
in the Council in December and repeated yesterday b!the representative of South Africa. This reminds OIY
very much of the policy of so-called constructive engagement pursued by the senior partner of the racists.

133. The most recent, and sixth, Council resolution
on the continuing acts of aggression by South Africa
against Angola was adopted on 20 December last year
[resolution 545 (1983)]. After due consideration
of
South Africa’s arbitrary.behaviour,
the Council unanimously, with one abstention, demanded that South
Africa should unconditionally
withdraw forthwith all its
occupation forces from the territory of Angola, cease
all violations against that State and henceforth scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

141. As has been stated by many delegations in the
Council, it is that very co-operation which is the main
obstacle to the elimination of colonialism and racism in
southern Africa and the achievement of a just and effective settlement of the security problems of the African
States that cherish peace and justice.
142. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR shares the
view that the Council, in view of the many years of
gross disregard of its decisions by South Africa, should
finally take all necessary measures and institute against
the aggressive racist regime sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

134. Today, however, the Council is being compelled
to take cognizance of a major escalation of military
intervention in Angola which has penetrated 200 kilometres into Angolan territory. The aggressor has used
sophisticated materiel-jet
aircraft, powerful artillery,
armoured vehicles and helicopters.
135. As a result of the many years of the war waged by
South Africa against Angola since 1975, many thousands of totally innocent people-children,
women and
old people-have
perished. Hundreds of villages and
towns have been destroyed. Extensive material damage has been caused totalling tens of billions of dollars.
The magnitude of South Africa’s aggression against
Angola and other African States is increasing.

143. The Ukrainian SSR decisively condemns South
Africa’s aggression against Angola and calls for its
immediate cessation and the unconditional withdrawal
of all occupying forces from Angolan territory. We fully
sympathize with the valiant people of Angola, who are
defending their freedom and independence by force of
arms. In this just and heroic struggle, Angola deservedly enjoys the warm sympathy and support of all honest people in the world and all forces of peace and
progress.

136. That in essence is the entire response of the racist
rulers of South Africa to the many decisions adopted by
the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the
United Nations Council for Namibia and other United
Nations bodies.

144. The PRESIDENT
fintermetation
from Swanish]: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

137. The plan of the Pretoria regime, like the plans of
those who pander to and protect the racists, is to hang
onto their domination
in Namibia and in southern
Africa by any means at any price. It seems that after this
bid for “linkage”
has turned out to be a failure for the
racists, they are now hastening to attain their goals by
military means and do not flinch from large-scale warfare against Angola.

145. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) [interpretation
from
French]: Sir, permit me first of all to convey my warm
congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month. I am extremely
pleased to do so since you represent a friendly country
which has shown the world that it is fervently committed to the ideal of freedom, peace and progress. Your
well-known conviction, authority and experience will
guarantee the success of these meetings.

138. They are seeking to intimidate Angola, to force it
to depart from a peace-loving, independent policy in
international affairs and subjugate it to imperialist diktat and to frustrate progressive socio-economic reforms
in other African countries in order to safeguard the
apartheid regime and maintain colonial systems in
southern Africa.

146. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. van der Stoel of the Netherlands, for the
noteworthy qualities he demonstrated while guiding the
Council’s work last month.
147. Finally, I wish warmly to welcome the new nonpermanent members of the Council. I am certain that
13

#heir individual and collective contributions will
strengthen this body’s authority.

that system and its precariousness consequently nourishes its expansionist and militaristic ambitions.

f48. The current Council debate, the very first in a
year that we hope will be favourable for international
peace and security,, remind us that in southern Africa a
policy of aggression and subversion pursued by South
&frica is keeping the whole region in a dangerous situa#ion of instability and insecurity.

153. Perhaps we should remind the Western representatives in the Council that the panegyric of war intoned
by the representative of Pretoria reminds us Africans of
the statement by a Prussian militarist of a recent era,
Helmut von Molke, who wrote: “Perpetual peace is a
dream and not even a good one. War is an element in the
divine order of the universe. Without war, the world
would wallow in materialism.” Those words inspired
Hitler and Mussolini, as today they inspire the leaders
of Pretoria. :

149. That situation, characterized in particular by
large-scale acts of aggression perpetrated by the Pretoria regime against Angola and the military occupation
of part of that country’s territory by South African
troops, is certainly among those that demonstrate unacceptable contempt for the law and seriously threaten
international peace and security.
150. This expansionist policy clouds all horizons in
southern Africa. The colonial policy in Namibia, the
system of apartheid imposed upon the South African
people, the policy of aggression and subversion against
the States of the region all stem from the very nature of
a regime that openly declares itself to be racist and that
thrives on the general instability it maintains. It is clear
today that the repeated attacks,against the sovereign
States of the region are meant not so much to break the
natural solidarity linking them to the Namibian people,
but more particularly to impose the racist order on
southern Africa’through subjugation of the peoples of
the region and through a neocolonial solution in Namibia.
151, Since its accession to independence, Angola has
known hardly one day of peace owing to the attacks by
the apartheid regime. As the Council itself has recognized, the national sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Angola are being literally violated. According to
information published by the Angolan Government,
more than 2,000 acts of aggression, ranging from violations of airspace to invasion and military occupation
pure and simple, have been perpetrated by South Africa
against Angola since 1975. These acts of aggression
have caused thousands of casualties and tens of thousands of refugees to flee the racist terror; the value
of the material destruction is estimated at several billion dollars. Savage military attacks, the occupation
by force since 1981 of part of Angolan territory, the
massive bombing of Angolan provinces-those are
the results of .this undeclared war that South Africa
has unleashed against Angola-a war which, according
to Pretoria’s spokesman, is meant to put an end to
SWAPO’s activities.

154. Not having taken those words seriously, Europe
found itselfin atrocious wars. We wish to spare southem Africa from a similar tragic fate. That indeed is what
led Angola and the front-line States to call for this
urgent meeting of the Council. This year marks the
hundredth anniversary of the Berlin conference, at
which Africa was carved up by an expansionist Europe.
It will be 100 years in August 1984 since South West
Africa was occupied by Prussian troops. How, in 1984,
100 years later, can we complacently allow a racist
regime to impose the same process of colonialization
and subjugation in southern Africa? How can a regime
whose.presence in Namibia has been universally declared illegal and internationally condemned-a regime
which denies the right of existence to millions of human
beings-come today before this body and declare:
“South African security operations in southern Angola
have but a single objective, and that is the protection of
the inhabitants of South West Africa/Namibia from
terrorist attacks by the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO)” [2509th meeting, pm-u. 351.
How can a regime thrice guilty of crimes against
humanity, of a policy of oppression, aggression and
illegal occupation come here and declare itself “protector” of a people to which it has denied the most funda-’
mental rights for sevetil decades? Such ludicrous arguments, nevertheless, do not prevent certain Powers
favourably disposed to South Africa from attaching’
some credibility to them.
155.. In fact, the latest attacks by the racist troops of
Pretoria stem less from a desire to neutralize SWAP0
than from the direct support for subversive groups
remote-controlled by South Africa and which the
Angolan troops are defeating. By its acts of aggression
against Angola and other countries of the regian, by its
policy of subversion that is of such unprecedented dimensions that it extends as far as Seychelles, South
Africa has given proof that it is engaged in nothing less
than war.

152. All expansionist regimes are decidedly similar in
the incongruity and cynicism of their methods and arguments. Hitler and Mussolini were the masters. To justify its attack on the innocent lamb, the fox in the fable
said: “If not you, then your brother.‘*. Indeed, the
apartheid system harbours war, just like all Fascist
regimes that have gone before it. It cannot escape this.
Injustice and oppression are the very foundations of

156. The policy of South Africa, just like that of its
natural ally in the Middle East, is a constant challenge
‘to the international community, and first and foremost
to the United Nations, whose very foundations it undermines and whose authority it flouts.
157. Let it be recalled in this regard that the debates
and decisions of the Council have clearly assessedre- ,
14

161. This reply stems from the. continued military
occupation of part of southern Angola and from the
savage acts of aggression against several Angolan provinces. It stems from the arrogant statements by the
leaders of Pretoria, which have been echoed in the
Council chamber; this organ is thus constantly obliged
to acknowledge an open rebellion against its authority.
The situation prevailing in southern Angola illustrates
the seriousness of the new challenge to the Council.
This organ has failed to draw the appropriate conclusions from the obstinacy of the Pretoria regime, which
continues to defy the United Nations; the Council has
not brought all its weight to bear in enforcing its decisions. Hence its reactions could not have a deterrent
effect. Its carefully measured injunctions and ‘verbal
condemnations,
never coupled with effective measures, could never prevent Pretoria from pursuing its
policy of oppression and aggression; quite the contrary.

sponsibility,
have noted the constant aggression and
identified the aggressor. Since 1976, practically year
after year, the Council has condemned South African
acts of aggression against Angola, called for its immediate cessation, demanded the immediate withdrawal of
racist troops from Angolan territory, and reaffirmed the
right of Angola to just and rapid compensation.
The
inability of this body to enforce its own decisions has
done nothing but embolden Pretoria in its intransigence, and the situation can only further deteriorate.
158. Hardly two weeks ago [2508th meeting], the
Council adopted resolution 545 (1983) in which it condemned the military occupation of part of the territory
of Angola by South Africa and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the troops of that
regime. That resolution, as the events of today prove,
was to suffer the same fate as that of its predecessors.

162. The present situation is critical. What is the use
of this debate if it should conclude and this arrant
military occupation and armed aggression as well as the
outright defiance of the Council do not incur the sanctions they deserve?.Chapter
VII of the Charter of the.
United Nations is designed to impose respect for legality. The Security Council must invoke it. The Council
must also condemn the military occupation of southern
Angola and the acts of armed aggression by the Pretoria
regime against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of that country. It must demand the cessation of aggression, the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of’
the racist troops from the territory of Angola and compensation for damage done to that country. Only the
adoption of such measures can restore the Council’s
credibility and reinforce its role as the guarantor of.
international peace and security.

159. Statements by South Africa repeated here again
yesterday, under an alleged offer to disengage,, are
meant only to hoodwink and confuse, as several delegations have stated. In that connection, the representative of Angola drew the attention of the Council to
Pretoria’s manoeuvres when he declared on 16 December:
“In a gesture of calculated cynicism, the racist
regime, upon hearing of my Government’s
request
that a Council meeting be convened, made a tactical
move aimed at diffusing expressions of support for
the Angolan position and the Angolan cause, and at
giving its allies the dubious distinction of being able
to point with pride to the fact that, at last, their policy
of constructive engagement is paying off.
“It is such racist tactics and strategies that we in,
southern Africa have learned, through bitter experience with Pretoria and through trust in its allies, to
be extremely wary of.” [2504th meeting, paras. I9
and 20.1

The meeting
.

rose at 6.50 p.m.

.I

NOTE

160. Today, only one simple question arises: has resolution 545 (1983) been implemented?
To that question
we must all reply with an unequivocal “No”.

’ Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Ses5.
sion, Supplement No. I (A/37/1), p. 3.
‘.

15

G

J.Li

$1

;;kJI

j

b

+.A

. ,JWl .L; I m

j

?.I
. .A.+

,,a, d$JI
j )I &JL*

j
j

id1
+I

?Yl d>,z.
,A# LUJI

Js J,aJl
;k-.
pYI : Jl &-I
,I

tomllmufwm&%
&fc4~&~17fPe~~m

HOW

#GHtl!ie~~a~B.

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

~b-#aiL1Filldzu~rr?aMldzHA~B~:C41fB29~1.

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
-.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
I : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

kIO:IY-HTh

R3nAHIIH

OPrAHZi3Al~2iZi

OEI>E,WiHEHHIdX

IMJJULHWR
OpraHl*3aqnu
06zefiHHeHHblX
HaqEik
MomHo
IqmHTh
SHH~X
n are~~emax
80 acex
pafioHax
mipa.
H~BOAHT~
cnpa~x~
BCLUI~M KHIIXHOM
Maramm
wnu mmnne
no anpecy
: Opra~n3aswfi
Hauwfr.
Cercuun no npo~ame
I43AaHUfi,
HMO-Flopw
m m Xe~e~a.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONRS

HAIUifl
B KHHXKHWY
nrara06 SWXaHnI(x
B

O~%W~HH~HH~IX

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York
‘\

00400

90-61313-Ianuaty

1993-2.050
