V.

165
Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-------"---~------------

formation on the procurement activities ofthe United Nations system;
31. Considers that the technical capacities of the
United Nations system in the field could more fully be
brought to bear in support of the modality of government
execution of projects, and requests the Goveming Council
of the United Nations Development Programme at its
thirty-fifth session to consider what further support can be
offered to Govemments and what further flexibility may
be called for to facilitate govemment execution of projects;
32. Requests United Nations funding organizations,
especially the United Nations Development Programme,
to adhere rigorously to established criteria and procedures
in the selection of executing agencies to be recommended
to recipient Govemments so as to ensure the provision of
technical expertise and appropriate project support, including technical backstopping, as well as the reliability
and accountability of the executing agencies;
33. Invites the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme to examine modalities for
enhancing the implementation of its inter-country programme, taking fully into account the technical skills and
capabilities existing within the United Nations system and
in other appropriate organizations and bodies and also
t~king into account the different characteristics of each reg1on;
34. Invites the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme, given the expiry in 1991
of current arrangements for project support costs, to begin
considering successor arrangements designed to ensure
enhanced project quality and maximum cost-effectiveness,
with a view, inter alia, to ensuring the full utilization of
technical and managerial capacities at all stages ofthe project cycle;
35. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to provide information to its field offices on programmes promoting or facilitating technical co-operation
among developing countries offered by various developing
countries;
36. Requests the Director-General for Development
and lntemational Economic Co-operation to report on the
implementation of the present resolution, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at
its forty-third session.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987
42/197.

United Nations lnstitute for Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41/172 of 5 December 1986,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 8'l
Recognizing the continuing importance and relevance of
the mandate of the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research,
Recognizing a/so the need for all Governments to contribute or increase their voluntary contributions, as appropriate, to the Institute,
Noting with concern the continuing lack of a sufficiently
broad base of donor countries supporting the Institute,
. Noting with regret that the 1987 United Nations Pledgmg Conference for Development Activities was unable to
89 A/42/6'l4 and Corr. l.

provide the General Fund of the United Nations lnstitute
for Training and Research with the leve! of resources required to maintain its current programmes and institutional structure,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,
prepared in response to General Assembly resolution
41/172; 8()
2. Reaffirms the continuing validity and relevance of
the mandate of the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research;
3. Stresses that the lnstitute makes an important contribution to the work of the United Nations and that every
effort should be made to continue its activities;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to restructure the
lnstitute as follows:
J.

PROGRAMME

A. Training
Training shall henceforth be the main focus ofthe
activities of the Institute, and that focus should be duly
reflected in the budget allocations;
2. The core training programme financed from the
General Fund shall concentrate on training for intemational co-operation and multilateral diplomacy at various levels, primarily of persons from developing countries;
3. The core training programme for 1988 and subsequent years financed from the General Fund, as set out
in annex I to the report ofthe Secretary-Generai, 89 shall
be reviewed by the Board ofTrustees in the context ofits
programme and budget preparations and may be adjusted in the light of the financia! resources available to
the Institute; the Board of Trustees shall also, in accordance with the statute of the Institute, consider and approve any new programmes that may be proposed by the
Secretary-General or Governments through the General
Assembly;
4. Training programmes designed and conducted by
the lnstitute for other United Nations bodies and specialized agencies shall not result in any financial obligations for the General Fund and shall be carried out on a
fully reimbursable basis;
5. Training for economic and social development
and any other training activities shall be funded from
special purpose grants:
l.

B. Research
6. Research shall remain a function of the Institute,
bearing in mind that the main focus shall be on training,
as outlined above; for the present, funding for research
from the General Fund shall not exceed the present ratio
of 13 per cent of the annual budget;
7. Current and ongoing research projects financed
from the General Fund shall be concluded as soon as
possibk if the long-term continuation of a project is envisaged, the appropriate United Nations body should
consider financing it, or a special purpose grant should
be sought for its execution;
8. Research and study falling within the mandate of
the Institute may he financed from special purpose
gran ts on a full-cost basis:
9. Research-cum-training in negotiating techniques,
international law and economic and social development
shall be funded from special purpose grants;

166

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

C. Projects jinanced from special purpose grants
10. Special purpose grants shall be welcome as long
as they are made for activities that relate directly to the
mandate of the Institute and do not overlap with work
carried out elsewhere in the United Nations system;
11. Special purpose grants shall cover, in addition to
the full costs of implementing the project (direct costs),
including administrative costs, an execution fee, which
should be determined by the Executive Director of the
Institute on a case-by-case basis but should not be less
than 13 per cent in each case;
12. The Secretary-General shall make available annually to all States, United Nations bodies, specialized
agencies and relevant non-governmental organizations a
list of training and research projects and invite them to
finance these projects through special purpose grants;
11. FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION
13. In the light of the restructured programme set
out above, the Secretary-General is requested to reorganize the management, staff and administrative and financia) arrangements of the Institute in the following
manner:
A. Stajf
14. The staff, whose composition is reflected in the
annex to the present resolution, shall be assigned to the
programme activities of the Institute in proportion to
the work-load and tasks necessary to carry out each programme activity at levels that will enable the Institute to
carry them out effectively;
15. The composition and structure of the staff to be
funded from the General Fund shall be reviewed by the
Board of Trustees in the context of budget preparations
ánd may be adjusted in the light of the financia} resources available to, and programme activities of, the Institute, taking into account the views of ali States, and ali
documents, formal and informal, discussed under the
agenda itero of the General Assembly entitled "Training
and research: United Nations Institute for Training and
Research";
16. The experience and expertise ofthe personnel of
the Institute are to be fully and effectively utilized;
17. Fellows and additional staff may be financed
from special purpose grants;
18. A roster shall be maintained of consultants and
experts and rotating staff whose services may be needed
by the Institute for the execution of projects and programmes at no cost or through financing from special
purpose grants;

B. Budget
19. The use offinancial resources available to the Institute shall be governed by the following principies in
1988 and subsequent years:
(a) The Institute shall operate on the basis of paid-in
voluntary contributions and such other additional resources as may be available;
(b) The interest accruing from the reserve fund to be
established by the Institute after the sale of the building
it occupies, shall be applied to the annual budgetary appropriations of the lnstitute;
(e) Allocations for programme and general operational costs shall correspond to the priority given to activities;

(d) General operational costs shall be reduced to a
minimum;
( e) Staff costs, in relation to the overall budget, shall
be minimized;

5. Approves the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to proceed as rapidly as possible with the acquisition of the land and subsequent sale of the en tire property
of the building of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the resources to be used to repay the
amounts currently dueto the United Nations and the balance to be used as a reserve fund for the Institute;
6. Urges ali States that have not yet contributed to the
General Fund of the Institute to do so and calls upon ali
contributing States to increase their contributions to the
Institute to enable it to continue to fulfil its mandate and
to implement fully and successfully the provisions of the
present resolution;
7. Appeals to ali States to provide appropriate special
purpose grants to enable the Institute to implement the
training and research programmes that cannot be financed
from its General Fund, and calls upon appropriate intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
contribute to the Institute;
8. Emphasizes the urgent need for broad-based financing for the Institute and invites the traditional donors, in
the light of the implementation of the present resolution,
to resume or continue, as appropriate, their voluntary contributions to the Institute;
9. Requests the Board ofTrustees to considera procedure for designating alternates for Trustees who are unable to attend any meeting of íhe Board and for ensuring
that the alternates so designated are able to participate
fully in the deliberations and decision-making of the
Board;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit to the Board of Trustees at its forthcoming session
the necessary amendments to the statute ofthe Institute to
reflect the reorganization of management, staff and administrative and financia} arrangements, as well as the
procedure for designating alternate representation on the
Board;
11. Appeals to the Secretary-General to give priority
consideration to absorbing, on an exceptional basis, within
'the United Nations Secretariat and other organizations of
the United Nations system, the staff of the lnstitute who
will be released as a result of the restructuring and to ensure that those who are so affected do not sutfer loss of
rank or benefits;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report
for submission to the General Assembly at its forty-third
session on the implementation of the present resolution
and on any other developments that may affect the future
of the Institute, including a section on how the research
activities ofthe Institute affected by the present resolution
relate to those of other United Nations bodies, with a view
to better co-ordination of activities.
96th plenary meeting
11 December 1987

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ANNEX
Proposed disposition of the staff of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research

2.

Post
Executive Director (who will also serve as a Programme Officer)
Programme Officer (New York)

3.
4.
5.

Programme Officer (Geneva)
Administrative and Finance Officer
Three General Service staff

l.

42/198.

Furthering international co-operation regarding the externa! debt problems

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/202 of 8 December 1986
on strengthened international economic co-operation
aimed at resolving external debt problems of developing
countries,
Recalling the Final Act adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at its seventh session, held at Geneva from 9 July to 3 August 1987, 2
Recalling Trade and Development Board resolutions
16S (S-IX) of 11 March 197890 and 222 (XXI) of 27 September 198091 and the relevant recommendations of the
mid-term global review ofprogress towards the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries,88
Concerned about the slowing down of the world
economy in the 1980s and the persistence of large imbalances, which was noted at the meetings of the Interim
Committee of the Board of Governors on the International Monetary System and the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the
Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing
Countries in September 1987,
Recognizing that the continuing debt problems of developing countries have become a major obstacle that restricts their economic recovery and long-term development, thereby increasing the vulnerability of the
international financial system and adversely atfecting the
ability of debtor countries to import and creditor countries
to export and thereby their growth and employment performance,
Deeply concerned at the increasing debt borden and the
deteriorating debt situation of African countries, which
impede the recovery and development of the continent
and the implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and
Development 1986-1990,60
Noting that there has been an evolving response from the
international community to the debt problem, which
recognizes the shared responsibility of the main parties
concerned, namely developing debtor countries, developed creditor countries, private and multilateral financial
institutions,
Profoundly concerned that, despite significant etforts by
developing countries to deal with the debt crisis, the
desired results have not yet been achieved and therefore
acknowledging the need for continued and evolving international co-operation, particularly to improve the interna90 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Suffi/ement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. 1, part two, annex I.
Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/35/15), vol. II,
annex 1.

167

tional economic environment, in order to attain a lasting
solution to the problems of indebtedness of developing
countries,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General on the
international debt situation in mid-1987, 92
1. Endorses the policies and measures agreed u pon and
spelt out in section 11.A of the Final Act adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at
its seventh session, 2 entitled "Resources for development,
including financial and related monetary questions";
2. Expresses concern that external debt problems can
pose a threat to economic, social and political stability in
indebted countries;
3. Stresses that debtor developing countries, creditor
developed countries and international private and multilateral financial institutions should strengthen work on
an evolving and growth- and development-oriented
strategy, through continuous dialogue and shared responsibility, in order to attain a durable, equitable and mutually agreed solution to debt problems;
4. Reiterates that specific measures to deal with the indebtedness of developing countries should pay particular
regard to the relevant factors of the debt-servicing
capacity of each individual country;
5. A/so reiterates that, in the present circumstances,
adjustment etforts are needed on the part of ali countries,
collectively and individually, each country contributing to
the common objective in accordance with its capacities
and weight in the world economy;
6. Reiterates that it is essential for the international
economic environment to be made more stable and predictable in support of growth through etforts by the major
market economy countries, including strengthened multilateral surveillance, aimed at correcting existing external
and fiscal imbalances, promoting non-inflationary sustainable growth, lowering real rates ofinterest and making exchange rates more stable and markets more accessible;
7. Further reiterates that it is essential for debtor developing countries to pursue and intensify their etforts to increase savings and investment, reduce inflation and improve effi.ciency, taking into account their own individual
characteristics and the vulnerability of the poorer strata;
8. Reiterates that it is essential that external financing
from official and private sources be increased on appropriate terms and conditions in support of these etforts;
9. Recognizes the competence of multilateral financia}
institutions and the need for providing them with the adequate resources and instruments necessary, inter alia, to
strengthen their contribution to attaining a durable, equitable and mutually agreed solution to the debt problems
and, in this context, takes note with interest of:
(a) The agreement on a substantial general capital increase for the World Bank;
(b) The initiative by the Managing Director ofthe International Monetary Fund to increase substantially the
resources of the Structural Adjustment Facility;
(e) The work towards an increase of quotas in the context ofthe Ninth General Review ofQuotas in the International Monetary Fund;
(d) The proposal to enlarge the scope of the Compensatory Financing Facility by the creation of a new external
contingency facility;

92 A/42/523.
