A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/115
30 January 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 89
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/729/Add.6)]
49/115.

Observance of World Day to Combat
Desertification and Drought

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the relevant provisions of chapter 12 of Agenda 21, 1/
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development,
Considering that the promotion of action to implement the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, 2/ requires public
awareness at local, national, subregional, regional and international levels,
Acknowledging that desertification and drought are problems of global
dimension in that they affect all regions of the world and that joint action
by the international community is needed to combat desertification and
drought, particularly in Africa,
Recognizing the importance and necessity of international cooperation
and partnership in combating desertification in those countries experiencing
serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa, in accordance

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
2/
95-76273

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.
/...

A/RES/49/115
Page 2

with the provisions of the Convention, adopted by the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Committee in Paris on 17 June 1994,
Recognizing also the strong commitment of the international community to
implementing the Convention and its regional implementation annexes,
1.
Decides to proclaim 17 June World Day to Combat Desertification
and Drought, to be observed beginning in 1995;
2.
Invites all States to devote the World Day to promoting public
awareness through the publication and diffusion of documentaries and the
organization of conferences, round-table meetings, seminars and expositions
relating to international cooperation to combat desertification and the
effects of drought and the implementation of the provisions of the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and its
regional implementation annexes;
3.
Invites the Secretary-General to make recommendations on ways and
means by which the Secretariat could assist Member States, upon their request,
in organizing their national activities for the observance of the World Day;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to make the necessary arrangements
to ensure the success of the observance by the United Nations of the World
Day;
5.
Invites all relevant United Nations bodies, within their mandates,
and non-governmental organizations to promote World Day to Combat
Desertification and Drought.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
