United Nations

S/PV.6609

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6609th meeting
Monday, 12 September 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Tian Lin
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2011/554)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-49208 (E)

*1149208*

S/PV.6609

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2011/554)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Joseph Dauda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Guillermo
Rishchynski, Chairperson of the Sierra Leone countryspecific configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Canada, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/554, which contains the seventh
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor to Mr. Michael von der
Schulenburg.
Mr. Von der Schulenburg: Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
seventh report of the Secretary-General on Sierra
Leone (S/2011/554) since the establishment of an
integrated United Nations peacebuilding mission in
2008.
As the country celebrated the fiftieth anniversary
of its independence last April, Sierra Leone continued
its progress towards developing into a stable, peaceful

2

and economically more viable democracy. I feel that
this is the occasion, especially here in the Security
Council, to commend the people of Sierra Leone for
what has been achieved during the past nine years in
consolidating peace and building a stable, democratic
society. These are achievements made not only by two
peacetime democratically elected presidents and
successive democratically elected Governments, but
also by political party leaders, independent
commissioners, local district officials, civil society,
traditional and religious leaders, professionals,
journalists and artists, tradesmen, doctors and nurses,
teachers and police officers — in short, by many
ordinary Sierra Leonean men and women.
However, the recent clashes and skirmishes that
occurred not only between followers of the two main
political parties but also among followers of different
groups within the same political party remind us that
there is still considerable potential for conflict and
violence. Particularly serious was the attack that took
place three days ago on the presidential candidate of
the main opposition and the subsequent rampage that
left him with head injuries and also left one person
dead, scores injured and a number of properties
belonging to followers of the governing party
devastated.
It is not yet clear who was responsible for the
attack, and we must not jump to quick conclusions; the
President has acted immediately by setting up a public
investigation, and the police has stepped up security
for the opposition leader. However, this brings into the
open the fact that there remains a persistent social
undercurrent that can turn into violence if provoked,
despite all the progress that has been made.
I therefore call on all Sierra Leonean politicians
not to forget what they have achieved, to continue
building on those achievements and to act responsibly.
Elections are still one and a half years away, and this
must not start to embitter the social and political
climate in Sierra Leone.
I believe that the recent incidents do not reflect
the real nature of ordinary, peace-loving Sierra
Leoneans. In fact, the recently held national delegates’
conference of the Sierra Leone People’s Party (SLPP),
the country’s main political opposition, is probably a
good example of political maturity and showed how
the Government, the governing party and the main

11-49208

S/PV.6609

opposition party can work together in settling
controversial issues and in making democracy work.
At the conference, the SLPP elected a new party
chairman and its party executive. But, more
importantly, the SLPP also elected its presidential
candidate, Mr. Julius Maada Bio, who had once been a
senior member and later Head of State of a former
military Government, the National Provisional
Revolutionary Council. Mr. Maada Bio will now be the
main contestant to face President Ernest Bai Koroma
for the presidency in the 2012 elections.
The SLPP conference was remarkable for the fact
that it was conducted in such a peaceful and
democratic atmosphere. Although the conference took
place in Freetown, a stronghold of the governing party,
the All Peoples Congress (APC), there were no
provocations or incidents whatsoever. Quite to the
contrary, the APC leadership had called on its
followers in Freetown not to wear the party colours and
to stay away from the location of the conference. As a
precaution, the APC party headquarters, which is
located just across the SLPP conference hall, was also
closed. Police protection for the conference was
professional. In fact, prior to the conference, the
President had met with the then interim leader of the
SLPP — the opposition party — to ensure personally
that the Conference would take place without any
violence or outside interference.
The media coverage of the SLPP conference was
generally lauded as having been fair, balanced and
informative. This was a major test for the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation, which was newly created
following the agreed closing of all political party and
government controlled radio stations after the 2009
political disturbances.
The SLPP conference was a further positive
example of intra-party democracy. Prior to the
conference, the SLPP had faced a major legal challenge
in the Supreme Court from one of its followers. After
initial hesitations, the party chose to solve this
challenge within the law and its own party constitution
by holding new elections for its party delegates.
At the conference, a total of 19 aspirants had tried
to obtain the SLPP’s endorsement as its presidential
candidate for the 2012 elections. In the run-up to the
party conference, this had caused considerable
intra-party controversies that at times spilled over into
violent clashes between the supporters of leading

11-49208

aspirants. However, at the conference all these
differences were managed and respective aspirants
made sure that their supporters did not disrupt the
democratic intra-party election process. In the end, all
aspirants considered the intra-party elections to be free,
fair and acceptable.
However, the re-election of the party Chairman
and the election of the presidential candidate of the
SLPP have raised concerns, as both elected party
leaders played prominent roles in previous military
regimes. I trust that both recognize the need to dispel
such concerns. I therefore welcome Mr. Maada Bio’s
recent public statement expressing his regrets and
issuing an apology for the wrongs that were committed
during the rule of a military Government in which he
held high office.
We all must not forget that military coups and the
horrors of the civil war are part of a very recent history
in Sierra Leone. It is therefore inevitable, and even
necessary and welcome, that some of those who have
been
involved
in
previously
undemocratic
Governments are now taking part in today’s democratic
political life. Against this background, it is important
that all political leaders with links to past regimes,
irrespective of their present political party affiliations,
make it clear that the right lessons have been learned
from the country’s violent past. In this context, I
applaud the clear and unambivalent words spoken by
President Koroma in his fiftieth anniversary speech
that Sierra Leone has learned a bitter lesson and will
not repeat past mistakes. I feel that these words could
guide the political discourse in the country.
The 2012 elections must not become hostage to
the past. Instead, we all have the responsibility to give
Sierra Leoneans in 2012 the possibility of looking
forward, of deciding on the future direction of their
country, and of selecting their future leaders
accordingly. All political parties, and above all the two
main political parties that have helped shape
post-conflict Sierra Leone and that were instrumental
in building today’s democratic society, must share a
common interest in protecting these national
achievements in 2012 and beyond.
I also hope that, in the same spirit, the
outstanding issues for the 2012 elections can be solved
among political parties. These include reaching
agreements on the legal framework for the next
elections, on a new code of conduct that will govern

3

S/PV.6609

election campaigning, and on building trust in existing
national electoral management bodies. I therefore look
in particular to the very able and trusted new Chairman
of the Political Parties Registration Commission to take
a lead in holding these crucial multi-party
consultations.
In his speech at the fiftieth independence
anniversary, President Koroma launched the idea of an
all-inclusive and non-partisan national conference to
discuss in a public debate the future direction of Sierra
Leone. I very much welcome such a proposal, as such a
conference would be held at a time when Sierra
Leone’s post-conflict reconstruction era is coming to
an end and the country is heading towards a new era of
economic and social development. This would allow
not only experts but above all ordinary Sierra Leoneans
throughout the country to be consulted at a time of
profound economic and social changes in the country.
Such a national debate could be an opportunity
for all political parties to listen to the problems and
aspirations of ordinary Sierra Leoneans before
launching themselves into the 2012 election campaign.
It could be an exercise of consultative democracy that
could help prevent problems in the future. Careful
consultations and preparations would be needed if such
a Conference is to be all-inclusive. I believe that it is a
sign of constructive political leadership that the
presidential candidate of the opposition party has also
indicated his willingness to participate in such a
national debate.
Let me finally turn to some economic and social
issues. The Government has been successful in
expanding the national, inner-city and rural feeder road
networks, in bringing electricity to a wider range of the
population, and in reviving agricultural production. It
has pursued a policy of privatization that includes the
Freetown seaport and national communication systems,
and it is mobilizing international private investments,
especially in extractive industries and agri-businesses.
The new iron ore projects are likely to start exporting
this year, and this could lead to a significant increase in
economic growth and revenue collection, with some
projections showing a possible threefold increase in
domestic revenues by 2015. Sierra Leone’s financial
fortunes could therefore change dramatically within a
relatively short time frame.
This will open up much-needed resources to
address the significant deficits in human development

4

and infrastructure availability. However, it also raises
challenges of the transparency and proper management
of those new resources for the benefit of all Sierra
Leoneans, while maintaining macroeconomic stability.
I welcome the generous international assistance to
Sierra Leone aimed at helping avoid the so-called
resource curse that has affected so many other
resource-rich countries.
The Achilles heel of Sierra Leone’s future
development will remain persistent poverty, youth
unemployment and problems in delivering social
services. Although Sierra Leone continues to enjoy
relatively high economic growth rates, it remains one
of the poorest counties in the world. In particular,
persistently high inflation rates for basic commodities
have eroded the purchasing power of low, fixedincome earners such as public servants, teachers, police
officers and nurses, as well as ordinary, occasional
labourers. This appears to affect more city dwellers and
many of the young people who have gone to the cities
in search for a better life. As we have seen in other
countries, such a decline in living conditions could turn
easily into social unrest, and it may therefore be time
for a more comprehensive review of the impact of all
development programmes on poverty reduction,
irrespective of who finances them.
Much has been achieved in improving social
services in recent years; the free health care
programme that the President launched last year is a
good example. Not surprisingly, however, there remain
persistent problems of delivering such services to reach
the target population. Corruption, bureaucracy, low
capacity and the lack of technical and logistical
facilities are probably at the core of such problems.
Here, there is also a need for the comprehensive
development of the safety nets in the country to protect
the poor from any global shocks. Also here, I feel that
such
problems
require
greater
Governmentdevelopment partner cooperation, with more attention
paid to making the public sector more effective and
efficient.
A thorny issue remains the high unemployment
rates among Sierra Leone’s youth — a difficult
problem not only for countries across Africa, but also,
as we know, in the developed world. Notwithstanding
the creation of the National Youth Commission and the
concerted efforts of development partners, no
substantive success has been achieved in fighting
Sierra Leone’s rampant youth unemployment. High

11-49208

S/PV.6609

population increases and increased migration to the
cities may even have made the problem worse. In the
short term, better coordination within the Government
will be needed so that the youth are better targeted to
benefit from specific programmes. It would also
require better cooperation among the Government,
development partners and the private sector.
At the end, I would like to recognize the
enormous contribution that Ambassador McNee has
made to peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. As the Chair of
the country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission for Sierra Leone for almost three years, he
visited the country repeatedly and reached out not only
to the Government and the political opposition, but
also to the wider Sierra Leonean society. For me
personally, he has been a great support and a reliable
partner in New York in discussing various policy issues
that helped shape the peacebuilding agenda not only
for Sierra Leone, but for the United Nations in general.
I would like to thank him profoundly, and wish him all
the best for the future.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome Ambassador Rishchynski, and I look forward
to working with him very closely also in the future —
we have had just one meeting. I think that there is
much to be done for Sierra Leone, and also for
peacebuilding, where we can work together.

Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): As the new
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Canada,
it is an immense honour and pleasure for me to be here
this morning, and I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to take the floor.
(spoke in English)
I am pleased to address the Council on behalf of the
Sierra Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
A decade following the civil war, Sierra Leone is
poised to shift its national strategic focus from
peacebuilding to economic development. As both the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
my predecessor have previously noted, that represents
a remarkable success story for post-conflict recovery.
Yet, it is not quite finished. Sierra Leone will require
continued support as it prepares for elections next year,
strives to address the enduring challenges in the areas
of good governance, youth employment and combating
drug trafficking, and builds resilience to weather
unexpected political and economic shocks.
Drawing upon the findings of a delegation visit to
Freetown earlier this year, I would like to highlight
issues of particular importance and outline the
Peacebuilding Commission’s plans for the coming six
months.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Von
der Schulenburg for his briefing.

As the Executive Representative noted, the
presidential, legislative and local elections in 2012
have great symbolic importance. A campaign free of
intimidation, conducted in a spirit of open dialogue and
accepted by all, will signal that Sierra Leone has built a
stable and democratic foundation upon which to build a
sustainable peace. As the elections approach, it is
essential that all actors involved build greater trust and
generate a common understanding of the ground rules
with respect to reforming the electoral laws and
making further progress on implementing the
agreements reached in the joint communiqué of April
2009. As the Security Council considers the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), I would like to emphasize the
central role that the mission has played in facilitating
dialogue and assisting electoral preparations, as well as
to commend Mr. Von der Schulenburg for his personal
leadership.

I now give the floor
Mr. Guillermo Rishchynski.

In that respect, the appointment of the Sierra
Leone People’s Party presidential candidate opens the

I would also like to thank the Government of
Sierra Leone and the leaders — religious as well as
traditional — of the political parties, independent
commissions, local Governments, civil society,
non-governmental organizations and the media for
their continued trust in the work of the United Nations.
However, I would like especially to thank President
Koroma for his leadership, his exceptional openness
and his welcoming of the United Nations family.
Finally, I would like to thank Sierra Leone’s
Foreign Minister, His Excellency Mr. Joseph B. Dauda,
for having come all the way to New York to represent
his country. He is probably one of the best witnesses
among us all of the achievements made in Sierra
Leone, as he has played a prominent role in successive
Governments. It is a pleasure working with him.

11-49208

to

His

Excellency

5

S/PV.6609

door for the main political parties to engage in a more
open, regular and productive high-level dialogue. The
National Electoral Commission must deliver not just a
technically sound election, but also one that is widely
accepted by all participants. The Political Parties
Registration Commission will continue to be an
important forum for resolving potential disputes. It is
critical that the relationship between those bodies and
the major political parties improve. The Sierra Leone
Police has served as a neutral and effective force for
stability in the recent past, but continues to face serious
equipment shortages. The current limited supply of
police vehicles poses a serious transportation constraint
and could hamper response times to remote areas
during the election period. I would urge all donors to
help fill that capacity gap.
Looking beyond the electoral period, lasting
solutions to many of Sierra Leone’s challenges will
depend on increasing private sector investment. Good
governance is essential for spurring such progress. The
Anti-Corruption Commission continues to advance an
ambitious agenda that includes the prosecution of
egregious offenders, public outreach and regular
institutional reviews. Such efforts have yielded steady
progress in the World Bank’s ease of doing business
rankings. They must continue and accelerate.
Sierra Leone is also experiencing a surge of
investment in the extractive sector. That holds promise
for generating growth and reducing dependency on aid,
but it also brings associated risks. Resources must be
managed in a transparent manner that delivers benefits
to the population as a whole. Sierra Leone can build on
its efforts to mitigate such risks through its
participation in the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative and the Kimberley Process.
Economic growth represents an essential
component in the long-term resolution of Sierra
Leone’s high levels of youth unemployment, but the
country has taken sensible steps in the short term.
Since the previous delegation visit in 2010, which
focused closely on the issue, the Government has
established a National Youth Commission, appointed a
new Youth Commissioner, restructured relevant
responsibilities to create a Ministry of Youth and
Sports, and revised its national strategy to better match
supply-side interventions to actual market demand.
Those are most welcome developments.

6

As the 2011 World Development Report argues,
creating jobs is a core component of peace
consolidation, but it often receives too little attention.
By providing additional support to Sierra Leone,
international partners could seize the opportunity to
begin implementing the recommendations of the World
Development Report and to invest in Sierra Leone’s
long-term success.
Sierra Leone continues to face the unwelcome
threat posed by drug trafficking and organized crime.
Recognizing the regional nature of the problem, the
West African configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission held a joint meeting earlier this year, with
the high-level participation of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office
for West Africa, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL. The discussion yielded
several relevant findings.
First, while Sierra Leone is the most advanced
member of the West Africa Coast Initiative, the slow
pace of progress elsewhere hinders intelligence-sharing
and early warning. The limited capacity within the
region to track financial flows is another significant
challenge, especially given the risk that illicit profits
may aggravate corruption. Secondly, the West Africa
Coast Initiative requires additional funding to meet the
scale of outstanding needs.
Allow me to close by briefly outlining the
Peacebuilding Commission’s forthcoming activities. In
October, the Sierra Leone configuration will meet to
consider the second annual joint progress report on the
Agenda for Change, prepared by the Government of
Sierra Leone in collaboration with the United Nations,
international partners and civil society, including
women’s groups. Over the course of the next six
months, I also plan to visit Sierra Leone and will
convene a meeting to assess preparations for the 2012
elections, featuring the participation of relevant Sierra
Leonean officials. I will convey the findings of that
visit and the conclusions of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s deliberations to the Security Council in
due course.
Finally, let me express my gratitude to both the
Government of Sierra Leone and UNIPSIL. Sierra
Leone has demonstrated what strong national
leadership can achieve in the face of adversity.
UNIPSIL, ably led by Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General Michael von der Schulenburg, in

11-49208

S/PV.6609

conjunction with the entire United Nations country
team, has developed an innovative and integrated
approach to peacebuilding that is yielding impressive
results. It is a privilege to work with such strong
partners. The Peacebuilding Commission stands ready
to continue to assist Sierra Leone’s efforts to
consolidate peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Rishchynski for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Bandabla Dauda, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Dauda (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Mr. President,
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of September. At the same time, I would like
to thank the members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to participate in the discussion of the
agenda item under the Council’s consideration, namely,
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL).
On behalf of His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma and the people of Sierra Leone, I wish to
convey our profound appreciation for the unremitting
support and active interest by the United Nations and
friends of Sierra Leone to consolidate our peace,
stability and development. In that regard, permit me to
single out the strong leadership and commitment in the
pursuit of peace and development in Sierra Leone
displayed by Ambassador John McNee as Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration, and to express our sincere
gratitude personally to him, his Mission staff and the
Government and the people of Canada for the
exemplary and record-setting role they have played,
which is worthy of emulation and recognition. We wish
Mr. McNee well in his future assignments.
We look forward to continuing to work with
Canada in consolidating the gains made in the
transition from the post-conflict phase to a more
development-focused phase. We welcome Ambassador
McNee’s
successor,
Ambassador
Guillermo
Rishchynski, with open arms and high expectations and
greet him today with a very warm embrace. We thank
him for his instructive participation in this debate.
Our thanks also go to the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, for his remarkable show of

11-49208

understanding of the situation on the ground, as well as
to the United Nations country team for its strong
support in helping to consolidate peace and in
maximizing the gains of our post-conflict development
effort. I acknowledge the kind sentiments that Mr. Von
der Schulenburg expressed in my regard in his
statement. I would like to assure him of my continued
cooperation and support in the efforts to consolidate
our peace process.
The Secretary-General’s seventh report on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (S/2011/554) accurately catalogues the
progress made and the challenges that remain in our
efforts to consolidate peace and transition towards a
more developmental phase. President Ernest Bai
Koroma and the Government of Sierra Leone remain
firmly committed to the vision of our international
partners, including the United Nations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, for ensuring durable peace
and stability and in fostering socio-economic
development as mapped out in our Agenda for Change.
It is within that context that President Koroma
launched the idea of an all-inclusive and non-partisan
national conference during his speech celebrating the
fiftieth anniversary of our independence.
The concern for the implementation of the joint
communiqué of 2 April 2009, alluded to in the report,
is well noted. We would like to assure the Council that
the Government of Sierra Leone will continue to
engage with all stakeholders, as was demonstrated in
working with UNIPSIL to establish the All Political
Parties Youth Association and the All Political Parties
Women’s Association, both of which aim at preventing
political violence, fostering inter-party dialogue and, in
the case of the Women’s Association, further enhancing
women’s participation in politics.
In the latter regard, I am happy to share with the
Council that we now have 14.5 per cent of women
holding political office, almost half of our target of
30 per cent. We also continue to make progress towards
the education of the girl child and towards providing
free health care to pregnant women, lactating mothers
and children under five years old.
We are also making steady progress in putting
structures in place to address youth unemployment,
corruption, transnational organized crime, the
participation of women in peacebuilding and public
service, and gender-based violence. In response to

7

S/PV.6609

youth unemployment, which remains a significant
challenge to the peace consolidation process, a new
Ministry of Youth Employment and Sports has been
established,
along
with
a
National
Youth
Commission — whose commissioner and board
members have been appointed — to provide the policy
framework. These measures will pave the way for the
meaningful participation of youth in national
development.
The Government of Sierra Leone remains
committed to the conduct of peaceful, free, fair,
credible and transparent elections in 2012. We
welcome all the support of the United Nations and our
development partners to that end. President Koroma’s
commitment to a peaceful political environment was
recently demonstrated by ensuring that there was an
atmosphere conducive to the main opposition party, the
Sierra Leone People’s Party, being able to select its
party officials, including its presidential candidate for
the 2012 elections. Indeed, a successful outcome of
those elections will be a highly acclaimed benchmark
and indicator of whether meaningful peace and
stability has really taken firm root in our national
efforts, as will the realization of the much talked-about
idea of a transition process or a phasing out of
UNIPSIL into a United Nations country team.
The National Electoral Commission and the
Political Parties Registration Commission enjoy the
independence necessary to deliver effectively on their
constitutional mandate free of interference. Efforts are
also being made by the Electoral Commission, in
consultation with all stakeholders, including political
parties, to consider the reform of the electoral process.
The Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation, the
Independent Media Commission and the Editors Guild
continue to play a central role in providing equal
access to radio and television air time to the public,
and to political parties in particular.
We are equally committed to responding to
concerns raised in the report on the mining sector and
the management of our natural resources by taking
measures to improve the governance of the sector and
ensuring greater transparency and accountability in
order to maximize the value derived from the country’s
mineral resources for the benefit of all Sierra
Leoneans. To that end, we have sought support from
our development partners in order to build the capacity
of the Ministry of Mines and Mineral Resources.

8

However,
continued
support
from
the
international community and our development partners
is still required to build on the gains made to further
consolidate peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. In
particular, such issues as support for the National
Electoral
Commission,
addressing
youth
unemployment, support for the Anti-Corruption
Commission, the reparations process as recommended
by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and the
provision of vehicles to the Sierra Leone Police to
enhance their capability and make them more mobile
and visible during the elections and after, are issues
that require urgent attention and solutions in order to
consolidate the gains already made.
The successful conduct of peaceful, free and fair
elections largely requires all stakeholders to be
responsible and adhere to the electoral laws and other
relevant national legislation. In particular, there is a
need for all stakeholders, including international
players, to be biased in favour of consolidating peace
and stability in Sierra Leone and not to be seen to be
supportive of perpetrators of gross human rights abuses
and violations. At this stage of the peacebuilding
process, such conduct could tend to be misunderstood
and incite violence, which could then lead to a relapse
into conflict.
Furthermore, drug trafficking and organized
crime continue to pose a serious challenge to the
Economic Community of West African States
subregion. With support from the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Sierra Leone, within the
framework of the West Africa Coast Initiative, has
gone far ahead of other affected countries in putting in
place the structures for the Transnational Organized
Crime Unit to be functional and effective. Additional
assistance to the Government in promoting good
governance and the rule of law; combating illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime; providing support to
the Human Rights Commission; and assisting in
strengthening national capacity-building in the areas of
law enforcement, forensics, border management,
money laundering and the strengthening of criminal
justice institutions is also required to consolidate and
build on the gains made in those key peacebuilding
areas.
On the socio-economic front, the prevailing
global economic and financial uncertainties, as well as
debt crises, are seriously undermining our efforts to
turn the economy around as quickly as desired. In view

11-49208

S/PV.6609

of the severe impact of those uncertainties on our
efforts, and in support of the strides we have made in
socio-economic development, we look forward to the
adoption of effective ways and means by which the
international community and development partners
could respond to the needs of the funding gap in the
implementation of the United Nations Joint Vision for
Sierra Leone. We appreciate the positive response by
some of our development partners and friendly
countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, Ireland and Italy, in terms of their
contribution to the Multi-Donor Trust Fund. We appeal
for appropriate steps to be taken towards fulfilling
commitments with regard to the pledges made at the
Consultative Group meeting on Sierra Leone held in
London in 2009.
We are fully aware that attracting foreign direct
investment and establishing a conducive and
purposeful business environment remain key in
establishing a more secure Sierra Leone and in
protecting its citizens from fear and want. The
Government will relentlessly continue to pursue that
objective.
While we share the accolades for the progress
made, it is important to gently urge our friends, the
international community and the United Nations to
continue investing in success as we relentlessly work
towards achieving our shared objectives in peace
consolidation and development.

understanding that Mr. Maada Bio was to deliver his
thank-you message to his audience at the Bo
Coronation Field.
Mr. Maada Bio left Freetown on Friday,
9 September, made stopovers at Mile 91 and Moyamba
Junction and arrived in Bo without any incident. He
was welcomed by huge and jubilant crowds at all
points. On his way to the Coronation Field, the convoy
was routed along Mahei Boima Road, where the party
offices of the All People’s Congress (APC) and the
People’s Movement for Democratic Change (PMDC)
are located.
It is reported that, between the offices of the
PMDC and the APC, there was an incident of stonethrowing, to which Mr. Maada Bio, who is said to have
been riding in an open-top vehicle and in a standing
position, fell victim with an injury to his head. It is
further reported that he was then rushed to a hospital
for medical attention. With that, violence immediately
erupted at the scene of the incident, which led to the
burning of the APC office building. An additional two
buildings at two different locations were also burned
down, as was the residence of Mr. Sheku Sillah,
APC-Bo District Chairman, and a rental building
housing the offices of De Pa In Yai.

I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
increase in mercenary activities in the Mano River
Basin, which require our collective effort and support
so as to address the issue before it eventually gets out
of hand and undermines peace and stability in the
subregion. We welcome United Nations support to the
trial of Charles Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.

Journalists are reporting that police efforts to
contain the rampage involved the use of tear gas and
live bullets, which is said to have resulted in one death,
while 17 people were injured and hospitalized. This
ugly political incident was starkly condemned in a
press release issued immediately after the incident by
the Office of President Ernest Bai Koroma, and in
many subsequent press releases by other political
interest groups, including the APC and the PMDC
parties, the Independent Media Commission, the
Political Party Registration Commission (PPRC) and
the Campaign for Good Governance.

Before concluding my statement, I would like,
with the leave of the Council, to provide a briefing on
recent developments in terms of political violence in
Sierra Leone. The flag-bearer of the Sierra Leone
People’s Party (SLPP) for the 2012 presidential
elections, Mr. Jurius Maada Bio, scheduled a national
thank-you tour to personally express his gratitude to
SLPP members for having elected him as the
presidential candidate of their party. The party
secretariat is said to have duly requested the necessary
police clearance, which was granted by right, with the

Wide and unequivocal condemnation has also
been strongly expressed by the general public through
radio phone-in programmes and in print media
editorials. The President called a short security meeting
on Saturday, which was attended by invited executive
representatives of the PPRC, the media and civil
society. The meeting was also attended by the Minister
of Defence, the Minister for Internal Affairs, the
Deputy Minister for Information and Communications,
the Chief of Staff, the Chief of Defence Staff, the
Sierra Leone Police, the senior cadre of the Office of

11-49208

9

S/PV.6609

National Security, the president of the fire force and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

all those found culpable, without exception, prejudice
or favour.

In his opening remarks, the President thanked all
for responding in such good numbers on very short
notice. He firmly reiterated his personal condemnation
of the incident, which he said was sending very
undesirable and wrong signals ahead of the 2012
elections, and which could potentially negate and
derail the national gains made in terms of rebranding
the country’s image, peacebuilding and peace
consolidation, which were so painstakingly achieved
with the help of our development partners and the
international community.

The President reaffirmed his determination to
ensure that, without exception, anyone found
responsible would bear the full penalty of the law. He
then implored members of the committee to be
constituted to keep in mind that their assignment is a
special national call for their patriotic service in a very
crucial situation affecting our national development,
image and pride. In thanking all of those in attendance,
the President said that he expected a speedy and
transparent investigation, as well as a very
comprehensive and credible report for the sake of
easing the anxiety of the nation.

The President emphatically described the
unfortunate incident as ugly and unacceptable,
inasmuch as it portends possible violence during the
forthcoming 2012 elections. He added that it could
undermine the peace, security and stability of the State.
President Koroma then categorically stated his
personal commitment to nip this inimical tendency in
the bud, as he would not allow a recurrence of such
apparent re-emergence of political violence, be it
inter-or intra-party violence. In the light of what I have
described, the President then issued a series of stern
directives. He ordered an urgent investigation into the
entire political incident of Friday, 9 September and the
submission of a comprehensive report as soon as
possible. He also ordered that a competent committee
be properly and immediately constituted and stressed
the need to include members of the PPRC and civil
society organizations so as to ensure transparency and
the outcome of an objective report that would be
credible in the eyes of the nation and the international
community.
The President added that he would like to see the
investigation conducted in such a professional manner
as to leave no room for suspicion by anyone of being
unduly disadvantaged. He said that the committee must
engage in an extensive fact-finding exercise aimed at
producing a comprehensive report that is expected to
provide credible evidential basis for the prosecution of

10

It is to be noted that the investigation will be
conducted independently of, but simultaneously with,
the Bo police investigation, which may be seen as
political in nature.
A similar approach was taken in the case of a
recent incident in Kono during a visit by the Minister
for Internal Affairs. The committee was scheduled to
depart Freetown on Sunday, 11 September. On
realizing that Mr. Maada Bio cut short his tour and
returned to Freetown over the weekend, the committee
membership decided to seek an interview with him
before he departed the country for a medical check-up.
That is the end of that briefing.
Finally, allow me once again to reaffirm our deep
appreciation to the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, its Chair and the members of the Sierra
Leone configuration, as well as our development
partners, for their continued support to peacebuilding
and peace consolidation in Sierra Leone.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Dauda for his statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

11-49208
