IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

Taking note of the report of the Second United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, 12
1. Expresses its appreciation and thanks to the Government and people of Austria for the excellent facilities
and generous hospitalit" provided for the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space;
2. Endorses the recommendations pertaining to international co-operation in the exploration and peaceful uses
of outer space, as contained in the report of the Conference; 13
3. Invites all Governments to take effective action for
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Conference;
4. Invites all Member States, in particular those with
m.tjor space capabilities, to contribute actively to the goal
of preventing an arms race in outer space, as an essential
condition for the promotion of international co-operation in
the exploration and uses of outer space for peaceful purposes;
5. Requests all organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system and other intergovernmental organizations which are working in the field of outer space or
space-related matters to co-operate in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference;
6. Takes note of the recommendations of the Conference regarding study projects 14 and invites all specialized
agencies and other intergovernmental organizations concerned to contribute within their field of competence to the
elaboration of those studies;
7. Decides, upon the recommendations of the Conference, 15 that the United Nations Programme on Space Applications should be directed towards the following
objectives:
(a) Promotion of greater exchange of actual experiences
with specific applications;
(b) Promotion of greater co-operation in space science
and technology between developed and developing countries
as well as among developing countries;
(c) Development of a fellowship programme for in-depth
training of space technologists and applications specialists,
with the help of Member States and relevant international
organizations and establishment and regular up-dating of
lists containing available fellowships in all States and relevant international organizations;
(d) Organization of regular seminars on advanced space
applications and new system developments for managers
and leaders of space application and technology development activities as well as seminars for users in specific
applications for durations, as appropriate;
(e) Stimulation of the growth of indigenous nuclei and
~ autonomous technological base, to the extent possible,
m space technology in developing countries with the cooperation of other United Nations organizations and/or States
Members of the United Nations or members of the specialized agencies;
(f) Dissemination, through panel meetings and seminars, of information on new and advanced technology and
applications, with emphasis on their relevance and implications for developing countries;
(g) Provision or arrangements for provision of technical
advisory services on space applications projects, upon request by Member States or any of the specialized agencies;

8. Decides to establish an International Space Information Service, initially consisting of a directory of sources
of information and data services to provide direction upon
request to accessible data banks and information sources;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the Outer
Space Affairs Division of the Secretariat with an appropriate
augmentation of technical personnel and decides, upon the
recommendation of the Conference, 16 that all new or expanded activities contained in the present resolution are to
be funded mainly through voluntary contributions of States
in money or in kind, as well as through the rearrangement
of priorities within the next regular budget of the United
Nations;
10. Appeals to all Governments to make voluntary contributions, either in money or in kind, towards carrying out
the recommendations of the Conference;
11. Approves the recommendations of the Conference
regarding the establishment and strengthening of regional
mechanisms of co-operation and their promotion and creation through the United Nations system; 17
12. Emphasizes the need for close co-operation between
all United Nations bodies engaging in space or space-related
activities, as well as the desirability of close co-operation
with international funding agencies and subsidiary bodies,
such as the United Nations Development Programme;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to assure the availability and appropriate dissemination of the report of the
Conference;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
JO December I 982
37/91.

Question of the review of the Convention on
International Liability for Damage Caused by
Space Objects

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in the field of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer
space, including the moon and other celestial bodies, and
of promoting the law in this field of human endeavour,
Taking note with appreciation of the work accomplished
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, in
particular that of its Legal Sub-Committee,
Recognizing that, in view of the considerable increase of
activities in outer space, effective international rules and
procedures concerning liability for damage caused by space
objects continue to be of great importance,
Having reviewed the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects, 18
Noting with satisfaction that to date seventy-two States
have signed and sixty-two States have ratified the Convention,
I. Reaffirms the importance of the Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects;
2. Invites all States that have not yet done so to give
urgent consideration to ratifying or acceding to the
Convention.
100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982

2

Ibid. (A/CONF. 101/10 and Corr. I and 2)
Ibid .. para. 361.
Ibid .. para. 428.
" Ibid .. para. 430.
'

11

14

97

•• Ibid .. para. 423.
11
Ibid .. para. 353.
'"Resolution 2777 (XXVI). annex.
