S/PV.8352

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8352nd meeting

Thursday, 13 September 2018, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2018/800)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28584 (E)
*1828584*

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2018/800)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia; Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission
in Somalia; and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.
Mr. Madeira is joining this meeting via video
tele-conference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/800, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now welcome and give the floor to Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating: My tour of duty comes to an end
next week. On the day that I arrived in Mogadishu in
January 2016, I was taken straight to the President’s
office to discuss a threat by federal member states to
suspend cooperation with the central Government.
When I left Mogadishu two days ago, the country faced
a similar situation.
The structural problems that shape Somali politics
and security have not changed, but that should not
obscure some remarkable achievements in the past three
years. There was a peaceful transition of presidential
power with a result that was accepted as legitimate.
A new Upper House, representing the federal states,
came into being. The percentage of women Members of
Parliament went up from 14 to 24 per cent, higher than
both the African and the global average. A famine was
averted in 2017 thanks to national mobilization, better
preparedness and the generosity and speed of donors in
2/26

13/09/2018

providing funding. That is a largely untold story that is
a credit both to Somalis and to the United Nations.
The federal map is being filled in. One year ago,
HirShabelle state was created. There have been successes
in conflict prevention and resolution. I just crossed
lines and went shopping in Galkayo, a town that was
until recently very insecure and bitterly divided. Other
conflicts, such as between Puntland and Somaliland,
have been prevented through intense diplomatic activity
by the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and others.
A framework for addressing chronic insecurity
is in place: the national security architecture and the
comprehensive approach to security.
The plan for the transition of lead security
responsibility from the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to Somali forces is being
implemented. Somali forces just took over Mogadishu’s
iconic stadium and adjacent areas.
There is a Government in place with a compelling
reform agenda, anchored in the strong partnership
between President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo and Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre.
Its primary objective is to make the country more
creditworthy and accountable as a step towards
regaining full sovereignty, reducing dependency and
attracting both public and private investment.
Benchmarks set by the International Monetary
Fund are being met, domestic revenues are increasing,
public financial management is improving, business
confidence is growing and the prospect of arrears
clearance and debt relief is closer.
Legislative and institutional frameworks are being
developed for the 2020 elections. Real progress is
being made to review the Constitution. Federal states
have been more engaged on a range of issues, and the
work Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee
has energized the Government’s agenda. A national
reconciliation framework is being developed with a
view to all players in Somali society playing a part in
addressing grievances and resolving conflicts.
Somalis can draw strength from those positive
changes. However, no one should delude themselves
about the challenges ahead, many of them structural.
Somalis continue to experience profound insecurity,
high and costly levels of violence, ruthless attacks by
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

Al-Shabaab, limited access to justice and basic services,
an absence of local governance, chronic poverty and a
lack of income and jobs.
The country is vulnerable to climate shocks. There
are 2.6 million internally displaced persons. It is one
of the most disadvantageous places in the world for
women, and the educational, work and life opportunities
for young people remain heartbreakingly limited.
Abuse and the deprivation of human rights is
common, including sexual violence, harmful traditional
practices, limited freedom of expression and arbitrary
arrests and detentions, including of children. A national
human rights commission has yet to be established.
Disputes over borders, resources and revenues,
power-sharing and grievances between clans and
interest groups have the potential to turn violent and
result in further human misery and displacement.
The 4.5 power-sharing convention that accommodates
the interests of powerful clans at the expense of weaker
ones and of minorities has allowed progress, but is a
source of exploitable grievances.
The rule of law is weak. A justice and corrections
model is close to being agreed, but capacity remains
very limited. The Government lacks the means to
ensure that judgements are implemented; too often,
people turn to Al-Shabaab instead.
Corruption is systemic, used to gain and retain
power. It penalizes the poor, the majority. Untraceable
money changing hands continues to be a defining
feature of Somali politics.
Tackling corruption also requires structural
change — building and funding independent justice
institutions, appointing well-trained and competent
staff in the civil service.
Somalis are proud of their clan lineage, but the
country cannot afford to let clan identity be the only
basis for determining appointments. Young people in
particular deserve institutions that deliver services.
The Government is fully aware of those challenges.
The issue is whether it will be able to tackle them, and
whether the international community will be able to
provide coherent, adequate and timely support to help
it do so. There are many risks. Four stand out.
First is the risk that Al-Shabaab and other extremists
will derail progress. Despite the success of AMISOM

S/PV. 8352

and Somali security forces in containing Al-Shabaab,
it remains resilient. It uses targeted assassinations,
improvised explosive devices and the extortion both of
communities and businesses, including in Mogadishu
and other towns. Managing and mitigating that risk
requires systematic degradation of Al-Shabaab, as
well as increasing the legitimacy and capacity of the
Government. One without the other will not work.
Accelerated implementation of the national security
architecture and investment in the comprehensive
approach to security are essential. Those can facilitate
more coherent approaches by international partners,
but success depends primarily upon the implementation
of agreements among Somali leaders on security roles
and responsibilities throughout the country.
Second is the risk that political differences will
bring progress, the passage of key legislation and the
implementation of the Government’s reform-andsecurity agenda to a grinding halt. The deficit of trust
between the central Government and federal member
states and the recent decision by the latter to suspend
cooperation are very worrisome. The failure to restore
trust and cooperation sends a negative signal to both
Somalis and those international partners trying to
make a case to sceptical capitals that Somali is ready
for additional financial and security support. Federal
states should use the upcoming meeting of the National
Security Council, to be convened by the President, as
an opportunity for constructive engagement. Building
upon progress to date, there is scope for more investment
in the capacity of federal states and more outreach and
communication from the centre. Securing the buyin of key constituencies to the national agenda — not
just the federal states, but also parliamentarians, clan
power brokers, the business community, including the
diaspora, and traditional elders — is becoming tougher
and more expensive as state and national elections
approach, but it is essential.
Mitigating that risk requires a twin-track approach.
Fundamental issues, including how power should
be shared, allocated and separated, the nature of the
federal state and the respective powers of Federal
and state Governments, should be addressed through
the constitutional review. Young people, women and
minorities need to be consulted. Strong and differing
views about federalism are legitimate, but if the political
culture is to change, those need to be resolved through
dialogue, not unilateral actions. More immediately,
the greatest challenge is to reach political agreements

18-285843/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

that enable forward momentum without prejudicing the
outcome of the constitutional review. Those include
the electoral law, the integration of security forces
and resource- and revenue-sharing agreements. In
that context, trust is the key ingredient, although it
is difficult given the fact that politicians suspect, or
assume, that their opponents’ principal preoccupation
is to remove or replace them. The concept of patriotic
opposition is weak, and the rules of the political game
are blurred and blunt. Motions of no-confidence and
impeachment and elections are abused and used for
financial and political gain. They need to be revamped.
Politicians’ role should be to get things done, rather
than promote clan or personal interests. That will take
time and will happen only if agreements and processes
are seen as legitimate and the result of constructive
engagement. Trust requires respect for due process,
the commitment to non-violence and the willingness to
engage and make compromises for the broader good.
That was my parting message to Somali leaders.
The third risk, notwithstanding Council unity, is
fragmentation in the international community. There
are a number of dimensions to that. The Government’s
security, political and economic reform agenda will be
far more successful if partners work with one another,
based on agreed national plans and capable management
systems. In some areas that is working, and the results
have been impressive, including humanitarian and
electoral support and economic and financial reforms.
Strong partnerships are being brokered by the United
Nations and international financial institutions.
Much high-level budget support is in the pipeline,
including from the European Union and Norway, but
in other areas, namely, the security area, more bilateral
approaches prevail, thereby complicating the chances
of success.
Another area in which fragmentation must be
resisted is the basis upon which AMISOM will
remain in the country. AMISOM deserves predictable
funding and a clear horizon for its drawdown, based
on reconfiguration around progress in degrading
Al-Shabaab and on evident Somali capacity to assume
security responsibilities. A premature departure of
AMISOM could be disastrous, but in order to be
sustained, support for AMISOM, as well as support
for Somali security institutions, requires success in
improving the population’s security. Somalis have
taken ownership of a conditions-based transition, and
AMISOM can help drive its success. The role played by
4/26

13/09/2018

the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS)
will need to evolve as transition advances. The current
UNSOS review will shed light on that.
A further test of international unity relates to
Somalia’s vulnerability to partners’ rivalries, including
in the Gulf. The atmosphere created by the resurgence
of diplomatic activity in the Horn of Africa and the
rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea may, I
hope, prove contagious. Beneficial knock-on effects
could include containment or a swifter resolution of
conflicts among Somalis, including talks between
Hargeisa and Mogadishu, which need to resume,
and finding a respectful basis upon which Somalia
can benefit from historic links and support with all
its partners.
A fourth risk is that the population will once
again face the prospect of a humanitarian catastrophe.
Unfortunately, the risk of that happening is high, and
millions are already living on the edge of a dignified
existence. Future crises will result from the combination
of climate-related shocks, armed conflict provoked by
Al-Shabaab and unresolved grievances, competition
over natural resources and the systemic marginalization
of certain groups. The objective should be to reduce
human vulnerability by creating jobs, investing in
urbanization, water management and access to clean
power, and adding value to the country’s enormous
economic potential, whether in livestock, fisheries,
agriculture or information technology.
The future of Somalia is in the hands of the Somalis.
The Government recognizes that, and I pay tribute to
its determination to reassert Somalia’s sovereignty.
Political will alone, however, is not enough. Practical
capacities are essential, as is success in fostering truly
inclusive politics, which is far from easy in a political
economy scarred by 30 years of violent conflict,
with spoilers who benefit from insecurity. Success
depends upon political, business, traditional and other
leaders working together for the common good, while
leveraging the country’s potential wealth to transform
prospects for people — especially youth. Cynicism
concerning the likelihood of that ever happening and of
Somalis being able to find a basis upon which to resolve
their problems has been punctured in the past few years.
There is now a sense of the possible, not of just the
impossible. The more that political leaders show unity,
the greater the opportunity, and the responsibility,
of international partners to invest in all parts of the
country and its leadership.
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

In conclusion, I should like to thank the Council for
its continued support for Somalia, the United Nations
and me and my team. It has been a privilege to work
with international partners and, above all, with the
leaders and people of Somalia.
The President: I thank Mr. Keating for his briefing,
and, on behalf of the entire Council, I thank him for
his service.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. It is a great honour for me to do
so once again.
Somalia is on its way to taking full ownership of
its future. Despite many daunting challenges, Somalia
is on an upward trajectory, and tangible progress can
be seen in a number of critical areas. The country’s
journey towards lasting peace and security remains
achievable through the concerted efforts of its people,
leadership and many international friends and partners,
including the strong partnership of the African Union
and that of the United Nations. The momentum created
by encouraging developments in the region, where
leaders of the Horn of Africa have become more aware
of the urgency of achieving peace and stability around
them and are taking deliberate initiatives to enhance
and captitalize on the factors that are common to their
peoples and unite their countries, is creating new
opportunities for reconciliation, stability, regional
cooperation and economic integration. That momentum
must be maintained by Somalia and its people, who
should remain steadfast on the path on which they
have embarked under their Government, which has
been characterized by reconciliation among Somalis,
economic growth and prosperity without corruption,
security and stability through respect for human rights,
inclusive politics, power- and resource-sharing and
equitable land distribution. In that connection, the
African Union congratulates the Federal Government
of Somalia for placing inclusive politics at the core of
its national reform agenda towards federalization and
the constitutional review, as expressed through the
political road map on inclusive politics.
We welcome the decisions taken at the National
Security Council meetings on resource-sharing,
security force integration and the transition plan. We
view with satisfaction and salute the commitment of
the Federal Government of Somalia to accelerating the

S/PV. 8352

taking of the political decisions needed to effectively
tackle and address all remaining issues delaying the
finalization of the constitutional review process,
including formalizing the status of the federal member
states under the National Security Council, resourceand power-sharing between the Federal Government of
Somalia and federal member states, fiscal federalism,
the allocation of responsibilities in the security and
justice sectors, the rule of law, the system of political
representation and the implementation of an agreed,
transparent and credible justice model. The creation of
the Federalization Negotiation Technical Committee,
tasked to drive forward negotiations on the fundamental
pillars for long-term stability, including election model
resource-sharing and allocation of powers to support
political agreements at the leadership level, is a
landmark step towards lasting peace in the country.
President Farmajo and his Government, as well as
the leaders of Somalia at both the national and federal
member state levels, have charted the way to realizing
Somalia’s constitutionally guaranteed one person-one
vote election, as stipulated in the Somali provisional
Constitution. We need to continue to encourage
and support the leadership as it strives to implement
and bring clarity to all other outstanding issues in
this regard, such as the passage of the electoral law,
the continued registration of political parties, the
finalization of related constitutional amendments,
amendment of the law on political parties, protective
inclusivity, particularly in terms of ensuring the equal
representation of women, as well as internally displaced
persons, young people, minorities and disadvantaged
groups, in decision-making.
Tremendous progress has been made towards
achieving debt relief, which will offer Somalia the
opportunity to have access to international concessional
financing and increase financial resources. We strongly
applaud these efforts and congratulate the Somalis on
that outstanding achievement.
Progress in Somalia has never been easy and cannot
be taken for granted. The Government is operating in
an unstable environment, using very fragile tools and
managing extremely weak institutions. Peace dividends
accumulated as a result of the sustained efforts of the
Somalis and their partners are constantly threatened
and hampered by mistrust, clan dynamics, extremist
ideological narratives, divisive politics, insurgency,
unregulated competition for power and resources,
violent extremism and vicious Al-Shabaab activity.

18-285845/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

The current political crisis in Somalia is putting
unusual pressure on the cohesion of the Federal
Government and federal member states. I believe in
the wisdom and the capacity of the Somali leadership
to overcome this new challenge through continued
focus and unity of purpose, protracted dialogue, a
spirit of partnership, shared interests and mutual
accommodation. We should, however, remain
supportive of such efforts and be ready to intervene in
case of need and provide sustained dependable, timely,
coherent and proactive support to the parties.
Turning to the security situation, there is a backdrop
of continued violence and local clan conflicts that
remains a real concern. Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State
continue to maintain an active presence across Somalia
and to conduct deadly attacks. Most recently, there has
been Al-Shabaab’s shift in operations, with a renewed
focus on Mogadishu. This shift creates real danger. The
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) remains
ready to partner with the Somali national security
forces, which have taken over from the Mogadishu
stabilization force. Similarly, beyond Mogadishu,
Al-Shabaab continues to resort to using improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), including vehicle-borne and
remote-controlled vehicle-borne IEDs, and ambushes,
particularly along the main supply routes. The impact
of Al-Shabaab’s freedom of movement continues
constrain AMISOM troops, Somali national forces and
civilians, as well as humanitarian actors.
Addressing the threat of Al-Shabaab will ultimately
require the completion of the national security
architecture and progress on the comprehensive
approach to security. In this regard, AMISOM will
continue to support these frameworks and the necessary
security reforms required by the Federal Government.
As Somalia navigates its way through a learning
curve, we must not lose sight of the real progress made
by the Federal Government and, I should add, within
a short period of time. Over recent months, we have
seen genuine attempts at defence reform by the Federal
Government. This has seen significant progress on
biometric registration, payroll reform and the recent
operational readiness assessment of the regional forces
conducted by AMISOM’s police component.
In addition, last month, we witnessed substantial
changes in the security establishment and a genuine
attempt to improve gender parity within its senior
ranks with the appointment of Brigadier General Zakia
6/26

13/09/2018

Hussein Ahmed as Somalia’s first female Deputy Police
Commissioner. AMISOM welcomes these important
changes and looks forward to working closely with
the new security chiefs in securing Mogadishu and
improving security across Somalia.
As Council members are fully aware, such
progress will be critical in transforming the landmark
national security rchitecture agreement of 2017
from design to implementation. In this connection,
AMISOM welcomes the outcomes of the National
Security Council meetings that took place in Baidoa
in June, calling for the completion of the national
security architecture. Completing the national security
architecture will ensure that the progress on transition
made to date by the Federal Government and federal
member states, together with AMISOM, is sustained.
The rationale for the transition is to design a framework
for building Somali operational and institutional
capacity for its forces as well as to meet the needs
of Somali citizens, especially in the areas of justice,
responsible local governance, freedom of movement
and service provision.
Today, I can report that progress is being made on
the implementation of the transition plan, but before
that I wish to pay tribute to the efforts of the Federal
Government in leading the transition implementation
team. The implementation team continues to meet and
plan regularly and has fostered a close partnership
between AMISOM, planners and its Somali National
Army counterparts. This close partnership and joint
planning is now the basis of AMISOM’s mentorship
of the Somali security forces and, within the coming
weeks, planning will soon be devolved to the regional
security offices as part of the Federal Government’s
next step on transition. This also represents a major
step in transition planning, as federal member states
will receive urgently needed support for their regional
support offices.
Regarding the implementation of the pilot
phase, as announced in July at the Brussels Somalia
Partnership Forum by His Excellency Ambassador
Smaïl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union, AMISOM would hand over the
Mogadishu stadium. It is with great pride that I wish to
inform the Council that AMISOM has now relocated
from Mogadishu stadium. A formal handover of the
premises will be completed at a date and in accordance
with modalities mutually agreed with the federal
Government of Somalia and all stakeholders once the
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

United Nations Support Office in Somalia concludes
the environmental clean up of the stadium.
As for the remaining pilot locations, securing the
Mogadishu-Baidoa main supply route has seen major
progress. More needs to be done, particularly on
ensuring that the commitments made during the past
two National Security Council meetings in Mogadishu
and Baidoa are implemented not only by the Federal
Government, but also by the federal member states.
More important is the financial support required from
Somalia’s international partners so as to ensure that we
can mitigate potential threats to the transition and not
reverse the gains made by AMISOM.
The next six months will be crucial for the African
Union and AMISOM as we focus on the critical tasks
ahead. Following the fourth joint review of AMISOM,
the AU Peace and Security Council renewed AMISOM’s
mandate at its 782nd ministerial meeting, as reflected in
its 27 June communiqué, which is now complemented
by Council resolution 2431 (2018).
The implications of both mandates are far-reaching.
The transformation of AMISOM’s operations is taking
place across Somalia as we plan our eventual exit
from the country. In adjusting to the new strategic and
operational realities, AMISOM is now in its final phase
of deploying its civilian component across its sectors.
Their role will be to support AMISOM military and
police in implementing the transition plan, in addition
to focusing on stabilization, reconciliation and human
rights efforts. In doing so, I welcome the commitment
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
to working alongside AMISOM’s soon-to-be-deployed
civilians across the federal member states.
Similarly, as required by resolution 2431 (2018),
AMISOM has recently concluded a comprehensive
internal review of its capabilities, I am pleased to report
that the review was conducted in full transparency,
highlighting AMISOM’s achievements within its
capabilities and identifying gaps across its three
components. The outcomes, including defining a model
for AMISOM’s reconfiguration, will set a baseline for
the next AMISOM concept of operations. That will
also provide enhanced support to the implementation
of the transition.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.

S/PV. 8352

Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Let me start by thanking
you, Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
Council on my recent visit to Somalia.
Like previous speakers, I believe that Somalia
has a once-in-a-generation opportunity for both peace
and gender equality. Many of the Somalis I spoke to
are risking their lives to seize this opportunity. One
of the most important developments in Somalia is the
representation of women in public office, which is
increasing and has been helped by special measures.
Women’s representation jumped from 14 to almost
25 per cent in the latest parliamentary elections,
bringing important voices to Somali politics and
bringing to the centre the fight to end child marriage,
to end female genital mutilation and to change the laws
that discriminate against women.
The participation of women in Somalia would
increase even faster if it were not left to the clan elders,
who tend to entrench the inequalities that the laws are
fighting against. Many more leaders are needed to
embrace gender equality and support women in order
to fast-track the critical changes.
In Baidoa, the interim capital of South West state,
where the Governor has been a stellar supporter of
women, I spoke with 31 female legislators in the State
Assembly, which has the highest number of women
legislators in Somalia. I saw the need for support that
the women called for. I was able to hear their pain
and their desire to change the future of their children
and their communities. These women and the people
of Somalia desperately need the continued support of
the international community so that their courageous
efforts will not be in vain.
I also saw important developments, as evidenced
by the constitutional review and the preparations
for the 2020-2021 elections, starting with a legally
binding 30 per cent quota for women. The Government
of Somaliland agreed in June to reserve 20 per cent
of seats for women in upcoming parliamentary and
local council elections. It is my strong belief that the
Security Council can and must stand with the Federal
and state Governments in their efforts to advance
gender equality, often against the objections of the
more powerful clan-based authorities. The voices of the
women of Somalia and other minorities must be heard.
They must be represented at the tables where decisions
are being taken because Somalia remains one of the

18-285847/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

countries with some of the worst conditions for women
and girls.
Earlier this year, Somaliland followed Puntland in
adopting a law criminalizing rape, forced marriage,
trafficking for sexual slavery and sexual harassment.
Even advocates were taken by surprise when the bill
got 35 of 50 votes in the House of Elders. The Federal
Government finally agreed on a sexual offences bill,
which only needs parliamentary approval. After a 10year old girl bled to death, the Government announced
the first-ever prosecution of female genital mutilation,
and there is a draft bill to criminalize this practice.
These are encouraging developments.
Additionally, in the past few years we have seen
advances, including the first forensic laboratory with
capacity to test DNA in rape cases, and the Chief of
the Somali National Army issuing a command order
affirming zero tolerance for sexual violence and a
traditional dispute-resolution policy to encourage
families to take sexual violence complaints to courts
rather than clan-based informal mechanisms. A woman
has been appointed Chairperson of the National
Independent Electoral Commission. Together with
the African Union and the women of Somalia, we will
soon launch the Somali chapter of the African Women
Leaders Network. That will support the building of
women’s movement among the many women in Somalia
who are hungry for change.
These landmark achievements need the Council’s
support and sustained attention because the progress
that Somalis are making is not irreversible. These laws
are often ignored. Female parliamentarians are often
marginalized at the whim of clan elders. Al-Shabaab
courts are still killing women by burying them neckdeep and pelting them with stones. In customary
courts, rapists often simply compensate the victim’s
family or marry her. Impunity for sexual violence is
still rampant, but I hope that the Security Council will
investigate the impact on women of current efforts to
counter violent extremism with a view to identifying
the best ways to support women.
There are three centres to rehabilitate men who
disengage from Al-Shabaab, but none for women.
Women can play a vital role in motivating the voluntary
disengagement of Al-Shabaab members, but that work
is often an afterthought and lacks resources. With
greater support, women can make significant progress
in that area, and we stand ready to support them.
8/26

13/09/2018

Somalia is also an important test case for the SecretaryGeneral’s gender parity goals, because the lack of
gender balance in the United Nations has been noticed
by our Somali partners.
I expect Council members will follow up on the
implementation of the mandates they gave to the African
Union Mission in Somalia and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia earlier this year, which
include many references to gender equality, and will
support women’s participation, not just in elections or
electoral reforms but also in efforts to advance national
and local reconciliation, prevent violent extremism and
reform the security sector.
Just as I have heard many times in the Council
that peace cannot be achieved by military means
alone, I know that Somalia will not have long-lasting
peace and deep reconciliation without the far-reaching
contribution, involvement and recognition of women.
We should support and help women to change the
deep structures that continue to reinforce inequality
and insecurity. That can happen when women are
fully involved.
Women’s organizations in Somalia are organized,
dedicated and comprised of activists, advocates,
entrepreneurs, professionals and patriots, and they pay
the ultimate price. Let us think about them as we look
at the way in which we are supporting the changes to
enhance security in Somalia. In the many challenges
that lie ahead, women will face them and make a
difference. In Somalia, the glass is half full. Let us help
to fill the other half. I thank the Council again for the
support given to UN-Women.
The President: I thank Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
her briefing.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank all three of
our briefers for their very informative briefings today.
If I may, I would like to particularly thank Michael
Keating for his work and commitment during this
historic period in Somalia’s State-building process and
for his resilience while holding this challenging and
dynamic portfolio. He has been an exemplary Special
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

Representative of the Secretary-General, and I think the
whole Security Council wishes him well in his future.
As Mr. Keating set out in the nearly three years
he has represented the Secretary-General, there has
been real progress to advance peace, stability and
State-building in Somalia. But there have also been and
remain significant challenges, and we have seen both in
recent months. I think the biggest single positive — if we
start with the positives — must surely be in the overall
regional dynamic. It has been exciting and inspirational
to see the rapprochement brought about in the Horn of
Africa, in particular, led by Ethiopia and Eritrea.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
to the Council the new Ambassador of Ethiopia and
to also pay tribute to his predecessor, who was such
an influential member of the Council. I have known
Mr. Alemu for a decade; I have learned so much
from him, and I count him as a friend. That is why I
wanted to welcome the new Ambassador and thank his
predecessor for all he did for us here and for Africa in
the Council.
In Somalia, I think that the other positives we have
seen are the agreement in principle on an electoral
model and resource-sharing signed in June, and we
welcome and need to see further progress to take those
forward. It has been extremely encouraging to see
the strong progress on economic recovery, including
efforts to tackle corruption, improve public financial
management and commitments to ambitious reforms
under the recently agreed on third International
Monetary Fund programme. We commend those efforts
and their results. I agree very much with Mr. Keating
on the economic potential of Somalia, which of course
requires a political commitment and courage if we are
to get there.
We also warmly welcome the much-needed
improvement in the humanitarian situation following
both the strong humanitarian response and the better
than average rainfall. Recovery remains fragile. We
must not be complacent. The situation is still concerning,
with 2.6 million internally displaced persons in urgent
need of assistance.
Unfortunately, however, as our briefers set out,
significant challenges remain. The current political
difficulties between the Federal Government and the
federal member states urgently need to be resolved. That
is critical across all areas of State-building. A failure
to resolve that challenge would seriously limit the

S/PV. 8352

opportunity for further progress. Cooperation between
the parties is needed to meet the December time frame
for passing the electoral law, and in particular to agree
on the final outstanding issue of constituency size. It is
needed to complete the constitutional review process
and strengthen the federal system, and it is needed to
take forward the vital work of security reform. We must
therefore have cooperation.
I would like to now address security. Let me start
with condemning in the strongest terms the attacks in
Mogadishu on 2 and 10 September, and sending my
deepest condolences to all those affected. Security
reform is at a critical juncture. The implementation of the
national security architecture, including the integration
of and support for regional forces, is vital, and faster
progress is needed. The national security architecture
is the critical underpinning of a successful transition
to Somalia-led security. We therefore welcome the
development of the transition plan and we pay tribute to
the ongoing commitment and sacrifice of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the troopcontributing countries in the fight against Al-Shabaab.
I thought that was made very clear by Mr. Madeira in
his briefing.
It is important that the transition plan be delivered in
a managed and coordinated way, with close engagement
from AMISOM, the federal member states and other
partners. To support the practical requirements to
transition, AMISOM needs to reconfigure accordingly.
We all, as international partners, must play our part
by coordinating the assistance we give as part of
a comprehensive approach to security structures.
Mr. Keating again set out the importance of us
coordinating together and ensuring that we do not end
up in a situation where essentially we are accidentally
funding a set of different and private armies. We must
bring together one army, and we must ensure that the
transition is sustainably financed. The United Kingdom
announced in recent weeks an additional $9 million in
funding for AMISOM. I expect that there will be a
number of calls today around the table for predictable
and sustainable funding for AMISOM, and I urge all
those who make those calls to ensure that they also
make similar contributions.
May I welcome Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka to the Security
Council table, and I hope to see her even more often. I
would just like to very much welcome her briefing. The
rise to 73 of the number of women elected as Members
of Parliament in 2016 was a significant change and

18-285849/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

13/09/2018

really worthy of commendation. The country must
build on that to support and strengthen the role of
women as decision-makers and in leadership roles by
strengthening the position of women, along with young
people, people with disabilities, displaced people and
minority groups, in the upcoming electoral law and
constitutional review. I agree wholeheartedly with
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka that sustainable development and
a sustainable peace require inclusion, and inclusion
requires the particular inclusion of women. Legislation
is important to strengthen the protection of women
and girls, and ensure that perpetrators of abuses are
held to account, including for sexual and gender-based
violence. We look forward to further progress on the
sexual offences bill and commend the progress made
in Somaliland.

Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira,
for their briefings on the most recent developments in
Somalia. As this is Mr. Keating’s last briefing, let me
also take this opportunity to express my Government’s
appreciation to him for his dedicated service in support
of Somalia. We have enjoyed an excellent working
relationship and cooperation with him over the past
couple of years. We wish him all the very best in his
future endeavours. We also look forward to working
closely with his successor, Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
who has already been active in the region. We are
also grateful to the Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, for her briefing on her
recent visit to Somalia, which focused on the role of
women in peacebuilding.

Overall, we believe that we are on the right side of
the ledger in Somalia, but we cannot be complacent.
We must continue to work, and we must work harder.
I hope that the remarkable and exciting progress in the
Horn of Africa also has an impact in Somalia. The key
is dialogue and cooperation. All Somali leaders must
work together and find ways to set aside short-term
interests and gain in favour of longer-term stability,
which will be of far-higher political, security and
economic benefit to all in Somalia. That is the only way
to ensure ongoing international support.

Today’s discussion takes place against the backdrop
of significant and important developments in the Horn
of Africa. As rightly highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/800), my Prime Minister
undertook his first official visit to Mogadishu in June.
The outcome demonstrated the strong commitment of
both Ethiopia and Somalia to raise their relations to a
new level. The subsequent visit of President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo to Asmara for the first
time also heralded a new era between Somalia and
Eritrea, with the establishment of diplomatic relations
between the two countries. The trilateral summit among
Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia that took place in Asmara
early this month and the subsequent visit by the Foreign
Ministers of the three countries to Djibouti also led the
way for the opening of a new chapter in the relations
between Djibouti and Eritrea.

The President: Today is a special morning because
we get to introduce our newest member of the Security
Council, Ethiopian Ambassador Amde. We are so excited
to have him. We welcome him to the Security Council
family. He should get to know these faces because he
will spend so much time with them that he will get tired
looking at them. But we are certainly excited to have
him, and we welcome him to the Council.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): May I underline how very
pleased I am to be here today in the Security Council
for the first time since my appointment as the new
Permanent Representative of Ethiopia to the United
Nations. I look forward to working closely with each
and every Council member and count on their support.
I also thank you, Madam President, for your kind
welcoming words. May I also note that it is particularly
opportune that I am starting my work with a discussion
on peace and security in Somalia. In Ethiopia it is a
subject that is very close to our hearts.
Let me thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Michael Keating, and the
10/26

Over the past few months, we have seen reconciliation
and the start of the process of normalization between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, Djibouti, the Sudan and Somalia.
The restoration of peace between and among the members
of our region is already providing for the possibility of
extended economic integration and a broader political
response. Yesterday, the South Sudanese parties finally
signed the revitalized peace agreement for South Sudan
at the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in Addis Ababa. Of course, that is
not the subject of our discussion today and we will take
it up at the appropriate time, but it also underlines that
the winds of change blowing across the Horn of Africa
have rekindled a new sense of hope and optimism for
regional peace and stability.
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

We welcomed the resolution of the political crisis
a few months ago between the executive branch and
the Federal Parliament in Somalia. It has brought about
some positive developments in the overall political
process in Somalia. Equally, we are very aware that
the political situation today is being dominated by
political tensions between the leadership of the Federal
Government and the federal member states. We strongly
agree with the Secretary-General on the urgent need
to find solutions to such issues through discussion
and dialogue. Fostering local, regional and national
reconciliation is critical for State-building in Somalia.
Similarly, the military standoff between Puntland and
Somaliland forces has escalated in recent months. If the
situation is not handled carefully, it has the potential
to further complicate the security situation. In that
context, we support the joint mediation efforts of IGAD
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
towards a negotiated resolution of the Somaliland and
Puntland stalemate.
With regard to the security situation in Somalia,
we remain very concerned about the series of attacks
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab and elements of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in Mogadishu and other
parts of the country. We strongly condemn their
heinous attacks and continue to stand firmly in support
of, and solidarity with, the people and the Government
of Somalia in fighting the menace of terrorism in
their country.
The swift implementation of the national security
architecture and the Somalia transition plan will dictate
the successful assumption of security responsibilities
by Somali forces and provide protection to the people.
At the same time, Somalia, of course, still needs
sustained support from the international community
in its efforts to achieve post-conflict recovery. In
that regard, we welcome the outcome of the Somalia
Partnership Forum held in Brussels in July and the
strong commitment expressed by partners to supporting
peace and prosperity in Somalia in a spirit of mutual
accountability. However, we would strongly emphasize
the need to translate commitments into concrete action
and, in addition, ensure the necessary coherence among
partners in providing support to Somalia.
The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), in close cooperation with the Somali
national security forces, continues to be absolutely
vital. We agree with the Secretary-General that more
predictable support by the international community is

S/PV. 8352

important to implement AMISOM’s mandate effectively
and support Somalia on its path to peace and stability.
There is no doubt that AMISOM needs increased
force multipliers and other sustainable logistical and
financial support. The AMISOM Military Operations
Coordination Committee, which met in Nairobi last
month, discussed a range of important issues and raised
crucial points. They require our close attention.
The commitment of the Government of Somalia
to progressively shoulder the lead role in providing
security for its people and implement reforms is highly
commendable. The Government has a realistic view
of the conditions-based transition to ensure that the
security gains, made with enormous sacrifices, are not
reversed. It deserves our full support.
Finally, may I also emphasize that we hope, and
have every expectation, that the high-level event on
Somalia we will be co-hosting, along with our partners
Somalia, the United Kingdom and Italy, during the
high-level week, will contribute to keeping Somalia
on the international agenda and help in mobilizing
the necessary future support for its peacebuilding
endeavours and its continued progress towards elections.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Francisco
Caetano Jose Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, and Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, for their briefings. As my other
colleagues have mentioned, we thank Mr. Michael
Keating, not only for his briefing today, but also for his
commitment, efforts and determination in supporting
the well-being of Somalia and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I also
echo my colleagues in welcoming the new Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia and take this opportunity
to pay tribute to his predecessor, Ambassador Tekeda
Alemu. The new representative has our full support.
Bolivia welcomes the efforts of the African Union,
the United Nations and countries of the region to achieve
peace and security in Somalia and overcome ongoing
terrorist threats. We also underscore and commend
the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to
build and consolidate the political process of peace
and reconciliation, in the framework of its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, with a focus on

18-2858411/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

13/09/2018

defining its priorities for development, strengthening
resilience and promoting socioeconomic transformation.

about through political tools if political solutions are to
be found.

We would underscore also the initiatives taken by
the Federal Government in the areas of peacebuilding,
State-building, the strengthening of the rule of law,
security-sector reform and other key objectives, which
demonstrate its ongoing commitment to achieving
political and social stability and, above all, to providing
protection to the civilian population.

Dialogue means learning and requires reflection
and the recognition not only of differences but also
of areas of common ground. It also facilitates crisis
recovery and can avert an escalation of violence insofar
as the priorities and needs of all stakeholders are borne
in mind.

On security-sector reform, we note that it is vital
that Somalia take ownership of the process, which
must be built on a relationship of mutual trust and be
consensus- and inclusivity-based with respect to both
Federal Government and the federal states. To that
end, we underscore the importance of the work of
UNSOM in providing support to the Office of National
Security, which we deem of paramount importance
to building capacities in the area of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as effective
weapons and ammunition management, maritime
security and strengthening the capacities of the
country’s police forces. In this respect, we would echo
those who call for effective coordination of the various
international stakeholders involved so as to ensure that
all cooperation efforts in the security field are made
in close coordination with the Federal Government
of Somalia.
At the political level, we are concerned at the
persistent tensions between certain federal states and the
Federal Government, as political rivalries undermine
Government oversight and hamper all the efforts of
our Organization and the international community. In
that regard, the political road map for Somalia shows
significant progress that we are certain will be reflected
in significant advantages of mutual benefit to both the
Federal Government and federal states.
Bolivia fully supports the efforts of the international
community to implement initiatives for mediation
and preventive diplomacy that support the quest for
a peaceful and sustainable solution to the conflict
in Somalia. In this regard, it behoves us continually
to highlight the work of the African Union Mission
in Somalia and its personnel, some of whom have
sacrificed their lives in the service of their mandate.
We fervently appeal to the parties to use peaceful
mechanisms for resolving conflicts and disputes. We
stress the need for the use of political means, including
inclusive dialogue. Sustainable peace must be brought
12/26

On another tack, we are deeply concerned at the
continual deterioration of the security situation. As
several colleagues have already mentioned, the presence
in Somalia of the Al-Shabaab terrorist group and a selfdeclared faction of the so-called Islamic State continues
to highlight the imperative need to identify the means
necessary to counter such threats.
Asymmetric attacks using car bombs, improvised
explosive devices, including those controlled remotely,
have caused the loss of hundreds of lives and significant
material damage. The kidnapping of Government
and international staff, the kidnapping, recruitment
and indoctrination of children as fighters, as well as
sexual violence against women and girls, particularly
those who have suffered forced displacement, all
are alarming.
We commend the coordination between UNSOM
and the United Nations Development Programme in
the implementation of support programmes for the
protection of victims of sexual violence and in the
establishment of preventive measures. The protection
of women, boys and girls is and must be a priority.
To conclude, we are certain that the collective
response, both to terrorist threats and to political
instability in Somalia, must be robust and consistent.
The international community must continue its
strengthened cooperation for the full implementation
of the national security architecture throughout Somali
territory, so that in the near future the Somali security
forces can take full responsibility for maintaining the
security of their country and their people.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would echo my colleagues who spoke before me in
welcoming the presence here of the new Ambassador
of Ethiopia. As the representative and coordinator
of the group of African countries members of the
Security Council by virtue of the principle of rotation, I
welcome the fact that I will soon be able to count on his
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8352

wisdom — Ethiopian wisdom as reflected in the recent
initiatives taken by the Ethiopian Prime Minister.

unfortunately demonstrates the fragility of the political
situation in Somalia.

My delegation wishes also to thank Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Somalia (S/2018/800). I would assure
him that the Council deeply appreciates the tremendous
work he has done in Somalia and wish him every
success in all his future endeavours.

Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the Somali authorities
to overcome their differences. It calls on the leaders
of the federal states to seize the opportunity of the
National Security Council meeting to be convened by
the Somali President on 18 September in order to restart
discussions on the topics on which there is divergence.
Those discussions could make it possible to create a
climate of mutual trust and to work constructively to
strengthen federalism and implement the agreed road
map in the run-up to the elections scheduled for 2020
and 2021.

I wish also to thank Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and
Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women, for their informative
briefings. Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka has just returned from
Somalia, where women constitute 25 per cent of the
members of the National Assembly. That, I think, would
make many States envious, and my country would
indeed like to emulate Somalia in that achievement.
My delegation’s statement will focus on the
following points: the evolution of the political and
security situation, the issue of human rights and the
economic situation in Somalia.
On the political situation, Côte d’Ivoire notes
with satisfaction the recent positive developments that
have been noted in the Horn of Africa. In that regard,
we welcome the initiatives taken by His Excellency
Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, aimed
at strengthening regional cooperation. My country
also welcomes the commitment of Somalia’s leaders to
improve bilateral relations with Ethiopia and Eritrea.
My delegation would encourage the authorities of
those countries to maintain this momentum and further
strengthen their economic, diplomatic and security
relations in order to ensure stability in the region.
However, we remain concerned by the tensions
that have led the federal member states to suspend
all cooperation with the Federal Government. While
the agreements in principle reached by the National
Security Council at its meeting in June on an electoral
model and the sharing of revenues from natural
resources gave rise to hope for an improvement in
relations among the parties, the recent spike in tensions

On the security track, my delegation remains
deeply concerned at the fragility of the situation as
described in the report of the Secretary-General. In
addition to the continuing clan violence, my country is
concerned by the renewed tension between Puntland and
Somaliland, which has displaced about 15,000 people.
We are convinced that a military option cannot resolve
the disagreements between the two states. We therefore
call on them to prioritize dialogue as a means of settling
their differences, and we take this opportunity to
commend the joint initiatives of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and UNSOM to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict between Somaliland
and Puntland.
My country also remains concerned about the
activities of the terrorist groups Al-Shabaab and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Somalia. Despite
the intensification of counter-terrorist operations in the
country, we must note that Al-Shabaab continues to
possess operational capabilities to carry out large-scale
attacks. As for the presence of the Islamic State in
Somalia, it constitutes a major risk of destabilization
for the region, or even the entire African continent,
owing to its links with other terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida and Boko Haram.
The precarious security situation in Somalia
justifies the continued presence of troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
in the country and should lead the international
community to provide financial and logistical
support on two tracks: first, to AMISOM, in order to
enable it to effectively implement its mandate, and
secondly, to the Somali Government, in order to support
the country in its security sector reform process and
enable it to effectively implement the transition plan,

18-2858413/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

which is aimed at facilitating a progressive transition
from AMISOM to the country’s security forces. In
that regard, my country supports the appeal made by
the Secretary-General to Member States to contribute
to the financing of the trust funds for AMISOM and
the Somali National Army. Furthermore, we call
on the Somali authorities to redouble their efforts to
achieve significant progress in power-sharing and
the implementation of the security arrangements
necessary for the proper implementation of the national
transition plan.
My delegation notes with great concern the
deterioration of the human rights situation in Somalia.
We are seeing an increasing number of civilians
killed, kidnappings, rapes and other sexual abuses, as
well as the continued use of child soldiers by terrorist
groups. Given that situation, Côte d’Ivoire wishes to
remind the authorities of their responsibility to protect
civilian populations, and all parties of their obligation
to respect international law and human rights law. We
are convinced that accountability is essential to the
restoration of lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
Therefore, my country urges the Somali authorities to
identify the perpetrators of human rights violations and
bring them to justice before the competent courts.
With regard to the economic situation, Côte
d’Ivoire notes with satisfaction the progress made by
the Somali Government in the implementation of the
International Monetary Fund’s reference programme.
We reiterate our conviction that, in the light of our
own experience, there can be no genuine solution to
the crisis, or peacebuilding without efforts to rebuild
the economy. Following the example of my country,
which made that strategic choice, it is imperative
that the current security responses be accompanied
by a strategy based on combating poverty and
youth unemployment in order to prevent them from
succumbing to terrorist radicalization.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
appreciation to UNSOM, AMISOM, the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia and all Somalia’s partners
for the multifaceted support they have provided to
the people and the authorities of Somalia in under
difficult circumstances.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We also would like to begin by welcoming our new
colleague, the Ambassador of Ethiopia, and to express
our support to him as he goes about his work. We
14/26

13/09/2018

are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings by Mr. Michael Keating,
Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira and Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka. We welcome the appointment of
Nicholas Haysom as the new Special Representative
for Somalia and thank Michael Keating for his valuable
efforts to bring about peace and stability in Somalia
during a very complex transition period.
Peru notes with concern the situation in Somalia.
Inter-clan conflicts, violent extremism and the adverse
effects of climate change have resulted in a serious
humanitarian situation for millions of Somalis and
in political instability that constrains the Federal
Government’s efforts to rebuild the country.
We vigorously condemn the terrorist attacks
by Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. We stand in solidarity with the victims and
encourage the Government not to allow those attacks
aimed at underming peace to impede its efforts aimed
at achieving sustainable peace in Somalia. We highly
value efforts to build a federal State, including the
initial agreements on the electoral model and the
distribution of natural resources. We look forward to
the review of the Constitution and preparations for the
2020-2021 general elections. We hope that, by resuming
its activities this week, the Somali Parliament will be
able to swiftly make progress on those issues.
We would also like to stress the importance of
promoting the active participation of women and young
people in the political life of the country and in the fight
against violent extremism and terrorism. We welcome
the fact that the draft electoral law provides for greater
political representation for women. As Ms. MlamboNgcuka mentioned, the situation of women and girls
who are victims of sexual violence needs to be addressed
more effectively. We also welcome the participation of
young Somalis in the International Youth Conference
on the Prevention and Countering of Violent Extremism
and Terrorism, which was held in Egypt in May.
We underscore the need to fully implement the
national security architecture, which defines the roles
and responsibilities of federal and regional forces,
and the transition plan so that the Somali authorities
assume responsibility for the security of the country.
To that end, we note that coordination between the
Federal Government and the federal states, as well as
the support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the United Nations Assistance Mission
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

S/PV. 8352

in Somalia (UNSOM), the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and international partners,
is essential.

between Somaliland and Puntland. We strongly
welcome the Federal Government’s positive agenda and
the high goals that it has set for Somalia.

We are playing close attention to the most recent
developments in the Horn of Africa subregion. We believe
that the normalization of relations between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, and now Somalia, should facilitate an increase
in investment for the benefit of the development of the
three countries and their citizens. Nevertheless, we
believe it is essential that the international community
increase its support for the implementation of the
recovery and resilience framework for Somalia and
the 2018 humanitarian response plan by providing the
required financial resources.

It is important that a constructive and inclusive
political dialogue continue at all levels, while taking
on the challenging tasks that lie ahead, not least, with
regard to the constitutional review, the strengthening
of federalism and preparing for the 2020-2021 general
elections, which will be the true peace accord for
Somalia. The recent deterioration of relations between
the federal member states and the Federal Government
are of great concern in that regard. We urge all
stakeholders to promptly meet in the National Security
Council to address current grievances through mutually
respectful dialogue. Functioning collaboration between
the Government and the member states is a precondition
for moving forward the Government’s ambitious reform
agenda and for Somalia’s aspiration towards debt relief
and advancing economic development.

I would like to conclude by highlighting the work
done by AMISOM, UNSOM and UNSOS in support of
the efforts of the authorities and the people of Somalia
to achieve sustainable peace in spite of the remaining
difficulties and challenges.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Special Representative
Keating, Special Representative of the African Union
Commission Chairperson for Somalia Madeira and
Executive-Director Mlambo-Ngcuka for their briefings
this morning. Their remarks and the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/800) underline the significant
political progress that has been made in Somalia and
the region during the reporting period. The past few
months have seen positive regional developments
take place at an astonishing pace, mainly driven by
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea. The
tripartite summit in Eritrea and last week’s high-level
meeting in Djibouti among the Foreign Ministers of
the region hold out the prospect of true change and a
possibility to end the instability that has plagued the
Horn of Africa for far too long.
I will take this opportunity to welcome, as others
have done, our new colleague from Ethiopia, and repeat
how important it is that, we, the Security Council
recognize and acknowledge the historic significance
of the decisions taken, not least by Ethiopia, and the
positive momentum that those decisions have had
for the entire region and how such leadership should
serve as a model for so many other situations that are
frequently on our agenda.
It is imperative, in that light, that Somali actors seize
this opportunity for historic and significant change and
continue the positive trajectory in addressing their own
internal conflicts, not least the aggravated situation

We welcomed the successful outcome of the
Somalia Partnership Forum in July, co-hosted by my
Government, Somalia and the European Union, as it
was an important opportunity to take stock of progress
made and setting subsequent priorities. Active support
from the international community for Somalia’s
development remains crucial. We commend the Federal
Government’s ambitious and successful economic
reforms. Continued reforms are central for the overall
State-building process in Somalia and for restoring
trust in the Government. It is important that efforts
now be geared towards the implementation of more
demanding reforms.
We also commend the steps taken by the
Government and the federal member states in security
sector reform. The adopted transition plan needs to
be swiftly and successfully implemented. To that end,
strong commitment by Somali actors, as well as by
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), its
troop-contributing countries and other partners, will be
vital. Improved coordination of international support
will also be crucial. We need to acknowledge, however,
that the build-up of security in Somalia will take
time. We must therefore also continue to address the
challenges to AMISOM’s efforts, including by ensuring
adequate, predictable and sustainable funding.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to engage
women and its efforts to increase their political

18-2858415/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

representation. The Executive Director’s briefing
shows how gender issues are central to peace and
security in Somalia. The Council needs to stand with
the Federal and state Governments in their efforts
to advance gender equality. Dedicated support for
women’s participation is needed, not just regarding
elections, electoral reforms and the constitutional
review process, but also for efforts to advance national
and local reconciliation, prevent violent extremism and
reform the security sector. In that regard, Sweden is
working to create a women’s network for mediation in
Somalia. We commend the reporting on gender equality
and women’s empowerment in order to better follow up
on those issues. We would welcome the use of genderdisaggregated data in future reports.
We also welcome the reporting with respect to
climate-related security risks, as there is no doubt
that they have a direct impact on the stability and
security of the country. We look forward to receiving
further information and risk analysis to that end. We
also welcome the resilience and recovery framework
launched by the Government at the Somalia Partnership
Forum, which will help us be proactive instead of
reactive in the face of climate-related threats.
In conclusion, I should like to thank once again
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Michael Keating for his relentless engagement and
valuable work with regard to Somalia’s development.
We welcome his reform of UNSOM and the introduction
of the comprehensive approach to security, which
paved the way for a more effective approach of the
international communities’ efforts in Somalia. We are
also highly appreciative of the good cooperation that
we have enjoyed with him and his staff in Somalia and
wish him every success in his next assignment.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking our briefers for their statements,
and in particular by commending Mr. Michael
Keating for his leadership, clear mindedness and the
perseverance he demonstrated as Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia for nearly three
years. I also welcome the presence of the Executive
Director of UN-Women at today’s meeting. I join others
in welcoming the new Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia, Ambassador Taye Atske Sellassie Amde.
The stability and security of Somalia remains
a priority for France. We are all aware of what is at
stake concerning regional security and, more broadly,
16/26

13/09/2018

successfully combating terrorism at the international
level. In that context, France attaches particular
importance to the gradual transition of the country’s
security responsibility to the Somali security forces,
which must be part of a clear and precise timetable
and adhere to the national security architecture . At
the high-level security meeting on Somalia in May, we
welcomed the finalization of the transition plan of the
Somali Federal Government. It is now essential that
progress be made in the implementation of the plan in the
pilot areas. We welcome the recent transfer of security
responsibility for the Mogadishu stadium, which must
enjoy the necessary security guarantees. Needless to
say, the transition will succeed only if the national
security architecture becomes a reality in Somalia. Its
implementation must be stepped up, especially with
regard to the various areas highlighted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/800), including the
integration of regional forces into national security
forces, the delineation of responsibilities between the
various federal and regional security services and
defining the chain of command.
The second key element to ensuring the transition’s
success is the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which continues to play a primary role in
Somalia’s security, given the persistent threat posed
by Al-Shabaab, and, in that regard, we pay tribute to
the Mission’s troop-contributing countries. We know
that, in order for it to succeed, AMISOM must be
reconfigured to support the Somali transition plan in
accordance with the request of the Security Council via
resolution 2431 (2018), adopted in July. Although the
Council decided to postpone reducing the AMISOM
troop ceiling until February 2019, continuing the
gradual, organized and conditioned drawdown of
AMISOM remains important. It is also essential to
abide by the new deadlines pursuant to resolution 2431
(2018). I would mention in particular the AMISOM
operational readiness assessment and the technical
evaluation, which should review the status of the
Mission’s reconfiguration.
Clearly, AMISOM must continue to be supported
throughout the transition. Nevertheless, France believe
that the European Union can no longer continue to
finance the bonuses of AMISOM soldiers alone. As
the reports of the Special Envoys of the United Nations
and the African Union on funding AMISOM point
out, it is now essential that new partners contribute
to financing the Mission. More generally, in keeping
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

with remarks made earlier, all partners in Somalia must
improve coordination, as was underlined at the Somalia
Partnership Forum held in Brussels in July.
The third, and most basic, key to success involves
the country’s political and economic integration and
unification. Somalia must face up to major challenges,
such as deepening federalism, the constitutional
review, the holding of the 2020-2021 elections,
based on the one-person-one model, and pursuing an
economic reform agenda. In that regard, we welcomed
the outcome of the meeting of the National Security
Council held in Baidoa in June, which marked the
resumption of discussions between the Somali Federal
Government and the federal member states. We are,
however, concerned about the communiqué issued
on 8 September by the Presidents of the five federal
member states announcing the suspension of talks with
Mogadishu. We therefore call on all Somali actors to
resume their dialogue around crucial issues as soon as
possible, including devising the electoral model and
sharing revenue generated by natural resources. We
also call for the cessation of all outside interference in
the internal affairs of Somalia.
Overall, concerning the political process, in
keeping with what Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka said earlier, I
should like to stress the importance that France attaches
to greater women’s participation. As we know, the
full and effective participation of women in political
processes is a prerequisite for ensuring lasting peace
and reconciliation.
I thank Michael Keating for having pointed out that
Somalia is an example of a situation of vulnerability
to climate events. The Security Council must keep that
reality in mind. With respect to that issue and to the
participation of women, I agree with the suggestion
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden that
it could be useful for the Council to have access to
analytical datat on these conflict-related factors.
I conclude by welcoming recent regional
developments, such as last week’s signing of a
cooperation agreement between Somalia, Ethiopia
and Eritrea, and the holding of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development summit yesterday, marked
by the return of Eritrea and the consultations held
upstream between the Djiboutian and Eritrean
authorities. These developments open real prospects for
the stabilization of the entire Horn of Africa and, we
hope, for Somalia too.

S/PV. 8352

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Mr. Keating; the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira; and
the Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. MlamboNgcuka, for their briefings.
Mr. Keating’s term in office will soon come to an
end. China highly commends him for his contributions.
China welcomes the new Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia and commends the former Permanent
Representative for his contributions.
Somalia is an important country in the Horn of
Africa. In recent years, through the concerted efforts
of the Somali Government, the African Union (AU),
the United Nations and the international community,
Somalia has made ongoing and positive progress
in rebuilding the State. China supports the efforts
of the Somali Federal Government to promote
political reconciliation, restore the economy and
improve livelihoods.
Relations among the States of the Horn
of Africa — Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti and
Somalia — have continuously improved of late, thereby
creating sound conditions for regional peace, stability
and development. China welcomes these developments.
In the meantime, Somalia faces many challenges
to its political process and economic and social
development. The threat posed by terrorism to regional
security persists. Somalia has a long way to go in its
rebuilding and development efforts. In that context, the
United Nations and the international community should,
based on the situation on the ground, support African
States in their efforts to resolve African issues in
African ways and assist Somalia in its State-rebuilding.
First, on the basis of respect for the leadership of
the Somali Government, efforts should be pursued
to assist it in advancing the implementation of its
transition plan, with a focus on governance, justice,
police and security sector capacity-building. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia should
provide targeted assistance in these areas. Regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
should fully leverage their roles in leading good offices
efforts and work with Somalia towards further progress
in security and rebuilding.

18-2858417/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

13/09/2018

Secondly, efforts should be maintained to support
the Somali Government in its work to combat extremist
anti-Government forces and terrorist organizations,
and to assist the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in its enhanced efforts to implement its
mandate. The United Nations and the international
community should give positive consideration to
providing stable, predictable and sustainable funding
support to AMISOM and help the troop-contributing
countries with capacity-building so as to crack down
more effectively on terrorism and promote the peace
and stability of Somalia and the surrounding regions.

cooperation with Africa, and to participate actively
in the cause of Africa’s peace and security so as to
make its due contribution to the peace, stability and
development of Africa.

Thirdly, it is important to further step up
humanitarian assistance and support to social and
economic development in Somalia in order to help the
Somali Federal Government to rebuild the economy
and improve the well-being of the people. After many
years of war and turmoil, Somalia’s economic and
social development is lagging. There is much to be done
to strengthen its agriculture, education, health-care and
infrastructure sectors. The international community
should enhance its support for Somalia’s economic
and social development with greater inputs so that the
Somali people can enjoy better lives.

To address the challenges faced by women and girls
in Somalia, we need greater representation of women in
political structures and processes. We feel very strongly
that Somalia now has a clear window of opportunity
to advance gender equality in the reform agenda, the
constitutional review process and the preparations for
the elections in 2020.

Peace, stability, development and revitalization
of Africa are the long-term aspirations of the people
of that continent and the common responsibility of
the international community. Early this month, China
successfully hosted the Beijing Summit of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation. The Forum adopted
two important outcome documents: the Beijing
Declaration-Toward an Even Stronger China-Africa
Community with a Shared Future, and the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation Beijing Action Plan
(2019-2021).
It also launched new measures to comprehensively
deepen China-Africa cooperation, with eight major
initiatives at the core. Both sides agree to strengthen
peace and security cooperation. China decided to set
up a China-Africa peace and security cooperation fund
to support their cooperation in peace, security and the
maintenance of peace and stability. As China’s first
funding mechanism for African peace and security, the
fund will help to build an even more effective platform
for their cooperation.
China will continue to follow the principle of
sincerity, real results, amity, good faith and the
pursuit of the greater good and shared interests in its
18/26

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank Mr. Keating, Ambassador Madeira and
Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka of UN-Women
for their briefings. Their briefings clearly affirmed
that Somalia remains volatile and that many challenges
persist for its people, in particular for women and girls.
I was especially touched by the information provided
by UN-Women on that score.

We welcome the progress made by the Federal
Government of Somalia on economic, political and
security sector reforms, but, according to the briefers,
many risks remain. That includes violent extremism,
armed conflicts, political instability and the possibility
of further humanitarian crises. In that line, let me
focus on three issues: first, the implementation of the
transition plan; secondly, the need to address root
causes; and thirdly, the protection of civilians.
On my first point, we urge the Federal Government
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
to accelerate the implementation of the transition
plan. The next months will be key; success depends
on the efforts and cooperation of all stakeholders
involved — the efforts first and foremost of the Somali’s
themselves and AMISOM, but also of the international
community in providing support. In that light, we
welcome the winds of change in the Horn of Africa.
We applaud the recent joint commitment of Eritrea and
Somalia to restoring diplomatic relations.
That brings me to my second point. It is essential
that the root causes of the conflict be addressed if we
are to achieve sustainable peace. A stronger rule of law
is key to addressing such root causes as corruption and
impunity. Reforming the Somali security forces, on the
one hand, is essential for the eventual phasing out of
AMISOM; on the other, it will be effective only within
a strong justice framework. The Federal Government
of Somalia should show real progress. That includes
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

implementing the agreements concluded earlier on the
constitutional review, federalization and the reform of
the justice chain.
We remain concerned about the impact of climate
change and ecological changes on the stability of
Somalia. We underline the point just made by our
Swedish colleague. In resolution 2408 (2018), the
Security Council emphasized the need for risk
assessments and strategies relating to these factors. We
call on the United Nations and the Federal Government
of Somalia to make progress on this, and we look
forward to the new report of the Secretary-General,
which should include reporting on those issues.
That brings me to my third point, concerning the
protection of civilians. We are truly concerned about
the heavy toll that the conflict continues to exact on
civilians. We remain concerned about the scale of
sexual abuse and assaults on women and young girls.
Gender-based violence remains a key protection
concern, especially for internally displaced persons,
who are already extremely vulnerable.
We want to express our great appreciation to the
national and international troops in Somalia. At the
same time, we call on the Government of Somalia and
its international partners to do everything possible
to prevent civilian casualties during operations.
In addition, it is crucial to ensure that the Federal
Government of Somalia holds perpetrators of sexual
violence accountable. In that connection, we welcome
the approval of the sexual offences bill and hope that it
will soon be enacted at the federal level. Let me stress
that accountability is key to a stable political future.
In conclusion, we commend the Federal Government
of Somalia for promoting a positive reform agenda.
Although progress is being made, the scale of the
challenges facing Somalia remains daunting. Failure to
address any of them may have a knock-on effect on the
others, and it is therefore crucial that all stakeholders
work together in a coordinated way. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands will continue to support Somalia on the
road to stability.
Finally, let me reiterate our appreciation to Special
Representative Keating, who will pass the torch at the
end of the month. We want to thank him for his tireless
commitment, persistence and leadership. We admire
his courage, especially in these difficult conditions. We
wish him all the best in his future endeavours, and we

S/PV. 8352

welcome the appointment of Nicholas Haysom as the
new Special Representative.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Michael
Keating, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his dedicated service, and wish him all the
best in his future endeavours. I am glad to once again
see Mr. Francisco Madeira, the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, with whom we met in Mogadishu during the
visit to Somalia of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia
and Eritrea. We also appreciate the very insightful
and informative briefing of Ms. Phumzile MlamboNgcuka, the Executive Director of UN-Women. Lastly,
we welcome Mr. Abukar Dahir Osman, the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, to the Chamber.
I would first like to express my condolences for
the terrorist attack by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu on
2 September, which killed a number of people, including
children. That cowardly act of violence reminds us of
the fragility of the security situation in the country
and the need to make every effort to preserve its hardearned stability.
We welcome the recent positive momentum in the
Horn of Africa as we witness the historic rapprochement
among the countries of the region, led by the strong
political will for change displayed by Ethiopia’s new
leader, and we commend the political leadership of
the region for initiating and promoting these positive
changes with the goal of steering their nations towards
a long-awaited peaceful and prosperous future.
On the political front, we note the progress made by
the Government of Somalia in revitalizing the high-level
political dialogue with the federal states, strengthening
reconciliation processes and State authority across the
country. In that context, we welcome the significant
outcomes of the National Security Council meeting
held in Baidoa in June, which reached key agreements
on the transition plan, revenue-sharing and the electoral
model for the 2020 one-person, one-vote elections.
We commend and wholeheartedly back the bold and
comprehensive reform agenda and development vision
of President Farmajo and Prime Minister Khayre,
and expect to see them consistently implemented.
We also support the initiative to create an inclusive
electoral system with the participation of women,
representatives of the whole of civil society and national
minorities. There can be no question that women must

18-2858419/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

be empowered to make a dynamic contribution to the
peace process and given a lead role in decision-making
and mobilizing the grass roots for community action.
Building consensus on those and other critical issues
is important as a basis for further progress, including
the conclusion of the constitutional review process
and the definition of Somalia’s federal model. We
encourage the country’s political leaders to overcome
their differences in a constructive and mutually
beneficial manner in the interest of the stability and
sustainable development of Somalia. We also welcome
the measures taken by federal constitutional bodies
to ensure the holding of a national constitutional
convention and provide an opportunity for an inclusive,
Somali-owned review process.
Furthermore, we would like to stress the importance
of the sustained and coordinated support of the
international community for the recovery and
stabilization process in Somalia. In that regard, the
Somalia partnership forum held in Brussels on 16 and
17 July was an important step towards the further
development of an international partnership to facilitate
the implementation of the transition plan and strengthen
Somalia’s resilience in the face of humanitarian shocks
and catastrophes.
On the security front, we are concerned about the
persistent threats posed by Al-Shabaab and groups
with alleged ties to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. We condemn all acts of violence, including
sexual and gender-based violence, that undermine the
fragile security and humanitarian situation and the
peacebuilding process.
We acknowledge the role of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and commend
AMISOM and the various United Nations entities for
their dedication to the security of Somalia. The swift
implementation of the national security architecture
and the transition plan, with the coordinated support of
the international partners, will be critical.
At the same time, the transfer of responsibilities
from AMISOM to the national security forces should
not create a security vacuum. The continued capacitybuilding of the Somali National Army is essential for
greater effectiveness. We note with satisfaction the
efforts of the Government of Somalia in addressing the
issue of the proliferation of arms and demonstrating a
commitment to building its weapons and ammunition
management capabilities. Just two days ago, we were
20/26

13/09/2018

briefed via video-teleconference by a national security
adviser to the Sanctions Committee on the status
of the issue, and we will continue to closely monitor
the process, since it has critical significance for the
country’s security and stability.
On the humanitarian front, we call on the
international community to fill the gap in funding
the Somalia Humanitarian Response Plan in order to
address the issues of vulnerable internally displaced
people and broad climate-related consequences.
Kazakhstan, for its part, has been contributing to the
Plan’s implementation by helping to alleviate drought
in hard-hit areas.
Finally, we would like to stress the importance of
ensuring Somalia’s rapid economic recovery. In that
regard, we encourage the Government of Somalia to
take further concrete steps to implement fiscal reforms,
build institutions and improve economic performance.
We call on the international community to enhance its
support for the further development of Somalia and for
addressing the root causes of the crisis.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation would like to echo
previous speakers in welcoming the new Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the Security Council. We
are grateful for the detailed and informative briefings by
Mr. Michael Keating, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Caetano
Madeira, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director
of UN-Women.
At the outset, I want to express my delegation’s
dismay over Monday’s attacks by the Islamist group
Al-Shabaab on a Government building in Mogadishu,
which resulted in six deaths and more than a dozen
wounded. We would like to convey our condolences to
the Somali Government and to the affected families.
Despite some progress on the ground as a result of
the security measures taken by the Federal Government
of Somalia and the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the security situation in Mogadishu
continues to be worrying. We condemn Al-Shabaab and
other terrorist groups, which continue to be the primary
threat to peace and security in Somalia. They are
maintaining a presence in central and southern Somalia
despite the measures that have been taken.
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

Our Government believes that the peace and
security of States must be given top priority and
attention in the United Nations because if there is no
peace, there can be no development, and if there is no
development, it is difficult to ensure people’s dignity,
integrity and freedom. We therefore fully support the
eradication of terrorist activities, which are the main
obstacle to Somalia’s development.
However, it is also clear that the security dimension
is not the only issue we need to address. The Government
of Somalia needs the determined support of the
international community to address the root causes of
radicalization, such as poverty, lack of education and
employment opportunities, and violent extremism. In
that regard, we want to underline the importance of
the support of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia to the inclusive political process led by the
Government of Somalia, including the provision by the
United Nations of its good offices in support of all the
issues envisaged in resolution 2408 (2018).
We are concerned about last Saturday’s decision
by the leadership of some federal member states to
temporarily sever their relations with the Federal
Government. We believe that this decision will increase
the pressure on the country’s already fragile political
situation, especially within the Government. We
welcome the Federal Government’s announcement of its
readiness to resolve any issues with the federated states
in accordance with the Constitution. In that regard,
we call on the parties to resume dialogue in order to
make further progress on key priorities, including
power- and resource-sharing, the constitutional review,
fiscal federalism, the preparations for elections in 2020
and 2021 according to the principle of one person,
one vote, support for regional security forces and
the completion of the federal model for justice and
correctional institutions.
Lastly, my delegation is very concerned about
the cases of sexual violence against internally
displaced women and girls, whose situation makes
them particularly vulnerable. It will be essential to
improve the country’s legal framework, its systems for
the protection of human rights and the capacity and
legitimacy of its institutions to help combat impunity,
improve accountability for human rights violations and
encourage reconciliation.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank our briefers today for their very informative

S/PV. 8352

presentations. I particularly want to applaud Special
Representative Michael Keating for his extremely hard
work and continued efforts to support the peacebuilding
and State-building agenda in Somalia over the past
almost three years, and to wish him every success in
his future endeavours. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia.
Poland welcomes the recent diplomatic developments
in the Horn of Africa between Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia
and Djibouti. We hope they can find peaceful solutions
to their outstanding issues with a view to forging new,
durable partnerships and economic cooperation that
will benefit regional security and sustainable growth.
With regard to Somalia, Poland welcomes the
progress that it has achieved so far, but we also note
the fragility of the situation. We commend the Federal
Government for setting an ambitious reforms agenda.
We welcome the initial agreement on the electoral
model, as well as the ongoing work on the electoral
law. At the same time, we believe that there are other
processes that have to move forward in parallel, in
particular the federalization and finalization of the
constitutional review that will allow for one-person,
one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021.
We appreciate the commitment that the Federal
Government of Somalia has demonstrated to economic
reform, particularly its efforts to strengthen budgetary
discipline and raise domestic revenue. Sustainable
socioeconomic development is hard to achieve without
taking concrete steps to combat corruption. In that
regard, we see the anti-corruption campaign launched
by the Government as a positive development.
The security situation remains critical to the
success of Somalia’s recovery and development efforts.
Progress on security-sector reform, as well as on issues
related to the political settlement, including powerand resource-sharing, is urgently needed and requires
the concerted efforts of all actors. We therefore call
on the Federal Government and Federal Parliament
of Somalia, and the federal member states, to work
together for the benefit of the people and in order to
implement the national security architecture. We also
call on the international community to support Somali
efforts in a coordinated way. In that regard, we very
much appreciated the recent Somalia partnership forum
held in July by international partners, including the

18-2858421/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

European Union and Sweden, together with the Federal
Government of Somalia.
Last but not least, I would like to emphasize the
critical importance of political inclusiveness and
ensuring women’s genuine involvement in the political
processes in Somalia. I could not agree more with today’s
briefer, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, that women in Somalia can
play a vital role in peacebuilding and reconciliation
efforts, forging resilience, addressing the root causes of
crises and developing strategies to counter terrorism.
The Council should build on the positive momentum
that we are witnessing and support the Federal and state
Governments’ efforts to advance gender equality and
promote women’s political participation in Somalia.
We also see a greater role for women in post-conflict
reconstruction and economic recovery. In that regard,
I want to thank all the United Nations institutions in
Somalia for promoting civic education and gender
equality and mobilizing young people. We especially
commend the adoption of the United Nations-Somalia
gender equality strategy.
I would like to conclude by thanking the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the whole
United Nations family and the African Union Mission in
Somalia, as well as other actors present on the ground,
for their daily efforts and their support to Somalia on its
path towards peace and stability.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Michael Keating,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his valuable briefing and everything he
has done for the Organization and Somalia during his
years of service. I wish him every success in his future
endeavours. I would also like to thank Mr. Francisco
Madeira, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, the Executive Director
of UN-Women.
I would like to address three aspects of today’s
topic — first, local developments; secondly, regional
and international developments; and thirdly, terrorism
and the security situation.
First, with regard to local developments, we
welcome the improvement in the relationship among
the various State institutions in Somalia, including
official authorities, as well as the improvement in
the relationship with the federal states. That steady
22/26

13/09/2018

improvement has prompted the League of Arab States
to welcome several developments, including the success
of national reconciliation and the support for Somalia’s
national development plan. That was expressed in a
resolution adopted by the Arab League Summit in April
that also welcomed the support for stability in Somalia
and called on other Arab States to offer all possible
support to the Somali Government. During the recent
ministerial-level meeting of the Arab League held
in Cairo two days ago, the current presidency of the
Ministerial Council called on Arab States to support
the elected Somali Government and make every
effort to work with it to foster peace and development
in Somalia.
We support the Somali Government’s efforts
to improve the economic situation in the light of the
difficulties it is facing. We also want to remind the
Council of the call that the Arab League has made to
Arab organizations and funds to offer their support
to the Somali Government in order to improve the
situation throughout the country. We reiterate the call
to the Security Council to maintain its united position
in support of the sovereignty, stability and territorial
integrity of Somalia while providing it with the
financial and political support that it needs.
Secondly, with regard to regional and international
developments, the positive events that we have been
witnessing in the Horn of Africa represent great
progress that will undoubtedly help to entrench peace
and security in the region. We welcome the visits
exchanged between the leaders of States in the Horn
of Africa, including the visit by the President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia to Asmara. We also
welcomed the quadrilateral meeting held in Djibouti
between the Foreign Ministers of Somalia, Eritrea,
Ethiopia and Djibouti. These are all developments that
will have positive effects not only in the countries in
the Horn of Africa but in their neighbours as well.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
on Somalia (S/2018/800) mentions some regional
developments that are of concern, but because they are
less worrying than formerly, we still feel cautiously
optimistic. We also welcome the Somali partnership
conference held in Brussels in July, in which Kuwait was
a participant, designed to support Somalia’s transition
plan and national security architecture in preparation
for holding elections by 2020.
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

Thirdly, with regard to terrorism and security, the
repeated terrorist attacks on Somalia’s capital, most
recently on 2 September, are very worrying. We once
again condemn such attacks in the strongest terms, as
we condemn the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, which
is responsible for these heinous acts. We commend
the courageous role of the Somali National Army and
the troops of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in confronting the dangers that Somalia
is facing and protecting its people and institutions. We
appreciate their sacrifice and pray for those who lost
their lives.
We also welcome the current developments
regarding AMISOM’s handover of its responsibilities
to the Somali National Army, in accordance with
the recommendations of the operational readiness
assessment. We also welcome the launch of the new
policing model. At yesterday’s Council meeting (see
S/PV.8349), we heard from the Permanent Observer of
the African Union (AU) to the effect that joint efforts on
the part of the AU and the United Nations would offer
more opportunities for strategic cooperation between
the two organizations on the African continent.
In conclusion, we would like to once again thank
Mr. Keating and to welcome his successor, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom. We wish him success in his new position and
look forward to working with him in order to help
him succeed in his work and achieve greater stability
in Somalia.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank today’s briefers,
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women. We are also very pleased to see our new
Ethiopian colleague in the Chamber today. We wish
him every success and are ready to work closely with
him in the Council.
We welcome the progress that has been made
between Mogadishu and the federal states in restoring
Somali statehood. In that context, we want to particularly
highlight the progress made on constitutional reform,
on developing a legislative framework for holding
general elections in 2020 and 2021, and the signing of
an agreement on the sharing of revenues from minerals.

S/PV. 8352

At the same time, we urge all political players
in Somalia to settle their differences exclusively by
peaceful means. We note the mediation efforts that
President Farmajo has made in that regard, as well
as those of the Intergovernmental Organization for
Development and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Such efforts are particularly
important considering that the challenges to security in
Somalia remain very serious. The terrorist organizations
Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant continue to conduct their subversive activities
on Somali territory, and the Somali authorities still
have much to do to put an end to such threats. Effective
joint efforts are particularly needed for the work of
building a national security architecture. The priority
here is ensuring the transfer of responsibility for the
country’s security to the Somalis themselves. In that
regard, we would particularly like to thank the African
Union Mission in Somalia, which continues to make a
huge contribution to normalizing life in Somalia. In the
current circumstances, it is important not only to adapt
the Mission to the changing situation on the ground
but also to ensure that its reconfiguration goes hand in
hand with the establishment of Somali law-enforcement
structures. We are ready to discuss the modalities of
financing AMISOM from the United Nations budget.
Progress in building the State and creating viable
institutions of authority, especially on the social front,
is no less important. The acute humanitarian challenges
that the country is facing must be addressed as soon as
possible. We support the calls to ensure women’s active
participation in that process.
The most recent developments in the region have
made it possible to speak with hope for the future of
the Horn of Africa. The positive momentum that began
with the normalization of relations between Ethiopia
and Eritrea has spread to the entire subcontinent.
We believe that the steps taken by the States of the
region, including Somalia, to restore good-neighbourly
relations between their peoples will ultimately bring
the stability and prosperity they desire. We wish the
countries of the Horn of Africa every success along
that path, and we are ready to support them in every
possible way.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Michael
Keating for his helpful work on the Somalia dossier for
the past three years. We wish him success in all his
new endeavours.

18-2858423/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I thank Special Representative Keating for his
briefing and his dedicated work over the past three
weeks to advance our shared goals in Somalia. I also
thank Ambassador Madeira for his remarks, and I want
to say a special thank-you to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for
being here today and for her work in improving the
lives of women.
Somalia finds itself at a defining moment. For
the first time in more than two decades, it has a real
opportunity to move towards protecting itself and
securing its own country. That opportunity has not
come without a price. The progress that we have seen
towards peace and stability over the past 10 years
is due in large part to the sacrifices of the countries
contributing troops to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), as well as the contributions of
international partners and donors. The United States
honours and appreciates the sacrifices and investments
that those countries have made, and we pay special
tribute to the soldiers and family members of those who
have been killed or injured while operating in Somalia.
For Somalia to capitalize on the opportunity of
this moment, there must be progress in strengthening
AMISOM’s performance and accountability. There
must be progress on the meaningful participation of
women. We call on all partners to make progress in
enforcing a zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation
and abuse and, most importantly, progress towards
transitioning responsibility for security to the Somali
security forces. That can happen only through a smart,
deliberate drawdown of AMISOM forces to reflect the
conditions on the ground.
Progress on the political track is equally important
in the coming months. Like the Secretary-General,
the United States is concerned about tensions between
federal member states and the Federal Government
of Somalia. Such tensions threaten Somalia’s hardwon progress. What is needed instead is the spirit of
reconciliation. We call on Federal and state leadership
to engage constructively and work to de-escalate these
tensions. Furthermore, we need to see progress on the
constitutional review process to lay the groundwork for
universal elections in 2020 and 2021.
Something Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka said during her
recent visit to Somalia should guide us. She said that a
chance to improve a nation’s Constitution is extremely
24/26

13/09/2018

rare — a once-in-a-generation opportunity. This is in
fact a once-in-a-generation opportunity to improve and
lift up the lives of all Somalis. The country’s leadership
and all parties in the region must seize this opportunity.
It is up to the Security Council to support that progress
with AMISOM, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia and the Government of Somalia.
A secure, inclusive and corruption-free Somalia
is possible. Political and security challenges will
occur; that is a given. But if we remain unified in our
commitment to progress, I sincerely believe we will
ultimately see a prosperous Somalia where all citizens
can thrive in stability and freedom.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to warmly
congratulate you, Madam President, on the accession
of your country, the United States of America, to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I wish you every success in your leadership.
I also wish to thank Mr. Keating, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union, and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of the UN-Women, for their briefings. I also
would not like to forget my brother, neighbour and
colleague the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
Mr. Amde, whose presence I welcome.
Since this is the last briefing of our good friend
Mr. Keating as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), I would like to take
this opportunity to thank him and acknowledge
the important role he played in supporting major
developments in Somalia over the past three years,
including the electoral process, the development of the
comprehensive approach to security strands to support
the national security architecture and the transition
plan, as well as in helping Somalia tackle the major
humanitarian crisis caused by the drought. We wish
him all the best in his future endeavours.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s appointment
of Nicholas Haysom as his new Special Representative
and Head of UNSOM. Mr. Haysom has our full support
and we wish him every success in fulfilling his duties.
18-28584

13/09/2018

The situation in Somalia

The delegation of Somalia takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/800) commends the
fact that it refers to progress made and acknowledges
the positive steps taken by the Federal Government of
Somalia. However, we respectfully suggest that in the
future, in the interests of maximizing its usefulness,
the report be redesigned to contain less narrative
and detail about specific events and more in-depth
analysis of major issues as well as recommendations
and conclusions.
Over the past decade, we have come a long way in
our joint efforts and have much to show for our progress
in building our State institutions, ensuring essential
services for our people, enabling democracy to take
root and upholding the fundamental rights of all our
citizens. The Federal Government of Somalia continues
to believe that inclusive politics and legitimate
governance are the basis for all other progress in
Somalia. The path to achieving that vision is not always
smooth, and in recent weeks the divergent opinions
and views at various levels of Government in Somalia
have been evident as we debate the future shape of our
governance — the federalism structures — and how the
responsibilities of different levels of Government will
be allocated and resourced.
These are formative years for Somalia, and the
emergence of new forms of Government is often a
turbulent process. Many of the Council members
seated here in the Chamber will recognize in their own
histories similar disputes, disagreements, divergence of
ideologies and of views, and vigorous debate that came
to form the basis of their Governments and institutions.
Somalia is no different. Like those members of the
Council, we are committed to allowing those debates
and differences to be energetically aired, allow time for
solutions to emerge and provide the space for positions
to move closer together. We recognize that can happen
only through dialogue, which is why my President,
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, has invited the
federal member states to meet on 17 and 18 September
to continue our debate and national discourse. We urge
all federal member states to join us at the table to enable
dialogue, not statements and press conferences, to be
the basis on which we shape our relations.
Underlying this all, steady technical progress
continues through the Federalization Negotiation
Technical Committee, which is tasked with driving
forward negotiations on the fundamental pillars for
long-term stability, including the election model,

S/PV. 8352

resource-sharing and the allocation of powers, to
support political agreements at the leadership level. We
also held the Somali National Constitutional Convention
in Mogadishu from 13 to 15 May, which set the tone and
pace for the constitutionally mandated institutions to
prioritize work, and set the timelines necessary for the
completion of the constitutional review process.
On the security front, Al-Shabaab remains a vicious
threat, able to conduct attacks against the Somali people,
Government institutions and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). I take this opportunity to offer
my prayers to the victims of the recent suicide attack on
school and Government offices in Hodan district in the
capital and to extend my heartfelt condolences to their
families. Al-Shabaab must be defeated and neutralized
as a matter of priority. In addition to significantly
enhancing the efforts of Somali National Army and
AMISOM, we suggest that the Security Council take
urgent additional steps to cut off, forever, the means
of Al-Shabaab’s survival. We propose in particular that
the Council authorize clear and adequate resources and
time to enable the sanctions committee to ascertain
definitively who finances Al-Shabaab, who provides
them weapons and how those weapons and financial
resources enter Somalia.
On our side, the Somali Government is working
to address the primary tactic of using improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) by developing a national
counter-IED strategy, which will bring together
Government departments to tackle the chain of events
that allows for IEDs to be manufactured, transported,
planted and detonated in Mogadishu and across the
country, as well as the to work on the detection of
devices and the prevention of casualties. That important
capacity-building work will include customs, ports and
law-enforcement agencies, as well as the development
of policies and legislation and the strengthening of
coordination and information exchange among security
institutions and the relevant Government ministries.
This year we also embarked upon transition — an
ambitious process whereby we Somalis are moving
towards full Somali sovereignty, national ownership
and leadership in an effort to realize our vision of a
secure, democratic and prosperous nation. We continue
with the implementation of the transition plan so as to
enable Somalia to assume responsibility for security
across the country, including the transfer of tasks from
AMISOM to Somali security forces. In addition to
our solid national resolve, the success of the transition

18-2858425/26

S/PV.8352

The situation in Somalia

process will depend on the continued support of the
international community, most importantly in building
the capacity of our national security institutions. In
parallel with the transition of security responsibilities,
we are focused on doing what is necessary to implement
the economic pillar of the transition process. That task
will be more difficult, requiring more time and the
sustained and long-term engagement of our international
partners during and after the transition process.
We believe that economic recovery is the centrepiece
of our Administration. We recognized early on that
in order to carry out infrastructural improvements,
institution-building and economic development,
we needed debt relief and access to international
financial institutions. We have therefore given our
firm commitment to the successful implementation of
the staff-monitored programme with the International
Monetary Fund, which is now a strategic objective of
our Government. Mobilizing domestic revenue is also
a high priority, as we view sustainable and reliable
domestic revenue as essential to reducing dependence
on aid, boosting economic development and providing
public services to our citizens, which for us is an
important factor for sustaining security improvement.
As part of the fiscal consolidation programme,
we are also in the process of reviewing security
expenditures. The reforms we are currently undertaking
include security-sector payroll reform, with biometric
registration of all security personnel. We are keen to
strengthen our systems through good governance.
Fighting corruption and ensuring transparency are key
priorities for my Government. There is a paradigm
shift in that regard in Somalia. We are on a clear path
of increased accountability and transparency, and
have commenced some difficult reforms, aimed at
transforming our nation, that demand accountability
at all levels, federal and regional alike. The Federal
Government of Somalia and our federal member states
are expected to meet these standards of governance,
and we are determined to support them in meeting
those goals.
With regard to women’s rights, the Somali
Government remains fully committed to the promotion
and achievement of equality for all its citizens and to
women’s empowerment. We commend the work of the

26/26

13/09/2018

United Nations specialized agencies in Somalia, which
have supported us in improving the lives of young
girls and women throughout our journey back from
protracted civil strife. Historically, Somali women have
played an important role in conflict resolution and are
key to building sustainable peace in Somalia. Decades
of conflict have increased the burdens placed on our
women and girls, but our transition from conflict
also presents more opportunities to advance Somali
women’s rights, in line with our Constitution and the
relevant international laws. For example, our current
constitutional review has the potential to significantly
increase equality and women’s empowerment, today
and for generations to come. Our Ministry of Women
and Human Rights is therefore taking the lead in
bringing together prominent and strong Somali women
at the first national Somali women’s conference, to be
held in Mogadishu in late October. The conference
aims to advance women’s meaningful participation in
Somalia’s constitutional review and their path towards
the elections in 2020 and 2021, through a nationally led
and owned process.
Somali women are very talented and we are proud
of them. We would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Ms. Asli Hassan Abade, one of Africa’s first
fighter pilots, who has proudly served her country
for decades. My Government’s efforts will continue
to be based on the principle of leaving no woman or
girl behind.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government and the people of Somalia to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative in
Somalia and all other troop- and police-contributing
countries for the sacrifices they have made for a final
and lasting peace in Somalia. I thank all our partners
in the international community for standing beside us
in solidarity to strengthen the foundations of peace,
democracy and development that we have laid down.
On the way forward, that role must be enhanced
to strengthen Somalia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We will continue along the path to realizing
our common vision of a peaceful, stable and democratic
Somalia that is self-reliant, a key factor in achieving
peace and cooperation in the region for all time.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

18-28584
