S/2014/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 January 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council
resolution 2113 (2013), by which the Council requested me to report every 90 days
on the implementation of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The report includes an update on the situation in
Darfur covering the period from 1 October to 31 December 2013. It also includes, in
section VIII, an assessment of developments against the benchmarks and indicators
contained in my report to the Council of 16 October 2012 (see S/2012/771, annex I).

II. Political developments
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
2.
During the reporting period, the signatory parties to the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, namely the Government of the Sudan, the Liberation and Justice
Movement (LJM) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)-Bashar, made
limited progress towards its implementation.
3.
In accordance with the provisions of the Doha Document on justice, on
22 October the Government issued a presidential decree granting amnesty to JEMBashar combatants. The amnesty applies to felonies other than war crimes, crimes
against humanity, crimes of genocide, crimes of sexual violence or gross violations
of human rights or humanitarian law.
4.
With regard to the work of the Special Prosecutor for Darfur, a total of
66 cases are reportedly under investigation by his office. This reportedly includes
newly opened investigations into the fatal attacks against UNAMID peacekeepers in
El Geneina (Western Darfur) on 13 October and Kabkabiya (Northern Darfur) on
24 November (see paras. 35 and 36 below, respectively). Furthermore, the
Government invited the African Union and the United Nations to deploy expert
specialists to monitor the Special Court trials provided for in the Doha Document, to
ensure that proceedings conform with international standards. UNAMID has
commenced the process of identifying suitable experts and arranging for their
deployment.

14-20171 (E) 160114

*1420171*

S/2014/26

5.
On 20 November, the Government and LJM informed UNAMID that they had
entered into a bilateral agreement on security arrangements outside and separate
from the Doha Document. The agreement, which was reached without consultation
with the Ceasefire Commission, provides for the integration of between 3,000 and
4,000 LJM combatants into the Sudanese Armed Forces and government police. The
remaining combatants, the number of which has yet to be specified by the parties,
are expected to undergo a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
UNAMID has urged the parties to adhere to the security arrangements set out in the
Doha Document and is assessing the appropriateness of providing support under the
new agreement. Regarding the implementation of the security arrangements for
JEM-Bashar forces, UNAMID, in conjunction with the Sudan Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, held a workshop on the security
provisions of the Doha Document for the movement’s commanders in Khartoum
from 8 to 12 December. Its purpose was to increase their understanding of
integration and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes in
anticipation of implementing those aspects of the agreement.
6.
With regard to the Darfur Development Strategy, commercial agreements
between the Darfur Regional Authority and national implementing contractors for
the implementation of 315 projects were signed in December. This followed the
initiation of a public tendering process on 31 August 2013 for the implementation of
1,071 projects totalling 400 million Sudanese pounds ($82.5 million). The Darfur
Regional Authority selected the projects in consultation with local authorities, the
United Nations country team and other international partners. They involve the
construction or rehabilitation of education, electricity, health-care and water
services in 59 localities throughout Darfur. Contracts for the remainder of the
projects will be established once the implementation of the first batch has
progressed. The Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund provided the funds
from the tranche that it received from the federal Government in January 2013.
7.
Moreover, and as agreed under the Doha Document, the Government took
steps to increase the participation of Darfuris in the tertiary education system by
announcing, on 15 November, the exemption of children of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Darfur from paying tuition fees for five years at national
universities and State-run higher education institutions.
8.
The above-mentioned activities notwithstanding, progress towards the
implementation of the majority of the provisions of the Doha Document continued
to lag far behind the implementation timeline. This includes the provisions related to
the establishment of a microfinance system and the compensation and reconciliation
of customary and statutory land right claims, all of which stand to have a concrete
impact on the lives of ordinary Darfuris.
9.
On 16 December, the Implementation Follow-up Commission held its seventh
meeting in El Fasher to review progress against the implementation of the Doha
Document. Participants expressed concern about the slow rate of progress and delay
by donors in fulfilling pledges made at a donor conference in April 2013. To date,
none of the $1 billion pledged has been delivered. In addition, participants
expressed concern about the adverse impact that heavy intercommunal fighting had
on security and, in turn, on recovery, reconstruction and development efforts in
Darfur. Moreover, they urged the Government and LJM to implement the security
arrangements within the framework of the Ceasefire Commission.

2/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

Negotiations towards an inclusive peace agreement
10. The African Union and United Nations Joint Special Representative and Joint
Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mohamed ibn Chambas, continued to engage with the
parties to the conflict and countries in the region to promote negotiations over a
cessation of hostilities agreement. Between 20 October and 25 November, he met
with senior officials of the African Union, the Governments of Chad, Ethiopia and
South Sudan and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) to
encourage them to play a proactive and constructive role in the Darfur peace
process. His interlocutors reaffirmed their support for the peaceful settlement of the
Darfur conflict and pledged to urge the parties to come to the negotiating table to
discuss a cessation of hostilities.
11. The Joint Chief Mediator, in collaboration with IGAD representatives, held a
technical workshop on peace and security for representatives of the Sudan
Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi and JEM-Jibril Ibrahim in Addis Ababa from
9 to 11 December. SLA-Abdul Wahid declined an invitation to attend. The objective
of the workshop was to increase the movements’ understanding of humanitarian
ceasefires and to encourage them to enter into negotiations with the Government.
The movements expressed readiness to negotiate, under the auspices of the
Sudanese Revolutionary Front alliance, a temporary cessation of hostilities. In
addition, they reiterated their commitment to providing unrestricted access to
humanitarian and development workers to areas under their control. The Joint Chief
Mediator briefed government officials and international partners on the outcomes of
the workshop at the International Follow-Up Commission meeting in El Fasher.
Further engagement with the parties on the possibility of negotiations over a
cessation of hostilities is planned for early 2014.
Darfur-based dialogue
12. On 15 December, the facilitators of the Darfur-based internal dialogue and
consultations (the African Union Commission, the Government of Qatar and
UNAMID) endorsed a concept note, communications strategy and road map for the
initiative (see S/2013/607). UNAMID commenced a survey of 500 civil society
representatives, on 28 November, to ascertain their level of understanding of the
process, views on the enabling environment and assessment of what would be
needed to ensure that it contributes effectively to the settlement of the conflict. The
results of the survey, the completion of which is scheduled for early 2014, will
inform the development of operational plans for the consultations.

III. Protection of civilians from physical violence
13. During the reporting period, intermittent clashes between government and
armed movement forces, resource-based intercommunal fighting and widespread
banditry continued to place civilians at serious risk of physical violence.
14. Fighting between government and armed movement forces escalated slightly,
in particular in an arc of territory running from Mellit in Northern Darfur, through
Tawilla (50 km west of El Fasher), to Khor Abeche in Southern Darfur. This
followed the end of seasonal rains in late September. In Northern Darfur, on
5 October, government and SLA-Abdul Wahid forces clashed in Donki Shatta
(25 km north-west of El Fasher, Northern Darfur). According to the authorities,
14-20171

3/17

S/2014/26

three Sudanese armed forces personnel were killed and one civilian was injured. The
parties clashed again on 26 October at a Sudanese armed forces checkpoint near
Mellit market (80 km north of El Fasher). Military officials informed UNAMID that
three government soldiers had been killed and four injured in that incident. In
addition, movement forces captured military equipment, including two gun-mounted
vehicles.
15. According to the authorities and community sources, government and
unidentified armed movement forces clashed in the vicinity of Thabit (45 km southwest of El Fasher) on 19 October. That engagement reportedly included air strikes
by Sudanese armed forces aircraft. Access restrictions imposed by government
security officials, who cited security concerns, prevented UNAMID from
conducting a timely assessment of the impact on civilians. UNAMID protested
against the restrictions. The following day, Sudanese armed forces aircraft carried
out aerial strikes against armed movement elements near Khor Abeche, Southern
Darfur, reportedly killing 10 civilians and injuring 6 others.
16. On 27 October, an unidentified armed group attacked a government military
camp at Amar Jadeed village (20 km south of Menawashie, Southern Darfur). The
attackers killed one government soldier, injured four others and seized two gunmounted vehicles and a number of weapons. Reports from local sources, which
could not be independently verified, attributed the attacks to LJM-Ali Karabino and
LJM-Jibril Wafi, non-signatory factions that split from LJM in April 2011. Fighting
continued on 31 October near Mershing (90 km north of Nyala), resulting in the
death of three government police and injuries to two others. One civilian was also
killed. UNAMID urged the parties to refrain from hostilities.
17. The sporadic clashes continued on 15 November, when armed movement
elements attacked a commercial convoy under government security escort near
Siwar (65 km south-west of El Daein), killing one Popular Defence Force soldier
and injuring one civilian. The assailants took two commercial trucks. Government
officials attributed the attack to SLA-Minni Minawi. On 24 November, following
the carjacking of four commercial trucks by armed movement elements at Ghar
Hajar (18 km north-east of Shaeria, Southern Darfur) earlier the same day,
government and armed movement forces clashed in nearby Khazanjadeed. On
13 December, SLA-Abdul Wahid forces attacked a Sudanese armed forces camp
near Abata (30 km north-east of Zalingei, Central Darfur), killing 10 armed forces
personnel and injuring 18. The attackers captured two vehicles and several weapons.
Sudanese armed forces aircraft dropped two bombs in the vicinity of Tura village
(120 km west of El Fasher) on 29 December. On the same day, unidentified armed
assailants attacked a Sudanese armed forces base in Disa (40 km north of Kutum).
18. A personal disagreement between two commanders triggered a clash between
Sudanese armed forces and LJM elements in Menawashi market (Southern Darfur)
on 21 November. Two LJM personnel, one armed forces soldier and two civilians
were killed.
19. Government authorities acknowledged to UNAMID that, on 29 November, a
Sudanese armed forces aircraft had fired on a convoy of civilian vehicles near
Tangarara (approximately 25 km north-west of Shangil Tobaya, Northern Darfur),
killing 10 internally displaced persons (including 2 women and 1 child) and injuring
2 others. The authorities stated that the aircraft was conducting surveillance for
armed movement elements when it encountered the convoy, which had allegedly not

4/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

coordinated its movement with security officials. UNAMID assessed that an air-toground rocket hit the vehicle. UNAMID urged the Government to fully respect the
protections afforded to civilians under international humanitarian law.
Intercommunal conflict
20. Resource-based conflict between communities, supported by tribal militias,
remained a major source of insecurity and displacement for the civilian population,
in particular in Central and Southern Darfur. The intensification of this dimension of
the conflict, the trend towards which began in August 2012, is due to several factors.
These include a deterioration in the economy of the Sudan in 2012 and 2013 that led
to heightened competition between communities for resources, in particular access
to arable land, as well as lucrative minerals and hydrocarbons (e.g. gold and oil).
Another factor is the disruptions in salary payments to paramilitary forces, which
increased their need for alternative sources of revenue and, at the same time, eroded
the authorities’ control over the forces. Moreover, the intensification has taken place
within the context of pre-existing root causes that include impunity and weak rule of
law, weak or absent State administrations in rural areas, the prevalence of arms and
armed groups, weakened traditional conflict resolution mechanisms and limited
opportunities for young people.
21. During the reporting period, fighting between groups from the Salamat and
Misseriya tribes, which began in April 2013 over land and local political authority,
continued despite the conclusion of a peace agreement between them on 3 July
2013. On 24 and 28 October, incidents of cattle rustling perpetrated by the Salamat
against the Misseriya triggered renewed clashes between the tribes in Bindisi and
Eberla (29 km west and 12 km north of Mukjar, Central Darfur, respectively).
Government authorities reported a total of 24 people killed and 49 injured. In both
instances, government security forces restored calm. UNAMID increased patrols in
and around Mukjar to enhance the security of the local population. Fighting
continued on 7 and 8 November, spilling over into Rehaid el Birdi locality in
Southern Darfur through retaliatory attacks perpetrated by the Misseriya and Taisha
against the Salamat in Kubum and Markondi (25 km from Rehaid el Birdi). This
resulted in the displacement of approximately 18,000 civilians to various parts of
Southern Darfur.
22. On 14 November, armed Salamat from Darfur, together with Salamat
reinforcements from Chad, launched an attack on the Abuzar internally displaced
persons camp, a predominantly Misseriya camp on the outskirts of Um Dukhun
town. According to local sources, 50 people were killed and many others injured. In
addition, 104 shelters and two community centres were burned. Joint Chad-Sudan
border forces intervened to contain the situation. UNAMID transported the Central
Darfur Wali and the State Security Committee to Um Dukhun on 17 November to
mediate. While the situation remained tense, there were no further clashes.
UNAMID observed the heavy presence of Sudanese armed forces and joint ChadSudan border forces stationed in and around Um Dukhun town. A search operation
conducted by those forces in the Um Dukhun market area on 28 November seized
424 illegal firearms. Restrictions imposed by the authorities prevented peacekeepers
from moving beyond Um Dukhun town to verify the reports of casualties and assess
the impact of the clashes on the civilian population. UNAMID protested against the
restrictions to State authorities.

14-20171

5/17

S/2014/26

23. Throughout October and November, UNAMID engaged Misseriya and Salamat
leaders, as well as State and local authorities, to promote adherence to the 3 July
peace agreement and urge government officials to restore peace and stability. Under
the agreement, the parties had committed to ceasing hostilities, facilitating the
return of people displaced by clashes and paying compensation for casualties of the
fighting. To enhance security and prevent further clashes, additional government
troops and police were deployed to the flashpoints of Um Dukhun, Bindisi and
Mukjar; tribal militia camps throughout Um Dukhun locality were dismantled; and a
State decree prohibiting the public display of weapons was issued.
24. The reconciliation agreements reached in July 2013 between groups from the
Aballa and Beni Hussein tribes, who had clashed over control of an artisanal gold
mine in Jebel Amir (Northern Darfur) earlier in the year, held throughout most of
the reporting period. However, on 28 October a dispute over livestock grazing on
farmland led to an isolated clash between the groups in which seven Abbala
pastoralists were killed and one Beni Hussein farmer was injured. Similarly, on
1 November a group of Abbala attacked and killed a Beni Hussein and a Fur farmer
who were tending their farms near the Sabarina gold mine (40 km south-east of
El Sireaf, Northern Darfur). Another four Fur were killed the following day while
attempting to collect the bodies of the two dead farmers. A joint committee of Fur,
Beni Hussein and Abbala community leaders proceeded to the area to mediate. That
intervention led to an agreement to refrain from further hostilities, respect each
other’s assets and adhere to pre-existing reconciliation agreements. Furthermore, the
parties agreed that community leaders and militia commanders would work together
to defuse intercommunal tensions, community members would be allowed to move
freely to access markets in the three surrounding localities and community leaders
would focus on preventing conflict between farmers and pastoralists. No further
incidents were recorded.
25. On 8 October, clashes were reported between an armed militia group and
internally displaced persons in North camp near Nertiti, Central Darfur, after the
militia group kidnapped a local businessman who later died in captivity. His death
triggered angry demonstrations in the camp and reportedly led to the death of a
woman affiliated with the militia group. In reaction, the militia attacked the camp,
killing one person and injuring six others, and looted camp residents’ belongings.
Government police intervened to mediate between the two sides. UNAMID called
upon the leaders of the parties to urge restraint.
26. On 5 and 6 December, an attempt by a group from the Ma’alia tribe to
demarcate land that the Hamar tribe claimed to own triggered fighting between them
near Zarga Muhajid (135 km north-east of El Daein, Eastern Darfur), on the border
with Western Kordofan. A total of 36 Ma’alia and 12 Hamar were killed, and several
others on each side were injured. According to local sources, the disputed area is a
potential location of oil fields. On 7 December, UNAMID engaged both the State
Government and traditional community leaders in Eastern Darfur, urging the
conflicting parties to cease hostilities. No further clashes were recorded.
27. The destruction of farms by pastoralists triggered clashes between them and
farmers in the Jogana and Dougi areas (15 km south-east and 18 km south of Greida,
Southern Darfur, respectively) on 7 November. Local authorities and government
security personnel who proceeded to the area to mediate were themselves attacked
by a group of pastoralists. This resulted in the death of one policeman and injuries

6/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

to eight others. Immediately thereafter, the Government deployed additional security
forces to the area to restore calm. UNAMID increased patrolling around internally
displaced person camps in Greida town to enhance the protection of civilians. There
were no further reports of fighting.
28. In the light of the intensification of resource-based intercommunal fighting in
Darfur, UNAMID continued with increased efforts to support community-level
conflict resolution. During the reporting period, UNAMID facilitated conferences in
El Fasher, El Geneina, Khartoum, Nyala and Zalingei for local authorities,
community leaders and civil society representatives on the root causes of
intercommunal conflict in Darfur. The purpose was to analyse the causes and drivers
of this dimension of the conflict and develop recommendations to address it.
Participants identified land disputes and poor natural resource management, the
prevalence of weapons and the weakness of State institutions as key factors fuelling
the violence. Recommendations included building the capacity of traditional
reconciliation mechanisms and peace committees, providing traditional mediators
with additional resources, increasing the involvement of women in reconciliation
processes, establishing a mechanism to monitor potential breaches of local ceasefire
or peace agreements and strengthening the rule of law. These recommendations were
presented to the authorities, the Darfur Regional Authority and civil society
organizations for consideration and implementation.
Banditry
29. Criminal violence perpetrated against government personnel, civilians and
UNAMID by armed elements and gangs, typically to obtain vehicles and other
resources, continued to pose a serious risk.
30. Between 1 October and 25 December, unidentified armed assailants attacked
government security personnel and installations on six occasions, resulting in the
capture of vehicles and military equipment. This included, on 17 October, a
simultaneous attack by unidentified assailants on the headquarters of the Central
Reserve Police and the government police in Saraf Omra, Northern Darfur. One
government police officer was killed and another injured. One female civilian was
also killed in the crossfire. The attackers escaped with four gun-mounted vehicles.
31. Civilians were also targeted in several serious criminal incidents. On
14 October, in the Al Tadamon area in Nyala, three unidentified armed men
attempted to rob a local Zaghawa businessman. The victim and one perpetrator were
killed in the incident. Government police arrested one of the perpetrators, while the
others fled the scene. On 28 October, unidentified gunmen carjacked a vehicle
belonging to the Southern Darfur State Ministry of Health at Gambid (30 km northwest of Nyala) on the road between Nyala and Kass. The vehicle’s occupants, which
included a doctor, a medic and two government police, were abducted. The reason
for their abduction is unknown. As at 31 December, they were still being held. On
25 November, unidentified assailants attacked a Western Darfur State Ministry of
Health measles vaccination team in Gokar (25 km south of El Geniena, Western
Darfur). Two Ministry staff members were killed in that incident. On 2 December,
unidentified armed assailants wearing civilian clothing carjacked a vehicle from a
State Ministry of Health measles vaccination team as it passed through Adbul
Shakor village (30 km north-west of Kutum). No casualties were reported.

14-20171

7/17

S/2014/26

IV. Security situation and freedom of movement
32. Between 1 October and 31 December, UNAMID movements over land were
restricted on 35 occasions, compared with 37 in the previous reporting period. The
authorities intermittently restricted access to rural areas around Khor Abeche and
Shaeria, Southern Darfur, in particular in late November in connection with the
suspected presence of SLA-Minni Minawi elements. Government authorities denied
501 of 4,637 flight requests, compared with 826 of 4,734 requests in the previous
period. The restrictions tended to be imposed by government security officials on
movements in areas of ongoing or recently concluded hostilities between
government and armed movement forces. UNAMID called upon the authorities to
allow its personnel unhindered freedom of movement throughout Darfur to enable
the effective implementation of its mandate.
33. Access restrictions imposed by the authorities also remained a challenge for
humanitarian actors. The East Jebel Marra area remained fully inaccessible during
the reporting period. In Eastern Darfur, restrictions in place since August continued
to prevent United Nations humanitarian agencies from assisting civilians displaced
to the Adilla and Abu Karinka localities by intercommunal clashes. A planned
inter-agency mission to the area was approved by the Humanitarian Aid
Commission and the National Intelligence and Security Service but denied clearance
by Military Intelligence on security grounds.
Safety and security
34. Threats to the safety and security of UNAMID and humanitarian personnel due
in particular to armed attacks, carjackings and robberies remained of serious
concern. UNAMID peacekeepers came under attack on seven occasions, four of
which resulted in a total of seven fatalities. This brings to 16 the total number of
peacekeepers killed in hostilities in Darfur in 2013 and to 57 the number killed since
UNAMID was deployed in 2008.
35. On 11 October, two unidentified assailants stabbed a UNAMID peacekeeper
from Zambia in El Fasher when he resisted a carjacking. The peacekeeper later
succumbed to his injuries. Two days later, on 13 October, approximately four
unidentified armed assailants attacked the last vehicle in a UNAMID patrol
consisting of 12 peacekeepers in El Geneina, Western Darfur. Three of the
peacekeepers, from Senegal, were killed and one was injured. While the assailants
escaped with a vehicle and military equipment, the vehicle was later recovered. The
findings of an investigation reportedly opened by the Special Prosecutor for Darfur
have not been made available to UNAMID.
36. On 24 November, approximately six unidentified armed assailants attacked a
UNAMID vehicle on a logistics patrol near Kabkabiya, Northern Darfur. One
peacekeeper from Rwanda was killed. The assailants fled with the vehicle.
Government police informed UNAMID that they were investigating the incident. On
29 December, six unidentified armed assailants wearing military dress attacked a
UNAMID convoy near Greida, Southern Darfur, killing one Jordanian and one
Senegalese police officer. UNAMID peacekeepers repelled the attackers by
returning fire, killing one, whose body was taken into government police custody.
Government police arrested another near the scene and took him into custody. An
attempted carjacking is the suspected motive.

8/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

37. A local resident stabbed a UNAMID peacekeeper on sentry duty in
Ed al Fursan (Southern Darfur) on 5 October, while attempting to steal his weapon.
The peacekeeper suffered minor injuries. The perpetrator was arrested and handed
over to local authorities for prosecution. He was later released on bail pending trial.
On 2 November, a UNAMID peacekeeper suffered minor injuries when he resisted
attempts by two unidentified armed men to carjack the vehicle he was driving in
El Daein, Eastern Darfur. The following day, four unidentified armed assailants
attacked a UNAMID patrol in Kutum, Northern Darfur, in an attempt to carjack a
vehicle. The peacekeepers repelled the attackers by returning fire. There were no
casualties.
38. On 20 November, a Sudanese armed forces attack helicopter flew at low
altitude over a UNAMID convoy conducting a routine patrol from Kass to Nyala,
Southern Darfur. UNAMID protested against the status-of-forces agreement
violation with senior government officials.
39. A total of seven carjacking incidents targeting vehicles of UNAMID and
humanitarian actors occurred during the reporting period, compared with 12 in the
previous period. There were 12 incidents involving house break-ins and robberies
targeting UNAMID and humanitarian personnel, compared with 16 in the previous
reporting period. Of those, cash and equipment were stolen from international
non-governmental organizations in Khor Abeche (Southern Darfur), Kutum
(Northern Darfur) and Zalingei (Central Darfur).
40. On 20 November, a rations provider contracted by UNAMID informed the
Mission that it had recovered the helicopter detained by SLA-Minni Minawi forces
50 km south of Nyala on 3 August, after it had made an emergency landing.
Reportedly, a bullet hole in the rotor blade caused the emergency.
41. Insecurity and attacks on humanitarian actors continued to pose significant
challenges to the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. On 23 October,
unidentified gunmen killed the director of a national aid organization during a
carjacking incident in Sakali village (15 km south-west of Nyala). One other staff
member and a police officer were also injured in the attack.
42. Unidentified armed men stole food and personal effects from World Food
Programme trucks delivering aid to Um Dukhun, Central Darfur, on 13 October. The
drivers were unharmed and the trucks were not taken. On 7 November, unidentified
armed assailants carjacked a World Food Programme truck slightly south of Kutum,
Northern Darfur, as it returned from food distribution. A UNAMID patrol dispatched
to search for the vehicle located and pursued it. After an exchange of fire with the
occupants, the peacekeepers recovered the vehicle 15 km north-west of Kutum. The
perpetrators escaped; there were no casualties. On 15 November, central reserve
police manning a checkpoint near El Fasher shot and injured the driver of a World
Food Programme-contracted truck in what remain unclear circumstances. The driver
sustained moderately serious injuries.
43. In a positive development, Sudanese armed forces authorities agreed early in
November to provide security at landing sites in Kulbus and Selea in Western Darfur,
thereby enabling the resumption of United Nations Humanitarian Air Service flights
to those locations. The flights were suspended in September after the UNAMID base
in Kulbus was closed in line with the force reconfiguration recommended in the

14-20171

9/17

S/2014/26

review of uniformed personnel. An estimated 20,000 people benefit from education,
health, livelihood, water and sanitation assistance in the area.

V. Humanitarian situation
44. During the reporting period, the population forum working group revised
downward, from 460,000 to 380,000, its estimate of the number of civilians
displaced by conflict in the first three quarters of 2013. The adjustment is based on
an updated assessment of the number of people displaced by intercommunal fighting
between the Southern Rezeigat and Ma’aliya in Eastern Darfur in August 2013. The
total figure excludes 20,100 civilians newly displaced by fighting during the
reporting period, as this estimate is pending verification by protection agencies
through site visits. The working group, which includes government authorities,
non-governmental organizations, United Nations agencies and UNAMID, meets
periodically to establish a consensus on displacement figures.
45. An inter-agency humanitarian assessment mission to Muhajeria and Labado,
Eastern Darfur, early in November found that a significant portion of the 60,000
civilians displaced by fighting between the Sudanese armed forces and SLA-Minni
Minnawi in that area in April had yet to return home. Following the assessment, the
provision of health-care assistance to approximately 9,890 civilians still gathered
near the UNAMID base in Labado was transferred from UNAMID to the Sudanese
Red Crescent. In addition, the Government’s Water, Environment and Sanitation
Department began the construction of 300 latrines and sent technicians to repair
18 hand pumps.
46. Approximately 10,000 of the 100,000 civilians displaced by resource-based
intercommunal fighting in and around Jebel Amir, Northern Darfur, early in 2013
have reportedly resettled in 18 “cluster villages” near El Sireaf designated by the
Government as return sites. Access restrictions and insecurity have prevented
humanitarian protection actors from visiting the sites. International and national
non-governmental organizations continued to provide humanitarian assistance,
including health care, to some 80,000 displaced persons in other areas around
El Sireaf.
47. On 4 December, the World Health Organization and the Northern Darfur State
Ministry of Health reported that, following the discovery of an outbreak of
whooping cough early in October, the total number of suspected cases in El Sireaf
locality had reached 96. On the same day, the agencies sent samples through a
UNAMID flight to Khartoum for examination. The agencies continued to monitor
the situation and developed plans for a vaccination campaign, the implementation of
which is pending the laboratory test results.

VI. Rule of law, governance and human rights
48. The overall number of documented human rights violations increased from
87 incidents involving 189 victims in the previous reporting period to 156 incidents
involving 314 victims in the current period (164 victims of violations of the right to
physical integrity, 77 victims of violations of the right to life, 63 victims of sexual
and gender-based violence and 10 victims of arbitrary arrest and illegal detention).

10/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

49. National Intelligence and Security Service or Military Intelligence perpetrated
all nine cases of arbitrary arrest and illegal detention. None of the victims were
charged with offences. In one incident, a prominent lawyer and member of the
Darfur Bar Association, who had been arrested on 26 September in Nyala and then
transferred to Khartoum, was held without charges for 32 days. He was released on
28 October.
50. Concerning violations of the right to life, UNAMID recorded 41 cases
involving 77 victims, compared with 17 cases involving 19 victims in the previous
reporting period. In 13 cases, the perpetrators were identified as belonging to the
Central Reserve Police, the government regular police, the Sudanese armed forces,
SLA-Minni Minawi or LJM. In the other cases, the victims were unable to identify
the affiliation of the perpetrators.
51. The number of violations of the right to physical integrity, including
abductions, recorded by UNAMID increased slightly from 42 incidents involving
113 victims in the preceding reporting period to 71 cases involving 164 victims in
the current period. In 17 incidents, the perpetrators were identified as belonging to
the Central Reserve Police, the Sudanese armed forces, JEM-Bashar or SLA-Minni
Minawi. In the remainder, the victims were unable to identify the perpetrators’
affiliation. UNAMID urged the authorities to investigate and bring to justice those
responsible for the violations.
52. UNAMID recorded 35 cases involving 63 victims of sexual and gender-based
violence during the reporting period, compared with 24 incidents involving
31 victims in the previous period. Of the 35 cases recorded, 28 involving 51 victims
were rape, while 7 involving 12 victims were attempted rape. A total of 16 cases
involved minors. The victims were attacked on farms, while running errands or
during firewood or water collection. Underreporting of sexual and gender-based
violence remained a challenge owing to social stigma and the lack of confidence in
government authorities to investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes.
53. While victims filed complaints with government police in connection with
15 cases, investigations were opened into only 4 of them. The police cited the
victims’ inability in eight other cases to identify the suspects as prohibitive to
conducting investigations. The alleged perpetrators in the cases under investigation
were arrested and detained, two of whom were civilians and one was a member of
the Central Reserve Police accused of raping a 6-year-old girl in El Fasher on
18 October. The Family and Child Protection Unit of the government police
interrogated the suspects and collected samples for forensic examination in
Khartoum. Separately, government police informed UNAMID that a 32-year-old
man accused of sexually abusing a 7-year-old boy in Nyala on 1 November was
found guilty and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment. The suspect has appealed
the sentence.
54. UNAMID continued efforts to increase the protection of women’s rights. On
31 October, it provided technical support to the Federal Political Parties
Commission in support of a workshop on women’s participation in constitutionmaking processes for 75 political party representatives in Khartoum. Between
21 October and 13 November, UNAMID, in collaboration with Northern Darfur
State authorities, organized three workshops for a total of 145 traditional community
leaders to promote the increased representation of women in traditional
administrations. On 30 and 31 October, it facilitated a workshop on legal and policy

14-20171

11/17

S/2014/26

reforms for 50 women in El Geneina, Western Darfur, to enhance their participation
in the judicial system. On 18 and 19 November, UNAMID, in collaboration with the
Northern Darfur Ministry of Social Affairs, delivered training on sexual and genderbased violence prevention to local authorities in Kabkabiya.
55. In addition, UNAMID continued its efforts to promote human rights more
generally. On 2 and 3 October, it conducted a workshop on displaced persons’ rights
for 27 internally displaced persons in El Geneina. It held a workshop on human
rights for 29 Ministry of Education officials, including 6 women, in El Fasher from
12 to 14 November. That event was part of a programme to incorporate human
rights education in the teacher training curriculum. To promote increased access to
justice, on 17 and 18 December UNAMID held a workshop on the right to a fair
trial for 50 internally displaced persons in Zalingei.
56. UNAMID continued to work with prison officials to strengthen the corrections
system. From 11 November to 10 December, the Mission, in collaboration with the
government prisons administration, the University of El Fasher and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), organized a training programme for
30 prison staff across Darfur. Its purpose was to strengthen the capacity of staff to
reform and rehabilitate prisoners. On 25 November, UNAMID conducted refresher
courses on investigations and the treatment of detainees for prison officials from
11 detention centres throughout Darfur. On 2 December, UNAMID, UNDP and
50 government representatives participated in a workshop in Khartoum at which a
five-year Darfur prison strategic plan for 2014 to 2018 was adopted. That plan sets
out a framework for the provision of support for prison rehabilitation, capacitybuilding of prison officials and vocational training of prisoners. During the
reporting period, UNAMID conducted capacity-building workshops for a total of
5,678 government police on community policing, crime management, gender issues
and child protection.
57. To promote the protection of children, UNAMID maintained ongoing dialogue
about ending the recruitment and use of child soldiers with members of the
Sudanese armed forces, armed movements and militias. In addition, it conducted
20 training sessions on children’s rights for a total of 599 community members and
government personnel.

VII. Mission deployment and operations
58. As at 27 December 2013, the strength of UNAMID civilian personnel stood at
93 per cent of the approved strength of 4,369 (2,920 national staff, 1,032
international staff and 417 United Nations Volunteers).
59. The strength of UNAMID military personnel stood at 14,779 (14,102 troops,
353 staff officers, 237 military observers and 87 liaison officers), representing
91 per cent of the authorized strength of 16,200.
60. The number of UNAMID individual police officers stood at 2,303 (comprising
83 per cent men and 17 per cent women), representing 99 per cent of the authorized
strength of 2,310. All of the authorized 17 formed police units have been deployed.
61. During the reporting period, UNAMID military personnel conducted 9,806
patrols, including 5,478 routine patrols, 2,070 night patrols, 733 administrative
patrols, 638 humanitarian escorts, 624 short-range patrols and 263 long-range
12/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

patrols. UNAMID police personnel conducted a total of 11,263 patrols, including
6,112 inside camps for internally displaced persons and 3,361 in villages, towns and
markets, 1,205 medium-range patrols, 409 firewood and farm patrols and 176 longrange patrols.
62. From 1 October to 27 December, government authorities issued 1,337 new
entry visas for UNAMID personnel. As at 27 December, 117 visas were pending, of
which 47 were for United Nations Volunteers, 37 for civilian personnel, 13 for
official visitors, 12 for contractors, 6 for military personnel and 2 for consultants.
UNAMID continued to urge the authorities to approve all visa requests promptly,
including those of United Nations Volunteers with specialist expertise not readily
available in the local labour market.
63. The implementation of the recommendations of the review of UNAMID
uniformed personnel reconfiguring the military and police components continued.
The repatriation of 12 of 13 military units has been completed. The repatriation of
the remaining unit, a light field engineering company from the United Republic of
Tanzania, commenced in the last few days of December.
64. Regarding the operational and self-sustainment capabilities of troop and police
contingents, 29 of the 44 military and police units currently deployed to UNAMID
have a major equipment serviceability rate below the 90 per cent threshold. This
figure is unchanged from my previous report. Furthermore, the equipment
serviceability of several units has declined so that five are now at or below 44 per
cent. In the area of self-sustainment capabilities, only 5 out of 44 units fully meet
the requirements stipulated in the relevant memorandums of understanding. The
remainder lack self-sustainment capabilities in various areas and are partially
supported by UNAMID. The shortfalls, which pertain mainly to the serviceability of
armoured personnel carriers, continue to undermine the effectiveness of UNAMID.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations continued to engage with troop- and
police-contributing countries to encourage them to swiftly address shortcomings in
the serviceability of contingent-owned equipment.
65. During the reporting period, a total of 22 quick-impact projects were
completed; 56 additional projects are ongoing and at various stages of completion. A
total of 67 new projects were approved for implementation.
66. UNAMID, in collaboration with local implementing partners, continued to
carry out community-based labour-intensive projects for youth assessed as at risk of
joining armed groups or gangs. A total of 15 projects were completed and handed
over to communities in various parts of Darfur. On 8 December, UNAMID finalized
26 new project proposals.
67. UNAMID, in collaboration with the United Nations Mine Action Service,
continued to reduce the threat posed to civilians by explosive hazards. During the
reporting period, the Mission assessed 1,473 km of routes, surveyed 76 villages,
covering 198 km2, as free of unexploded ordnance, and destroyed 53 items of
unexploded ordnance and 165 small arms ammunitions. In addition, UNAMID and
local partners delivered risk education to 4,662 civilians (49 per cent women and
45 per cent children). UNAMID also provided support to government police in the
rehabilitation of weapons storage facilities in El Fasher.
68. Pursuant to resolution 2113 (2013), the Secretariat, working in close
consultation with the African Union Commission, UNAMID and the United Nations

14-20171

13/17

S/2014/26

country team, continued with the detailed and forward-looking review of the
Mission requested by the Security Council. The review consists of three phases, the
first of which involved an updated conflict analysis that identified its causes and
drivers in the light of pre-existing and new dynamics. In the second phase, a mission
capability analysis was carried out to assess, taking into account the operating
environment in Darfur, UNAMID capacity to address the key causes, drivers and
effects of the conflict identified in the updated conflict analysis. The third phase
involved an African Union and United Nations Headquarters review assessment
mission to Darfur from 1 to 10 December to validate the analysis’ findings and
develop options and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of UNAMID.
Consultations with senior African Union officials and discussions with the
Government of the Sudan on the findings, which incorporate the recommendations
of the civilian staffing review requested by the General Assembly in its resolution
66/264, are planned for the margins of the African Union Summit to be held from
24 to 31 January 2014. The results of the review will be presented to the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations Security Council in
February 2014.

VIII. Progress against benchmarks
69. The present section contains an assessment of progress made against the
benchmarks and indicators set out in annex I to my report dated 16 October 2012
(S/2012/771).
70. Progress against the first benchmark, increasing the inclusiveness of the
political process, was limited. The implementation by the Government and LJM of
the Doha Document was well behind agreed timelines. Preparations for the
implementation of development projects under the Darfur Development Strategy
were advanced, but actual construction had yet to begin. Two and a half years after
the implementation of the Doha Document began, and despite its provisions offering
many potential benefits, the agreement has yet to have a tangible impact on the lives
of the general population. Nine months after the signing of an agreement between
the Government and JEM-Bashar on 6 April to adopt the Doha Document, the only
step taken towards its implementation thus far has been the granting of amnesty to
JEM-Bashar combatants. While the participation of JEM-Jibril and SLA-Minni
Minawi in a technical workshop on humanitarian ceasefires was encouraging, the
continued insistence of the movements and the Government on contrary
preconditions related to the scope of peace talks prevented a breakthrough in this
area.
71. The second benchmark relates to the restoration of a stable and secure
environment throughout Darfur. Clashes between government and armed movement
forces undermined security in parts of Northern, Southern and Eastern Darfur, in
particular along roads and in rural areas in Mellit, El Fasher, Tawilla, East Jebel
Marra, Marshang, Niteaga and Shaeria localities. Heavy resource-based
intercommunal fighting near the border between Central and Southern Darfur
undermined stability in that area for much of October and November. Efforts by the
State authorities and community leaders, supported by UNAMID, to peacefully
resolve the conflict led to a subsiding in hostilities. In addition, reconciliation
agreements reached in the previous reporting period largely held. Banditry
threatened security in rural areas and along roads. Security incidents in camps and
14/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

main towns, where UNAMID presence and patrolling are mainly concentrated, were
less frequent.
72. The third benchmark relates to strengthening the rule of law, governance and
the protection of human rights. Discussions between UNAMID and the Ministry of
Justice about the deployment of African Union and United Nations specialists to
monitor Special Court trials are, if they lead to more transparent and fairer court
proceedings, a potentially positive development with regard to strengthening
accountability and the rule of law. Access to justice and the rule of law remained
otherwise unchanged. The human rights situation, too, remained relatively
unchanged during the reporting period. UNAMID continued to train government
authorities, the Darfur Regional Authority and community leaders in order to
promote greater understanding of human rights and justice principles.
73. The fourth benchmark pertains to stabilizing the humanitarian situation,
facilitating the delivery of aid and supporting early recovery. Intercommunal
fighting, which displaced an additional 20,100 civilians during the reporting period,
increased the need for humanitarian assistance in conflict-affected areas, yet also
hindered the delivery of assistance owing to insecurity and access restrictions.
Humanitarian actors continued to provide assistance to approximately 110,000
civilians who remain displaced by intercommunal clashes that took place in
Northern and Eastern Darfur in the previous reporting period. A temporary
disruption in the supply of assistance to some 20,000 civilians in Western Darfur
ended after humanitarian actors reached an agreement with the Government
whereby the latter would provide security at helicopter landing zones. Overall,
progress against this benchmark remained limited.

IX. Financial aspects
74. The General Assembly, in its resolution 67/284, appropriated the amount of
$1,335.2 million for the maintenance of the Operation for the period from 1 July
2013 to 30 June 2014.
75. As at 30 December 2013, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNAMID
Special Account amounted to $286.9 million. The total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to
$2,395.4 million.
76. As at 30 December 2013, reimbursement to troop-contributing countries for
contingent-owned equipment and troop costs had been made for the period up to
30 September 2013 and 31 October 2013, respectively, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

X. Observations
77. In my previous report (S/2013/607), I noted that progress by the signatory
parties to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the Government of the Sudan and
the Liberation and Justice Movement, towards its implementation had been limited
in terms of its impact on the ground. Unfortunately, this has remained the case over
the past three months, with the progress made limited mainly to planning and
administration, as opposed to action that directly benefited the general population.

14-20171

15/17

S/2014/26

Similarly, nine months after the adoption of the Doha Document, implementation by
the Government and the other signatory armed movement, JEM-Bashar, has
remained slow and limited to providing amnesty to the movement’s members, as
opposed to measures that provide relief to the civilian population.
78. The pace of implementation of the Doha Document will need to be increased if
it is to effectively address the root causes of the conflict and promote stability, as
well as attract the support of other movements and the general population. More
emphasis is also needed on activities that bring about tangible benefits to ordinary
Darfuris. In this connection, I once again call upon the signatory parties to
accelerate the implementation of all outstanding provisions of the agreement. This
will require demonstrating greater political will and increasing the commitment of
resources.
79. Progress towards addressing the causes of the conflict also requires an
enabling environment in which such efforts can be undertaken safely and
sustainably. Sporadic clashes between government and armed movement forces and
outbreaks of resource-based intercommunal conflict continued to seriously
undermine security. They also placed civilians at risk of physical violence, displaced
an estimated 20,000 people and increased humanitarian assistance needs. The spate
of armed attacks by non-signatory movements and militias on government premises,
during which vehicles and military equipment were captured, and on civilians
travelling between towns in off-road vehicles also seriously undermined stability.
I am concerned that, unless this trend is arrested and the rule of law respected and
upheld, the security situation in Darfur is at risk of degenerating into an increasingly
chaotic situation.
80. The engagement by the Joint Chief Mediator, Mohamed ibn Chambas, of JEMJibril Ibrahim, SLA-Minni Minawi and the Government of the Sudan in talks about
a humanitarian cessation of hostilities is welcome. An agreement between these
parties to cease fighting would have a considerable impact on the security situation.
I urge the parties to come together without preconditions or delay to negotiate a
cessation of hostilities agreement. I commend the Joint Chief Mediator for the steps
taken to encourage countries in the region to play a proactive and constructive role
in the Darfur peace process and support his efforts in this regard.
81. Efforts to address the intensification of intercommunal fighting are also
needed to improve security and reduce threats to civilians. I welcome the high
priority that UNAMID is placing on addressing this dimension of the conflict
through, inter alia, the provision of logistical and technical support to government
authorities and traditional community leaders engaged in reconciliation efforts. The
steps taken by the Sudanese armed forces and the joint Chad-Sudan border forces to
prevent intercommunal fighting in Central Darfur are also positive. Ultimately, for
local reconciliation efforts to be sustained, they must be supported by measures that
address the underlying causes of conflict, in particular as they relate to land and
natural resource management, impunity for crimes and the prevalence of arms. The
workshops organized by UNAMID on land and peaceful coexistence for local
authorities, traditional community leaders and civil society representatives are a
positive initiative in this regard.
82. The safety and security environment in which UNAMID and humanitarian
personnel work remains very worrying. I condemn in the strongest terms those
responsible for attacks on UNAMID personnel, in particular the four fatal attacks

16/17

14-20171

S/2014/26

that tragically claimed the lives of seven peacekeepers. I call once again upon the
Government of the Sudan to swiftly investigate and bring those responsible to
justice. In particular, I expect the Government to act expeditiously in relation to the
incident of 29 December, in which one of the perpetrators, who was injured by
return fire from UNAMID peacekeepers, was arrested at the scene. I would like to
express my sincere condolences to the Governments of Jordan, Rwanda, Senegal
and Zambia, as well as to the families, friends and colleagues of the fallen
peacekeepers.
83. The rate at which the authorities approved new visa requests for UNAMID
personnel during this reporting period is very welcome. I encourage the authorities
to continue with this trend. The access restrictions imposed on UNAMID personnel
by government security officials, however, constrained the ability of UNAMID to
effectively implement its mandate, in particular with regard to the protection of
civilians. I strongly urge the Government to adhere to the terms of the status-offorces agreement and allow UNAMID personnel unimpeded freedom of movement
throughout Darfur.
84. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Joint Special Representative and Joint
Chief Mediator, Mohamed ibn Chambas, and all the women and men of UNAMID
who continue to work tirelessly to protect civilians and promote peace. I would also
like to express my sincere appreciation to all humanitarian aid workers for their
determined efforts to assist and improve the lives of people in need in what are often
very challenging conditions in Darfur.

14-20171

17/17
