S/2018/210

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 March 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 7 November 2017 to 28 February 2018

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my report of 16 November 2017
(S/2017/964), including on specific provisions of Security Council resolution 2373
(2017). During the reporting period, there was no progress with regard to the
outstanding obligations of the parties under resolution 1701 (2006) or towards a
permanent ceasefire. The situation in the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) remained generally calm.
2.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1757 (2007), I extended the mandate of
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon from 1 March 2018 for a period of three years, or
upon completion of the cases before the Special Tribunal if sooner.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
3.
The Israeli and Lebanese authorities continued to reaffirm their commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) and to the cessation of hostilities. Despite the relative calm
along the Blue Line and in the area of operations, certain developments during the
reporting period, as elaborated upon in this report, led to heightened tensions. The
United Nations continued to urge both parties to refrain from inflammatory rhetoric
that could lead to incidents and threaten the cessation of hostilities, and to utilize
established channels to address concerns. UNIFIL and my Acting Special Coordinator
for Lebanon maintained permanent liaison with both parties to de-escalate tensions.
4.
Following the announcement by the United States of America of 6 December on
Jerusalem, some 24 demonstrations were held in the UNIFIL area of operations. On
17 December, approximately 35 individuals protested near Kafr Kila (Sector East),
where they started a small fire in an area near the Israeli technical fence. Israeli
soldiers extinguished the fire before releasing tear gas to disperse the crowd. On
21 December, over 300 students assembled peacefully outside the UNIFIL
headquarters in Naqoura (Sector West), and on 29 December, approximately 300

18-03673 (E)

150318

*1803673*

S/2018/210

individuals protested in Kafr Kila. UNIFIL worked closely with the Lebanese Armed
Forces, present during the gatherings, and the Israel Defense Forces, to prevent any
escalation.
5.
In early December, video footage emerged of Qais al-Khazali, of the Iraqi Shi’te
militia Asa’ib Ahl al-Haq, visiting South Lebanon in military uniform in the company
of Hizbullah representatives. On 9 December, the Prime Minister of Lebanon , Saad
Hariri issued a statement asserting that he had contacted military and security officials
to investigate and to take measures to prevent any person from carrying out military
activities and prevent Qais al-Khazali’s re-entry into Lebanon. UNIFIL formally
conveyed its concern to the Lebanese Armed Forces about the reported visit and
requested an update on the outcome of the investigation. In his letter addressed to me
dated 12 December (S/2017/1043), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations stated that that visit constituted a violation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004). On 15 January, an arrest warrant was issued in Lebanon for Qais
al-Khazali, after the investigation found that he had illegally entered Lebanon.
6.
On 26 December, a photograph appeared on social media in which Haj Hamza
(Abu al-Abbas), the commander of an Aleppo-based pro-Syrian government militia,
Imam al-Baqir Brigade, appears to be standing near the Blue Line. In a letter
addressed to me dated 5 February (S/2018/91), the Permanent Representative of Israel
to the United Nations stated that a senior Iranian official, Ebrahim Raisi, visited the
UNIFIL area of operations close to the Blue Line on 28 January and was accompanied
by “uniformed and armed members of Hizbullah”. UNIFIL cannot confirm this
information. On both occasions, UNIFIL formally sought clarification from the
Lebanese Armed Forces. Responses from the Lebanese Armed Forces are pending.
7.
UNIFIL observed an increase in construction activities, including vegetation
clearing and earthworks, along both sides of the Blue Line, on occasion leading to
violations of the Blue Line and several incidents of weapons pointing by the parties.
On three occasions, UNIFIL liaised with the parties to de -escalate tensions, urging
restraint. On 11 November, the Israel Defense Forces fired three smoke grenades, one
of which landed across the Blue Line, east of Blida (Sector East) after two Lebanese
Armed Forces intelligence staff approached the Blue Line. Two Lebanese Armed
Forces soldiers, who were also present, were hospitalized briefly owing to smoke
inhalation. On 29 November and 25 December, Lebanese Armed Forces and Israel
Defense Forces personnel pointed weapons at each other west of Ayta al -Sha‘b
(Sector West). Following the latter incident, UNIFIL interposed itself b etween the
sides and remained on the scene for 24 hours to ensure calm.
8.
On 20 November, three men near Ayta al-Sha‘b, one of whom briefly crossed
the Blue Line, shouted towards Israel Defense Forces soldiers. On 26 November,
while observers from Observer Group Lebanon were patrolling near Marun al-Ra’s
(Sector West), an Israel Defense Forces tank pointed its main armament towards the
patrol. UNIFIL raised these incidents with both parties, including at the tripartite
meeting on 7 December 2017. On 10 February, following military developments in
the Syrian theatre involving the downing of an Israel Defense Forces aircraft,
individuals in Kafr Kila, Udaysah (both Sector East) and Yaroun (Sector West) threw
stones and flags across the Blue Line. The Lebanese Armed Forces intervened on each
occasion, moving the crowd away from the Blue Line.
9.
From 1 November to 19 February, UNIFIL recorded 204 ground violations of
the Blue Line. Lebanese Armed Forces and Israel Defense Forces, including through
the use of engineering equipment, were involved in 12 violations. A total of 113 (or
55 per cent) were committed either by shepherds with their flocks near the Shabʻa Farms
and Bastrah (Sector East) or farmers cultivating their fields around Rumaysh (Sector
West). UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces regularly warned shepherds and farmers
2/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

not to cross the Blue Line. Most of the remaining violations involved farmers crossing to
the Shu‘ayb well, which straddles the Blue Line near Blida (Sector East).
10. Israel continued to violate Lebanese airspace almost daily, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. From 1 November to 19 February,
UNIFIL recorded 458 air violations of the Blue Line, totalling 1,684 overflight hours.
Unmanned aerial vehicles accounted for 360 (79 per cent) of these violations; the
remainder involved fighter or unidentified aircraft. UNIFIL protested all air violations
to the Israel Defense Forces and urged their immediate cessation. The Government of
Lebanon continued to protest the airspace violations, including in a letter addressed
to the President of the Security Council and to me dated 8 February ( A/72/742S/2018/109). The Lebanese Armed Forces stated that such violations contribute to a
sense of insecurity across Lebanon. Such violations of Lebanese sovereignty
undermine the cessation of hostilities and efforts to reach a permanent ceasefire.
11. The Israeli occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the Blue
Line continued, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. To
date, Israel has not responded to the UNIFIL proposal submitted to both parties in
2011, aimed at facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel Defens e Forces from the
occupied area. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL in July 2011 of the
agreement of Lebanon to the proposal.
12. Lebanon also protested alleged violations of its sovereignty by Israeli vessels
and ships operating near the Israeli line of buoys. The delineation of the maritime
boundary between the two countries continues to be disputed. Lebanon considers that
the line of buoys, installed unilaterally by Israel, runs through its territorial waters
and does not recognize it. The United Nations does not recognize the line of buoys.
13. Lebanon alleged that Israel continues to violate its sovereignty by conducting
electronic monitoring, espionage and surveillance through infrastructure deployed
south of and along the Blue Line, surveillance devices placed on Lebanese territory
and surveillance networks active in Lebanon, which the Government of Lebanon
considers to be electronic warfare.
14. In accordance with resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL continued to assist the
Lebanese Armed Forces in establishing an area between the Blue Line and the Litani
River free of unauthorized armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those of
the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL. The Force stands ready to act within the
full scope of its mandate and capabilities should there be credible evidence or
information supporting the presence of unauthorized weapons or the imminent threat
of hostile activity emanating from the area of operations. The Lebanese Armed Forces
regularly reiterated their strong commitment to act immediately upon receipt of
evidence of unauthorized armed personnel or weapons in the area in contravention of
resolution 1701 (2006).
15. In the course of its activities, UNIFIL observed 442 instances of individuals
carrying unauthorized arms in the area of operations in violation of resolution 1701
(2006). Almost all of these instances (439) involved civilians carrying hunting
weapons, mostly in the areas of Yaroun (Sector West), Bastrah, Blida, Mays al -Jabal
and Sarda (all Sector East), in the vicinity of the Blue Line. The remaining incidents,
not involving hunting weapons, are detailed in annex I. In each instance, UNIFIL
alerted the Lebanese Armed Forces and requested that they take appropriate
preventive measures. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL that they
continue to follow up on these incidents to prevent their reoccurrence. UN IFIL takes
seriously any allegation regarding the presence of unauthorized weapons in the area
of operations, but has not been able within its capabilities to substantiate them
independently.

18-03673

3/20

S/2018/210

16. UNIFIL coordinated with the Lebanese Armed Forces daily to conduct
inspections at permanent, temporary and co-located checkpoints. Lebanese security
forces screened and spot-checked vehicles at these locations. UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces operated a daily average of 19 temporary or permanent
checkpoints. At the Litani Bridge (Sector West), UNIFIL maintains a 24 -hour
presence with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
17. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces conducted on average nine counterrocket launching operations daily, across the area of operations. These opera tions
inspected strategic areas from which rockets could be launched. UNIFIL acts in
support of the Lebanese Armed Forces in these inspections, and is prepared to take
action independently if required and in accordance with its mandate.
18. Israel raised with UNIFIL the issue of individuals in civilian attire, whom it
alleged were Hizbullah operatives conducting “reconnaissance” towards areas south
of the Blue Line. UNIFIL observed and closely monitored activities, including
photography by persons wearing civilian clothes in areas south of the Blue Line. In
addition, UNIFIL visited almost daily areas where the non-governmental organization
“Green Without Borders” operates. UNIFIL observed no violations or hostile
activities in connection with activities or installations of this organization during the
reporting period. UNIFIL continued to closely monitor three locations in which the
Israel Defense Forces alleged the presence of Hizbullah weapons and infrastructure
in the UNIFIL area of operations as reported in my previous report.
19. Pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 2373 (2017), UNIFIL continued to
increase its visible presence and activities, with a focus on preserving the cessation
of hostilities. In monitoring the cessation of hostilities, UNIFIL sustained its
operational tempo as well as non-operational activities to mitigate risks in a timely
manner, thereby preventing small incidents from escalating into larger-scale violence.
UNIFIL also continued to operationalize resolution 2373 (2017), by enhancing the
visibility of its operations through intensified patrols, including at night and by
helicopter. UNIFIL conducted patrols in all municipalities and villages in the area of
operations at least once weekly, with many covered more often, when tensions had
been reported. Observer Group Lebanon and the UNIFIL Civil Affairs Section
continued activities throughout the area of operations daily without inc ident. To
safeguard the cessation of hostilities, UNIFIL continued to closely monitor the
situation along the Blue Line from fixed positions combined with mobile vehicle and
foot patrols. Enhancing its visible presence, particularly in sensitive areas, the
Mission conducted over 25,000 patrols during the reporting period, with an increase
along the Blue Line from 2,428 patrols in October to 2,562 in January.
20. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL was generally respected, except on 10
occasions, mainly owing to the inconvenience to local communities caused by heavy
military vehicles on narrow roadways in civilian populated areas (see annex II). In
each case, UNIFIL responded within its mandate, followed up with the Lebanese
Armed Forces and local authorities and subsequently ensured its freedom of
movement in the incident locations.
21. UNIFIL expanded its proportion of foot patrols, both along the Blue Line and
across the area of operations, with 1,767 patrols (24 per cent of all patrol activities)
in January, up from 1,085 in August (16 per cent of all patrol activities). In a number
of villages, for instance, Ayta al-Sha‘b, narrow roadways and community concerns
necessitated that patrols be conducted on foot. The increase in foot patrols has
enhanced UNIFIL situational awareness and monitoring. UNIFIL maintained close
contact with community leaders in southern Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces,
to address any sensitivities without compromising mandated tasks.

4/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

22. The improved use of air assets contributed to a 26 per cent increase in
operational flights, including day and night reconnaissance flights, from August to
19 February. UNIFIL conducted 171 hours of helicopter patrols (42.5 hours per
month) from November to 19 February, concentrated over areas with limited access.
Private property, rugged terrain or terrain contaminated by explosive remnants of war
limit access by UNIFIL patrols. Where the conduct of patrols in heavy vehicles is not
feasible, UNIFIL conducted vehicular patrols in surrounding areas t hat allowed for
closer monitoring. In addition, officers from the UNIFIL Liaison Branch and unarmed
military observers from Observer Group Lebanon of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, as well as UNIFIL personnel on light vehicle and foot
patrols, are deployed to achieve unimpeded access throughout the area of operations.
Such areas are also monitored by regular helicopter patrols. With the exception of
northern Ghajar, UNIFIL covered all of its area of operations either on foot, by vehicle
or by air at least weekly.
23. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL continued to regularly review their
modus operandi to enhance their close coordination. UNIFIL conducted 17 per cent
of its patrols with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Lebanese Armed Force s expanded
their presence along the Blue Line by participating with UNIFIL in more than 1,205
foot and vehicular patrols. UNIFIL conducted 60 daily activities in close coordination
with the Lebanese Armed Forces. The Fifth Intervention Regiment of the Leba nese
Armed Forces, deployed on 22 September, is fully integrated into the joint planning
and operations of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces. Approximately 22 per
cent of UNIFIL operational activities with the Lebanese Armed Forces involve the
Regiment.
24. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force carried out maritime interdiction operations
on a 24-hour basis and capacity-building for the Lebanese Armed Forces-Navy. From
1 November to 19 February, the Maritime Task Force hailed 2,312 vessels, 494 of
which were inspected and cleared by the Lebanese authorities. The Lebanese Navy
maintains a current maritime picture of its waters through the coastal radar system.
The Lebanese Armed Forces Navy has the capacity to deploy small units, with limited
crew capabilities, able to operate in calm weather for up to 24 hours. The Lebanese
Armed Forces Navy requires at least six vessels and trained crews able to stay a
minimum of 72 hours per week at sea, to assume maritime interdiction duties from
the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force. UNIFIL is supporting the Lebanese Armed Forces
in requesting international donor support for the provision of one offshore patrol
vessel to augment its existing capacity. UNIFIL conducted 107 training sessions,
covering land and maritime operational issues, to improve common operational
standards between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces.
25. Relations between UNIFIL and the local population remained largely positive;
UNIFIL continued its outreach and engagement with local communities. The Mission
continued to identify and implement quick-impact projects to address pressing needs
of local communities, support the extension of State authority in the South and
contribute to force acceptance in line with the priorities identified by the Lebanese
Armed Forces during the strategic review of UNIFIL (see S/2017/202), UNIFIL
continued to work closely with the Lebanese Armed Forces to establish a Lebanese
Armed Forces civil-military cooperation centre in Marjayoun (Sector East).

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
26. In mid-January, the Israel Defense Forces confirmed to UNIFIL their intent to
initiate what they said were “defensive engineering works” in several areas along the
Blue Line. UNIFIL stressed to the Israel Defense Forces that such activities — in
particular, in the previously identified Lebanese “reservations” areas — could trigger

18-03673

5/20

S/2018/210

a strong reaction in Lebanon and proposed that both parties convene and discuss the
matter through the UNIFIL-chaired tripartite mechanism. My Acting Special
Coordinator reinforced these messages in her engagements with both parties.
Following a tripartite meeting on 5 February, both sides agreed to continue their
engagement with UNIFIL to discuss these contentious issues. T he Israel Defense
Forces commenced work south of the Blue Line, in non-reservation areas, on
7 February. UNIFIL continues, in coordination with my Acting Special Coordinator, to
encourage all sides to use the existing liaison and coordination channels to maintain calm.
27. UNIFIL also chaired tripartite meetings on 8 November and 7 December. The
Lebanese Armed Forces stressed, on each occasion, the detrimental effect of Israeli
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty and emphasized the
importance of meaningful progress towards a permanent ceasefire. The Israel Defense
Forces underlined their concerns about reconnaissance activities allegedly conducted
by Hizbullah along the Blue Line. The Israel Defense Forces also raised recurring
incidents of stone throwing and Blue Line violations by farmers and shepherds.
During all three meetings, the parties renewed their commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), including respect for the Blue Line and
maintaining stability, and voiced their willingness to explore paths towards a
permanent ceasefire.
28. In addition to the tripartite forum, UNIFIL and the parties made extensive u se
of other established liaison and coordination arrangements to exchange information
and avoid the escalation of tensions between the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Israel Defense Forces. In early November, UNIFIL liaison mechanisms helped ensure
that the seasonal olive harvest in Blida concluded without incident. Similarly, liaison
and coordination efforts helped ensure that a demonstration at Marun al -Ra’s, against
the Balfour Declaration, on 2 and 3 November, took place without incident.
29. The establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in Tel Aviv, Israel, was discussed
with the Israeli authorities. Their agreement to the UNIFIL proposal remains pending
since 2008.
30. Progress in the visible marking of the Blue Line remained limited. Most points
agreed upon by the parties have been marked. To promote progress, UNIFIL, in close
coordination with my Acting Special Coordinator, emphasized the strategic value of
the marking for the parties, both in bilateral and tripartite discussions. The process
remains an important confidence-building activity.
31. In line with the recommendations of the 2017 strategic review of UNIFIL and
resolution 2373 (2017) and through the strategic dialogue, the Government of
Lebanon, the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL, including through a joint expert level working group, developed the concept of a model regiment. On 5 February, the
Lebanese Armed Forces informed UNIFIL of the formal establishment of a model
regiment within the South Litani Sector as of 1 February, to be deployed once the
requisite personnel and equipment have been secured.
32. UNIFIL continued to implement the recommendations of the strategic review,
pursuant to the strategic priorities identified (see annex III). A reconfigured UNIFIL
Maritime Task Force, which, as at 1 January, consisted of six vessels, continues to
assist the Government in securing Lebanese territorial waters. With the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, UNIFIL promoted an integrated and
comprehensive approach to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), in
particular in supporting the Government of Lebanon to increase its presence in
southern Lebanon and the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces, notably in relation
to prioritized land and maritime capabilities and deployment in southern Lebanon.
The Missions also focused on a range of preventive actions necessary to maintain
calm along the Blue Line and in the area of operations.
6/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

33. In line with its strategic priority to ensure that it is prepared to deliver on its
mandate to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence, and
following the strategic review, UNIFIL continued to train Mission personnel and in
December conducted, with humanitarian partners, a multi-day exercise that tested
protection of civilians procedures and protocols.

C.

Disarming armed groups
34. No progress was achieved with respect to the disarmament of armed groups. The
maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and other groups
continues to restrict the ability of the Government of Lebanon to exercise full
sovereignty and authority over its territory. Hizbullah continued to acknowledge
publicly that it maintains its military capacity. In an interview on 3 January 2018,
Hizbullah Secretary-General, Hassan Nasrallah, underlined that the group was
“working day and night … to obtain all kinds of weapons that would enable it to
achieve victory in the next war, if that war happens”. The same day, a Hizbullah
Member of Parliament Nawaf Moussawi reportedly warned that “the next war will
not be geographically limited to the same confrontation areas of 2006 and that the
resistance’s ability to launch wide territorial operations is at an optimal level ”. On
29 January, a Hizbullah Member of Parliament Mohammad Raad was quoted by
media as saying that “Hizbullah is stronger today and has capabilities that can destroy
the Israeli Army.”
35. The Government of Lebanon highlighted the importance of State sovereignty
and national unity in the context of the Lebanese Armed Forces. In their forewords to
the Lebanese Armed Forces capabilities development plan, presented on 12 February
in Beirut, the Prime Minister of Lebanon underscored that the Lebanese Armed Forces
are “the sole legitimate defender of the Lebanese State” and the need to “consolidate
Lebanese State authority throughout all Lebanese territory and deny any presence to
all non-state actors”, while the President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun underlined that
“Lebanon’s internal stability is consolidated through … the active role of the
Lebanese Army, the Internal Security Forces, the General Security, the State Security
and the Lebanese Customs.”
36. As reported by the media, on 28 November, the Israel Defense Forces
Spokesperson stated that “Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah is an Israel
Defense Forces target in the next war in Lebanon”. On 28 January, the Israel Defense
Forces Spokesperson alleged that “one in every three or four houses in southern
Lebanon is a headquarters, a post, a weapons depot or a Hizbullah hideout ”, warning
that “we know how to attack them accurately if required”. On 31 January, the Minister
of Defence of Israel, Avigdor Lieberman, warned that “the Lebanese Army and
Lebanon are no different from Hizbullah,” and would “all pay the full price”, in the
event of an attack on Israel.
37. The Lebanese Armed Forces and security forces continued counter-terrorism
operations and arrests of individuals suspected of affiliation with or support for
extremist groups. From 1 November to 28 February, 122 terrorism -related arrests
were reported, including of suspected affiliates of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and the Nusrah Front, as well as suspects in the 2013 Abra clashes, the 2014
Haret Hrayk bombing and the 2015 Burj al-Barajinah terrorist attack. On 19 January,
the Minister of Interior stated that security forces had thwarted an ISIL-linked terror
plot targeting places of worship and government buildings over the holiday period.
On 4 February, a suspected ISIL militant and a Lebanese Armed Forces soldier were
killed, and six persons injured, in a raid in Tripoli, North Lebanon.

18-03673

7/20

S/2018/210

38. Armed clashes throughout Lebanon illustrated the continued presence of
weapons outside of State control, posing a risk to stability. On 11 November, one
Lebanese Armed Forces soldier was killed and four others wounded in raid s against
criminal gangs in Baalbek. On 10 December, a Lebanese Armed Forces soldier was
injured by unidentified gunmen in Baalbek. On several occasions, personal disputes
escalated into shooting, including in Baalbek, Dinniah and Tripoli.
39. The security situation in the Palestine refugee camps in Lebanon remained
generally stable, except for clashes in the Ein el Helweh camp involving extremist
groups and the joint Palestinian security forces, in addition to several personal
disputes. A total of 4 people in the camp were killed and 11 injured. Several members
of extremist groups left Ein el Helweh camp or surrendered to the Lebanese
authorities. On 3 January, it was reported that Bilal Bader, the leader of an extremist
group involved in numerous clashes, had fled to the Syrian Arab Republic.
Intermittent violence also erupted in the Beddawi camp. A personal dispute led to two
people being killed in the Rashidieh camp on 4 March.
40. On 14 January, a car bomb wounded a member of Hamas in Sidon. Following
an investigation, the Lebanese Ministry of Interior announced on 26 January that a
suspect had admitted to the attack. The suspect also claimed to have been assigned by
Israeli intelligence agencies, a charge that Israel denied.
41. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada,
which continue to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and impede the ability of the
State to monitor and effectively control parts of the border.

D.

Arms embargo and border control
42. In a letter addressed to the Security Council and myself on 28 November
(S/2017/1000), the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Na tions warned
against “Iran’s intentions and actions taken to continue arming Hezbollah ” and
subsequent military build-up by Hizbullah, including among civilians. The Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations, in a lette r to the
Security Council and myself dated 5 December (S/2017/1019), accused Israel of
“false and baseless accusations”. On 2 December and 9 January, media reported
Israeli strikes on targets in the Syrian Arab Republic, using Lebanese airspace. On
28 January, the Israel Defense Forces Spokesperson likened Lebanon to “one large
missile factory,” in the context of “Iran’s ever-tightening control”.
43. Allegations of arms transfers to Hizbullah continued on a re gular basis and are
of serious concern. While taking such allegations seriously, the United Nations is not
in a position to substantiate them independently.
44. Reports of Hizbullah’s engagement in the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic
continued. A number of Lebanese nationals also allegedly continued to fight with
non-State armed groups in the Syrian Arab Republic.
45. Following operations in August-September 2017 to expel militants, the
Lebanese Armed Forces consolidated their deployment along the bo rder with the
Syrian Arab Republic, including through land border regiments. A sharp decrease in
the incidence of cross-border fire from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon was
observed. Cross-border incidents mostly involved smugglers. On 16 January, the
Lebanese Armed Forces raided an informal settlement for Syrian refugees at Arsal
and arrested over 20 Syrian nationals suspected of connections with terrorist groups
and arms trafficking. On 30 January, the Lebanese Armed Forces arrested 23 Syrian
nationals and seized weapons in another raid carried out in other informal settlements

8/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

at Arsal. Seven people were accused of connection with terrorist groups and arms
smugglers. On 14 December, Lebanese and Syrian authorities reopened the
Qa‘-Jusiyah border crossing, bringing the total number of crossings open between the
two countries to five.
46. A small number of localized initiatives to encourage Syrian refugees to return
took place, including by the Reconciliation Committee established by the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in Bayt Jinn, across the border from Shab ‘a,
South Lebanon. Neither the Government of Lebanon nor the United Nations were
involved in those initiatives. While attempting to enter Lebanese territory via a
smuggling route on 19 January, 16 Syrians (13 females and 3 males), including 5
children, froze to death.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
47. Six UNIFIL mine clearance teams cleared 1,587 m 2 of land and destroyed 384
anti-personnel mines in the UNIFIL area of operations. The Mine Action Service
conducted 35 quality assurance visits, and provided three safety training and
awareness briefings to 130 United Nations personnel. Seven mine risk edu cation
sessions and events were held in collaboration with the Lebanese Mine Action Centre
and the UNIFIL Civil Affairs and Military components, benefiting over 690 children.
48. Three incidents, one of which killed a 13-year-old boy, involving landmines and
unexploded ordnance, were recorded in the UNIFIL area of operations. On 9 January,
the Government of Lebanon wrote to the Security Council to condemn the incidents.
The Lebanese Armed Forces continued to remove mines and explosive devices left
by militants in the eastern border area of Lebanon.

F.

Delineation of borders
49. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel
have yet to respond to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed
in my report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2007/641).
50. On 14 December, the Cabinet of Lebanon awarded licences for offshore oil and
gas exploration to a consortium of three international oil companies. The maritime
area concerned includes “block 9”, located in waters disputed between Lebanon and
Israel. In a note verbale to me, dated 21 December, the Permanent Representative of
Israel to the United Nations called for the Government of Lebanon to cease “any
action that would violate Israel’s sovereign rights”. In a note verbale to me dated
26 January, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon conveyed her Government’s
message, that “Lebanon will not hesitate to avail itself of its inherent right to self defence if an armed attack occurs against the economic activities … in its maritime
areas”. On 29 January, the Minister of Energy and Water of Lebanon signed the
contracts for exploration and production. Hostile rhetoric followed, with the Minister
of Defence of Israel, on 31 January, describing the move as provocative and asserting
the claim of Israel over block 9. On 31 January, the Prime Minister of Lebanon noted
that the Government would follow up with the relevant international bodies to assert
the right of Lebanon to exert its control over its maritime waters. On 1 February, the
President of Lebanon cautioned against plotting against Lebanon, vowing to counter
Israeli claims by diplomatic means while asserting the right of Lebanon to defend its
sovereignty and territorial integrity by all available means.

18-03673

9/20

S/2018/210

G.

Political and institutional stability
51. On 21 November, the Prime Minister, Mr. Hariri, returned to Lebanon and
withdrew his resignation the following day. On 29 November, the President confirmed
that Mr. Hariri would resume his leadership of the Government. On 5 December, the
Council of Ministers of Lebanon issued a statement confirming its commitment to its
ministerial statement of 28 December 2016, noting that Lebanon must be kept out of
regional conflicts and the internal affairs of Arab countries, and reiterating its
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006), the Taif Accords, and the Charter of the
League of Arab States. There has been regular Cabinet and parliamentary activity
since.
52. On 8 December, the International Support Group for Lebanon conve ned a highlevel meeting in Paris. In its joint statement, the Group expressed its satisfaction over
the return to Beirut of the Prime Minister, noting that it would “pay close attention to
the implementation of the Council [of Ministers’] decision [on disassociation from
any regional conflicts, and wars and from internal affairs of Arab countries] by all
Lebanese parties” and calling “upon all Lebanese parties to implement this tangible
policy of disassociation from and non-interference in external conflicts, as an
important priority, as spelled out in previous declarations, in particular the 2012
Baabda Declaration”. The Group reiterated the need for full implementation of and
full respect for all United Nations Security Council resolutions, including 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006). These messages were reinforced by the Security Council in
a press statement of 19 December on the situation in Lebanon (SC/1313 0).
53. In his statement in Paris, the Prime Minister of Lebanon noted that the policy of
disassociation would allow Lebanon to maintain its national unity while respecting
the Arab consensus. The Prime Minister also confirmed that his Government would
pursue the preservation of the best relations with Arab countries and the international
community with respect to Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1701
(2006). On 23 February, the President of Lebanon stressed that Lebanon abides by the
policy of disassociation.
54. The International Support Group for Lebanon called upon all Lebanese parties
to resume discussions towards a consensus on a national defence strategy, welcoming
the statement of the President on 6 December, in which he underscored that the
national defence strategy was an issue on which it was possible to reach common
ground through dialogue.
55. In its joint statement of 8 December, the International Support Group for
Lebanon also called upon the international community to continue to coordinate and
step up its support for the Lebanese Armed Forces and all State security institutions,
crucial to the country’s sovereignty and unity. A ministerial meeting on support to the
Lebanese security forces is scheduled for 15 March in Rome, under the auspices of
the International Support Group. In preparation, the five -year strategic plans of the
Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security Forces were endorsed by the Higher
Defence Council of Lebanon on 19 January and presented to the international
community in Beirut on 12 February.
56. Preparations for parliamentary elections continue. On 4 January, the Cabinet
approved an amended electoral budget of $33 million. On 22 January, the President
and the Prime Minister signed a decree calling for parliamentary elections on 6 May.
Out-of-country voting is scheduled for 27 and 29 April. On 1 February, the Ministry
of Interior published the initial voters list for review. On 5 February, candidate
registration commenced. Preparations for international and local elections
observation are under way. United Nations technical assistance with the electoral

10/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

process, in support of the Ministry of Interior, continues, as do efforts to promote
women’s participation in the parliamentary elections.
57. Political tensions between rival parties erupted into street violence from
29 January to 2 February. Calm returned following a united appeal by the political
leadership.
58. On 20 December, the Prime Minister of Lebanon presented the country’s
national strategy for the prevention of violent extremism to governm ent, diplomatic
and United Nations representatives. The strategy, developed by all 29 ministries,
awaits endorsement by the Council of Ministers of Lebanon.
59. The Government is finalizing its capital investment plan for presentation at an
economic conference for development through reforms and with enterprises to be held
in Paris on 6 April. The Government is seeking to finance the $16 billion plan,
designed to stimulate growth, employment and infrastructure, through public -private
partnerships, concessional loans and bilateral assistance. Donors and financial
institutions have called for complementary sectoral and structural reforms, as well as
fiscal measures.
60. As at 31 January, 995,512 Syrian refugees were registered with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), a part of the impact of
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. New registrations of Syrian refugees by
UNHCR remain suspended by the Government since 2015. A decrease in the number
of registered Syrian refugees was due mainly to deaths, onward movements,
resettlement and a small number of spontaneous returns to the Syrian Arab Republic.
61. In response, the international community allocated $1.68 billion to Lebanon in
2017, with $1.37 billion disbursed or committed for that year, including $1.24 billion
to United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations under the 2017
Lebanon Crisis Response Plan, representing 45 per cent of the total appeal.
62. The Lebanon Crisis Response Plan appeal for 2018 was jointly launched on
1 February by the Government and the United Nations, requesting $2.68 billion to
support 2.8 million people with humanitarian assistance, as well as investment in the
country’s public infrastructure, services and local economy. At the launch, the Prime
Minister reiterated that there would be no forced returns of Syrian refugees.
63. The final results of the vulnerability assessment of Syrian refugees, a
socioeconomic survey conducted by UNHCR, the World Food Programme and the
United Nations Children’s Fund, confirmed that 76 per cent of households live below
the poverty line (an increase from 71 per cent in 2016), with a total of 58 per cent of
households living below the extreme poverty line (an increase from 53 per cent in
2016). Underscoring the increasing level of vulnerability, on 10 January, a Syrian
refugee set himself on fire at a United Nations compound in North Lebanon.
64. Local authorities continue to report host community fatigue. Job competition
was cited as a source of tension between host and refugee communities. In the last
quarter of 2017, a growing number of municipalities threatened or implemented
curfews and evictions against refugees, citing insufficient support for the
municipalities or security or economic concerns. Evictions affected refugee
households with respect to access to accommodation, basic services, children ’s
education and livelihoods.
65. A number of demonstrations were held, including in reaction to the
announcement by the United States on 6 December with regard to Jerusalem that also
triggered widespread condemnation by Lebanese politicians. Following clashes
between security forces and protesters in the vicinity of the United States Embassy in
Beirut on 10 December, 43 persons were injured and 10 de tained.
18-03673

11/20

S/2018/210

66. Tensions, especially among Palestine refugees, were precipitated by the
announcement by the United States that it would withhold its contribution to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). UNRWA has adopted additional emergency measures to preserve
temporarily its health, education, social security and camp improvement services in
Lebanon. However, additional financial support will be necessary for UNRWA to
continue its operations in the near term.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
67. UNIFIL continually reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures,
taking into account security threat warnings and closely coordinated with the
Lebanese authorities. In the Arqub area (Sector East), strict security measures,
including the use of armed escorts, remained in place for movements by United
Nations personnel. The alleged presence of extremist elements in Ein El Helweh camp
for Palestine refugees, situated in Sidon along the main supply route connecting the
UNIFIL area of operations with Beirut, continues to pose a security concern,
potentially affecting UNIFIL movements through the city. Lebanese security
institutions maintain a strong presence in surrounding areas.
68. On 29 December, UNIFIL discovered the theft of 2,240 rounds of small arms
ammunition from an armoured personnel carrier stationed inside a United Nations
position near Haris (Sector West). An immediate investigation led UNIFIL to reco ver
200 rounds of ammunition close to the facility. On 30 December, the General
Directorate of State Security and the Lebanese Armed Forces seized the remaining
ammunition, except for 26 rounds, from eight local individuals who had intended to
sell it. Six of the eight suspects were released under judicial control, as minors; two
adults remain in detention. Upon completion of the police investigation, the Military
Prosecutor transferred the case to an investigating judge.
69. Following an internal investigation into the incident, the UNIFIL Head of
Mission and Force Commander ordered an inspection of all UNIFIL units to ensure
that all measures were in place for the safety of staff and premises, as well as for the
secure storage of weapons and ammunitions, in line with United Nations standards,
rules and regulations. UNIFIL remains in close contact with the Lebanese authorities
as the investigation continues. In accordance with United Nations procedures,
UNIFIL has convened a board of inquiry.
70. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings in Lebanese military courts against
individuals suspected of planning or perpetrating serious attacks against UNIFIL. The
Permanent Military Court held hearings on 16 January with regard to the attack
against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with the Spanish contingent in 2007 and in the
case of terror intent opened in January 2014. The next hearings for both cases are
scheduled for 10 April. In the case of an attempted serious attack against UNIFIL in
2008, in which one of the four sentenced perpetrators filed an appeal, the Military
Court of Appeal held a hearing on 6 February; the next hearing is scheduled for
21 June. Three investigations launched into the serious attacks perpetrated against
UNIFIL on 27 May, 26 July and 9 December 2011 are ongoing, pursuant to additional
judicial instructions issued by the investigating judge. In the case of the homicide
committed in 1980, when two UNIFIL peacekeepers from Ireland were shot dead and
one injured, the Permanent Military Court held a final hearing on 9 January, but
deferred to 27 March a decision to either render a sentence or re -open the case for
further investigation.

12/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
71. As at 22 February, UNIFIL comprised 10,506 military personnel, including 411
women, or 4 per cent of the Force, from 41 troop -contributing countries; 238
international staff, including 78 women; and 580 national civilian staff, including 150
women. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprised five corvettes, one frigate, one
helicopter and 752 of the Force’s total military personnel, including 23 women. In
addition, 56 military observers, including 6 women, from the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, serve with Observer Group Lebanon, under the operational
control of UNIFIL.

V. Conduct and discipline
72. Neither UNIFIL nor the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for
Lebanon received allegations of sexual exploitation or abuse during the reporting
period. Both entities continued to implement existing measures to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse. The United Nations continues to promote an environment in
which staff feel able to report any case that might arise. In accordance with UNIFIL
communications strategy, UNIFIL personnel and members of the local community
were informed of the expected standards of conduct for United Nations personnel and
how to report misconduct, in particular in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse.
The United Nations country team prevention of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse
network in Lebanon continued to develop information-sharing protocols and to share
best practices.

VI. Observations
73. Crises in the region continue to pose a risk to the stability of Lebanon, the
fragility of which was illustrated by the resignation, later rescinded, of the Prime
Minister, Saad Hariri. The meeting of the International Support Group for Lebanon
in Paris of 8 December was a welcome reiteration of the international community ’s
support for Lebanon’s stability, security and sovereignty. I echo the Group’s call upon
all Lebanese parties for tangible steps on the policy of disassociation, consistent with
the Baabda declaration of 2012, and on all States and organizations to support the
country’s stability and security, with full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity.
74. As regional tensions persist, I note the Prime Minister ’s statement of
22 November that disassociation from external wars is critical to protect Lebanon.
Unauthorized visits by foreign militia members to South Lebanon undermine the State
authority and run contrary to the spirit of disassociation.
75. I reiterate my call upon all Lebanese parties and nationals to cease their
involvement in the Syrian conflict. I note the significant reduction in shelling,
shooting, incursions and attacks into Lebanese border areas from the Syrian Arab
Republic. I continue, however, to condemn the movement of fighters and war materiel
across the Lebanese-Syrian border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The lack of
a delineated, demarcated Lebanese-Syrian border does not justify violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by any party. I call upon all concerned to cease violations of
the border and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
76. The Lebanese Armed Forces continue to demonstrate their cruc ial role in the
extension of State authority throughout the territory of Lebanon, defending the
18-03673

13/20

S/2018/210

country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and acting as the protector of the
country’s security. I encourage continued cooperation among the Lebanese secu rity
agencies, which has been key to recent security achievements, including in countering
the threat of terrorism.
77. The presence of unauthorized weapons in the hands of Hizbullah remains of
serious concern and warrants condemnation. The presence of those weapons, together
with threatening rhetoric from both sides, heightens risks of miscalculation and
escalation into conflict. I call upon the parties to exercise restraint at all times.
Pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006), I call upon the Government of Lebanon to take
all actions necessary to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of
the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), which require the
disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon so that, pursuant to the Lebanese Cabinet
decision of 27 July 2006, there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other than
those of the Lebanese State.
78. I welcome the statement by the President of Lebanon, Michel Aoun, of
6 December recognizing the importance of a dialogue towards a national defence
strategy to reinforce stability and strengthen unity in Lebanon. I reiterat e my request
to the Lebanese authorities for the resumption of the national dialogue, with the
objective of formulating a national defence strategy that would address the presence
of armed individuals and groups outside of State control. The Lebanese Armed Forces
are the sole legitimate defender of the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. Earlier decisions of the national dialogue should be implemented,
specifically those relating to the disarmament of non-Lebanese groups and the
dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
79. Continued adherence by all sides to resolution 1701 (2006) remains essential
for the stability of Lebanon and the region. I am heartened by the Prime Minister ’s
reiteration of his commitment in this regard. I remain concerned, however, about the
lack of full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the unfulfilled obligations
of Lebanon and Israel. Non-compliance increases the risk of tensions and possibly
escalation into hostilities. I call upon both parties to redouble efforts towards full
adherence to resolution 1701 (2006) to bolster stability and prevent conflict. The
continued commitment of Lebanon and Israel to resolution 1701 (2006) is of
paramount importance.
80. UNIFIL continues to fulfil its mandate to assist the Lebanese authorities in
establishing an area between the Litani River and the Blue Line free of any armed
personnel, assets and weapons other than those of the Government of Lebanon and
UNIFIL. The relative calm along the Blue Line, tested during the reporting period,
should not be taken for granted. Recent discussions over construction work by Israel
in areas of Lebanese reservation, illustrate the continued fragility of the situation.
They speak to the need for progress towards a permanent ceasefire called for by
resolution 1701 (2006), as a means of preventing conflict and moving from calm to
durable stability and security for the communities living on eith er side of the Blue
Line. In the meantime, it is essential that both parties refrain from unilateral actions
that could increase mistrust and lead to miscalculations. I call upon both parties to
avail of UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements. The op en and constructive
exchanges in the tripartite forum, including on long-standing violations of resolution
1701 (2006), are a testament to the commitment of the parties, as well as to their
confidence in UNIFIL and the liaison and coordination arrangements. My Acting
Special Coordinator for Lebanon will continue to deploy good offices and, together
with the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander, will continue to explore
opportunities for confidence-building measures.

14/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

81. I am concerned about the use of bellicose rhetoric, in particular in the context
of the dispute between Lebanon and Israel over their exclusive economic zones. I urge
both parties to refrain from unilateral actions that carry the risk of escalation and that
could impact the stability of Lebanon and the region. My Acting Special Coordinator
will continue to engage with the parties to seek ways to lower tensions and, if
possible, explore ways to move forward on this issue. I encourage bot h parties to
adopt an approach that minimizes security risks and takes advantage of the
confidence-building potential of mutually beneficial exploitation of maritime oil and
gas resources.
82. I remain concerned about the continuation of Israeli overfligh ts of Lebanese
territory. The Israel Defense Forces continue to occupy northern Ghajar and an
adjacent area north of the Blue Line. These are clear violations of resolution 1701
(2006). I reiterate my condemnation of all violations of Lebanese sovereignty and
reiterate my call for Israel to cease its violations of Lebanese airspace and to withdraw
its forces from northern Ghajar and the adjacent area north of the Blue Line.
83. Deepened cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces will be
critical in furthering progress in the strategic dialogue and on steps towards
implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017). A model regiment in
South Lebanon, together with the decision of the Government of Lebanon to reinforce
deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces south of the Litani River, is testament to
the Government’s commitment to extend State authority.
84. I welcome the progress made by the Government of Lebanon in its preparations
for a ministerial meeting in Rome, under the auspices of the International Support
Group. The commitment of Lebanon to resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017) and
the continued accountability and independence of its security forces, remain key to
reaffirming and bolstering international support to the State security institutions.
I look forward to co-chairing with Italy, on 15 March in Rome, the meeting under the
auspices of the International Support Group for Lebanon, to support the Lebanese
Armed Forces and security institutions.
85. I welcome the proactive steps that UNIFIL has taken to implement resolution
2373 (2017) including by enhancing the tempo, visibility and effectiveness of its
operations. This remains an ongoing process and further adjustments continue to be
considered. The emphasis by UNIFIL on prevention continues to be vital in
safeguarding the cessation of hostilities. The United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and UNIFIL have also undertaken steps to ensur e that the
Security Council is provided with prompt, concrete and detailed reporting on
violations of resolution 1701 (2006). The Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, visited UNIFIL and met with Lebanese and Israeli
officials at the end of February, among other things to review the ongoing process of
implementing the provisions of resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017). The
Secretariat will continue to maintain close contact with the parties, Council Members
and troop-contributing-countries in the implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 2373 (2017).
86. I am encouraged by the steady progress of UNIFIL in implementing the strategic
review recommendations and look forward to continued progress in this regard,
including on the identified priorities.
87. I am encouraged by signals of political will and determination to conduct the
parliamentary elections on 6 May, the first since 2009. Renewing the mandate of the
Parliament is a powerful step towards renewing the functioning of Lebanese
institutions and ensuring accountability to the people of Lebanon, in line with the
country’s democratic tradition. It will be important to maintain confidence in the
electoral process. I encourage the political parties to increase women’s representation
in Lebanese politics and include qualified women on their electoral lists. During the
electoral period, I call upon all political leaders to maintain calm, exercise responsible
18-03673

15/20

S/2018/210

rhetoric, protect citizens’ freedom of expression and ensure continued adherence to
the Taif Accords and the Constitution of Lebanon. Peaceful, credible, transparent and
inclusive elections will be important for the country’s stability.
88. The most serious financial crisis in its 70-year history risks compromising the
ability of UNRWA to provide critical services to the highly vulnerable Palestine
refugee population in Lebanon, against the backdrop of overburdened Lebanese
public services. UNRWA operations in Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon are
important for the promotion of stability and socioeconomic progress. I am grateful to
those Member States which have advanced their annual commitments to enable
UNRWA to continue operations in Lebanon in the near term, and look forward to
significant additional financial support at the forthcoming ministerial conference to
be held in Rome on 15 March.
89. The recent tragic deaths of refugees illustrate the desperation of those seeking
safety and serve as a reminder that the situation inside Syria remains volatile.
I commend the generosity and hospitality of the Lebanese people and authorities in
hosting Syrian refugees and welcome recent statements by the Prime Minister that
refugee returns will be in line with international norms and under United Nations
auspices. Until conditions are met in Syria for a safe, dignified and voluntary return,
in line with international standards, including the principle of non -refoulement,
I reiterate the importance of the redoubling of their efforts by international partners
and of creating a hospitable protection environment. A recent UNHCR survey shows
that return home is the most sought-after solution by the refugees themselves. The
protection and dignity of refugees in Lebanon must be ensured until they can find
durable solutions outside of Lebanon.
90. Continued international assistance to refugees and host communities will be key
in this regard. It is important to increase support to the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan
and the predictability of its funding for 2018 and beyond. I wish to reiterate the
importance of providing flexible and predictable multi -year support to Lebanon, as
well as ensuring timely disbursement of funds, in accordance with the commitments
made at the London Supporting Syria and the Region conference, held in Feb ruary
2016, and the Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region,
held in April 2017. I look forward to strong multi-year engagements by donors, with
a heightened focus on development funding.
91. I look forward to the implementation of structural and sectoral reforms, critical
to the promotion of economic growth and job creation. In this regard, I welcome
ongoing preparations ahead of the economic conference for development through
reforms and with enterprises, including the finalization of the capital investment plan,
to be held in Paris on 6 April.
92. I urge all Lebanese stakeholders to maintain the positive spirit of unity and
national interest that marked the period following the Prime Minister ’s return.
Consolidating calm along the Blue Line remains vital to prevent the risk of any
incident sparking renewed conflict and derailing progress towards stability and
prosperity. I encourage all stakeholders in Lebanon, Israel and the region to facilitate
a conducive environment in this regard. The United Nations will maintain its
unflinching engagement in support of Lebanon, and I am grateful for the international
community’s continued consensual backing of this agenda.
93. I extend my appreciation to all countries contributing milit ary personnel and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I commend Acting Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, Pernille Kardel, and the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Michael Beary, for their leadership, and the
civilian and military personnel of UNIFIL, as well as the staff of the Office of the
Special Coordinator, for their continued efforts.
16/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

Annex I
Unauthorized weapons observed by the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon from 7 November to 19 February
UNIFIL observed 442 instances of individuals carrying unauthorized arms in the area
of operations in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The overwhelming majority of
these instances (439) involved civilians carrying hunting weapons, mostly in the areas
of Yaroun (Sector West), Bastrah, Blida, Mays al-Jabal and Sarda (all Sector East), in
the vicinity of the Blue Line. The remaining incidents, not involving hunting
weapons, are listed below:
1.
On 12 November, an individual fired a pistol in the air multiple times near Bayt
Lif (Sector West).
2.
On 23 November, two men with automatic rifles were observed outside a funeral
ceremony near Bint Jubayl (Sector West).
3.
On 8 December, two individuals fired ten shots in the air from a civilian vehicle
near Markaba (Sector East).

18-03673

17/20

S/2018/210

Annex II
Restrictions on the freedom of movement of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon from 7 November to 19 February
1.
On 17 November, following negotiations, a UNIFIL patrol in the vicinity of
Marjayoun (Sector East) returned to base after a Lebanese Armed Forces soldier
claimed that the planned route would continue outside the UNIFIL area of operations,
which would require prior authorization. The Lebanese Armed Force s later clarified
that the issue stemmed from a misunderstanding, and the patrols continued along the
route the following day.
2.
On 21 November, two men in a vehicle stopped a UNIFIL patrol in the vicinity
of Tiri (Sector West), advising the patrol that it would block a narrow village street
and requesting it to utilize an alternate road and then continue on its planned route.
After engaging with the individuals, UNIFIL used an alternate road briefly before
returning to their planned route. UNIFIL informed the Lebanese Armed Forces.
3.
On 12 December, two men stopped a vehicle in a UNIFIL patrol near Bayt Lif
(Sector West). The patrol left the area and returned shortly afterwards with a Lebanese
Armed Forces escort to continue along the planned route. In a meeting the next day
with the Mayor of Bayt Lif, he explained that the individuals were concerned about
the patrol obstructing traffic in the village.
4.
On 15 December, a man stopped a UNIFIL patrol in Bafiliyah (Sector West) and
requested it to turn around. UNIFIL left the area and returned with a Lebanese Armed
Forces escort to resume the patrol. The Mayor of Bafiliyah subsequently told the Civil
Affairs Section that the community preferred that UNIFIL be accompanied by the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
5.
On 18 December, two individuals with a vehicle stopped a UNIFIL patrol near
Siddiqin (Sector West). Despite negotiations with accompanying Lebanese Armed
Forces personnel, the patrol was unable to proceed further. The joint patrol used an
alternate route to complete the operational activity. After subsequent discussions
between the UNIFIL Civil Affairs Section with the Mayor and community of
Siddiqin, UNIFIL patrols have proceeded since on the route without incident.
6.
On 18 January, a UNIFIL patrol encountered a locked gate along the planned
route near Arab al-Wazzani (Sector East). The patrolled bypassed the gate and
completed its scheduled assignments.
7.
On 9 February, a UNIFIL vehicle patrol passed a roadblock south of Rashaf
(Sector West). An individual in civilian clothes in a vehicle followed the patrol into
Rashaf and gestured the patrol to leave the area. On its way back, after completing its
scheduled assignment, the patrol discovered a second roadblock located about 600
metres away from where it had encountered the first roadblock.
8.
On 12 February, municipality police officers stopped a UNIFIL patrol from
passing through Ayta al-Sha’b (Sector West). Following an intervention by the
Lebanese Armed Forces personnel patrolling with UNIFIL, the patrol continued on
its planned route.
9.
On 14 February, six individuals stopped a UNIFIL patrol in Tiri (Sector West)
and gestured to the patrol to leave the area by hitting the vehicle bonnet. The patrol
continued its activity by using an alternate route.
10. On 18 February, an Observer Group Lebanon vehicle with two observers was
stopped north of Ramiyah (Sector West) by three unidentified individuals who
politely but repeatedly asked the patrol to leave the area. The patrol turned round
without completing its mission. Observer Group Lebanon, together with UNIFIL, is
following up with the Lebanese Armed Forces on the incident.
18/20

18-03673

S/2018/210

Annex III
Update on the implementation of the recommendations of the 2017
strategic review of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
1.
Further to the letter dated 8 March 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2017/202) communicating the strategic
priorities and key recommendations of the strategic review of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the present overview provides an update on
progress in the implementation of those recommendations.
Protection of civilians
2.
UNIFIL continued its liaison with interlocutors from the Government of
Lebanon on the protection of civilians and continued its close coordination with the
Office of the Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in Lebanon.
3.
As part of ensuring mission-wide preparedness, UNIFIL continued to roll out
one-day training modules on the implementation of its protection of civilians
mandate. Building on the contingency plan and the logistics plan for the protection of
civilians, developed in 2017, UNIFIL plans to undertake its first protection of
civilians exercise in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces in March
2018.
Strategic dialogue mechanism
4.
UNIFIL continued its support to the Lebanese Armed Forces, with the Deputy
Force Commander and the Deputy Head of Mission engaging on a range of
coordination and capacity-building issues.
5.
With the assistance of UNIFIL, the Lebanese Armed Forces finalized a concept
of operations for the model regiment, which included a propos ed mission strategy,
organizational structure, materiel requirements and deployment schedule. In
coordination with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon,
UNIFIL continued to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces in engaging internatio nal
donors prior to the ministerial meeting in Rome, scheduled for 15 March. In addition
to the model regiment, there is a particular focus on the provision of an offshore patrol
vessel for the Lebanese Navy and the establishment of a Lebanese Armed Forces civil
military cooperation centre.
6.
With the financial support from UNIFIL and the Government of the Kingdom
of Spain, initial construction works for the Lebanese Armed Forces civil military
cooperation centre began in Marjayoun (Sector East); the centre is expected to be
completed in mid-2018.
7.
The Maritime Task Force continues to provide onshore and offshore training to
the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces Naval
School have developed a training concept for 16 courses that will be conducted by
November 2018. Meanwhile, the Lebanese Armed Forces has developed its own plan
for non-cooperative boarding training.
Liaison and coordination with the parties
8.
In January 2018, UNIFIL adopted new guidance and standard operating
procedures on coordination to ensure optimal synchronization of action by Mission
assets in crises or in case of an incident in the area of operations.

18-03673

19/20

S/2018/210

9.
In addition, as part of the deployment of a second permanent Liaison Team south
of the Blue Line, five staff officers were reassigned to the UNIFIL Liaison Branch.
UNIFIL also continued advocating with Israeli authorities for the establishment of a
liaison office in Tel Aviv.
Structure of the uniformed and civilian components of the Force
Land forces
10. In January 2018, UNIFIL issued an order aimed at increasing the frequency,
depth and effectiveness of coordination between the Lebanese Armed Forces and
UNIFIL.
Maritime Task Force
11. The Maritime Task Force currently comprises six vessels: five corvettes and one
frigate (in lieu of a corvette). The authorized maximum number of Maritime Task
Force personnel has been reduced to 780. UNIFIL continued to support the Lebanese
Armed Forces Navy in engaging donors about the requested provision of the above mentioned offshore patrol vessels.
Community outreach activities
12. UNIFIL continued to make progress on the recommendations pertaining to
community outreach activities. The community outreach board, formed in mid-2017,
continued to convene on a quarterly basis, while the subcommittees on strategic
communication and programme/project activities meet on a weekly basis to
coordinate quick-impact projects and other outreach activities.
13. The Mission has finalized its list of quick-impact projects for 2018–2019, giving
priority to sensitive villages along the Blue Line and areas where the battalions with
limited or no national project funds are deployed. In addition, UNIFIL is inc reasingly
involving the Lebanese Armed Forces in no-cost community and programmatic
activities, such as market patrols.
14. UNIFIL completed the analysis of the public perceptions survey, which was
presented in September, and provided its recommendations on strategic
communication and public information to the Mission leadership. The Mission is
examining options, within existing resources, to employ a second public opinion
polling in the coming months.
Liaison in Beirut
15. Throughout the reporting period, UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon met regularly with representatives of the Lebanese
Government, the Security Council and troop-contributing countries on a range of
issues, including the model regiment initiative. In December 2017, UNIFIL deployed
a senior representative in Beirut to continue engagement with relevant counterparts.
In addition, UNIFIL continued to liaise with relevant United Nations agencies,
through regular country team coordination meetings, and contributed to the
countrywide integrated strategic framework for 2018.

20/20

18-03673
