A/64/PV.115

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

115

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 7 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 16 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Letter dated 23 August 2010 from the
Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
General Assembly (A/64/906)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In the letter
contained in document A/64/906, I have been informed
of the interest of the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela in becoming a member of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. As delegations are aware, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX), of 10 November 1975, members of the
Committee are appointed by the General Assembly.
The proposal before the General Assembly is for
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to be included in
the membership of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. May I
take it that the General Assembly agrees to the
enlargement of the membership of that Committee by
appointing the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as a
member of the Committee?
It was so decided.
Mrs. Hernández Toledano (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I apologize for the fact that, although my
Ambassador was to make this statement, he has

momentarily left the Hall. I should therefore like to
express Cuba’s position on his behalf.
Cuba welcomes the decision just taken by the
Assembly to formally endorse the inclusion of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as a full member of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. Cuba, which in 1975
was one of the Committee’s 20 founding members,
welcomes the increase in the Committee’s membership.
This is a clear reflection of the international growing
support for the efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has historically
maintained a firm position of support for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, against the
illegal occupation of Arab territories and in favour of
an comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
We are certain that Venezuela’s membership will
contribute to strengthening the Committee and to its
successful fulfilment of its important responsibilities.
There is much to be done, and the obstacles are great.
However, we trust that, sooner or later, an end will be
put to the occupation of all Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967 and that an independent State of
Palestine will be established on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Mr. Troya (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Ecuador associates itself with the
statement that has just been made by the representative
of Cuba. We welcome Venezuela’s membership in the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-50685 (E)

*1050685*

A/64/PV.115

Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian people and are resolutely convinced that
the sisterly republic of Venezuela will greatly
contribute to the success of the Committee.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 16.
Agenda item 42 (continued)
Report of Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/64/L.55/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the Assembly held the debate on this agenda
item at its 26th plenary meeting, on 27 October 2009.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Yemen to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.55/Rev.1.
Mr. Al-Aud (Yemen): On behalf of the Group of
77 and China, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.55/Rev.1, entitled “Extension of the
transition period preceding the graduation of Samoa
from least developed country status”.
Samoa has suffered unprecedented human and
material losses as a result of the Pacific Ocean tsunami
of 29 September 2009. Pursuant to the draft resolution
before us, the General Assembly would decide to
extend for a period of three years the transition period
that Samoa is presently benefiting from among the
least developed countries. The draft resolution has
been negotiated by our partners, and I am happy to
report that we were able to reach consensus.
Allow me to thank all delegations for their
flexibility and cooperation on this issue.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/64/L.55/Rev.1, entitled “Extension of the transition
period preceding the graduation of Samoa from least
developed country status”.

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Samoa.
Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): The date of 29 September
2009 will be forever etched in our national memory
and conscience. That was the fateful day when part of
Samoa was demolished by the deadliest natural disaster
in our recorded history. The tsunami happened very
fast and for the briefest of time, belying the sobering
aftermath of its fury and the painful memories and
harrowing stories of survivors, whose souls will be
scarred for life.
One hundred and forty-three innocent lives —
mainly those of women, the elderly and children —
were taken unceremoniously, robbed of their human
dignity and worth. Over 500 families became homeless
and displaced in the wink of an eye. Costly
infrastructural facilities and hard-earned public and
private properties were destroyed. Suddenly, Samoa’s
economic outlook appeared vulnerable and its future
uncertain.
In 2007, the General Assembly decided to
graduate Samoa from the category of least developed
country by December of this year. A year into the
transition period, Samoa’s economy was already
experiencing severe contraction due to the global
recession. It should be borne in mind that the world
economic crisis and the tsunami both happened after
the decision on the graduation issue had already been
taken. Put simply, neither crisis was ever envisaged or
predicted, and their combined impacts were never
factored into the 2007 decision. Looking back at the
sequence of events, it is a truism and another subtle
reminder that, while man can plan and take decisions
as he likes, nature cannot always be influenced or
forced to comply.

Draft resolution A/64/L.55/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 64/295).

The imminent end in December of Samoa’s
transition period out of the least developed country
category, coupled with the massive reconstruction costs
associated with the tsunami, which amount to about
20 per cent of Samoa’s gross domestic product, our
Government, not surprisingly, was obliged to bring
these realities to the attention of the General Assembly
and to request an extension of the transition period.

The President (spoke in Arabic): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution, may I remind

That is the genesis and backdrop to resolution
64/295. The need for an extension commensurate with
the gravity of the reconstruction task at hand was

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.55/Rev.1?

2

10-50685

A/64/PV.115

genuine and real. Fittingly, therefore, by adopting the
resolution by consensus today, the Assembly has given
Samoa and its people the gift of a rainbow of hope in
place of the tsunami of despair. Exactly three weeks
from today, the Government and people of Samoa will
hold a national commemorative service to mark the
first anniversary of this tragic chapter in our history.
While it will be a day to mourn and pay homage to the
memories of those killed by the tsunami, it will also
provide a window of opportunity for thanksgiving for
the rebirth of a devastated island and for the gradual
triumph of the human spirit over the elements.
In the same vein, allow me to place on record
Samoa’s gratitude to those whose leadership and
support have been crucial. Without it, today’s
consensus adoption of the resolution would have been
in doubt. One or two in that special category need to be
singled out. First, the Permanent Representative of
Nepal, as Chair of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Group of Least Developed Countries, was instrumental
in facilitating the Group’s adoption of our draft
resolution as its own. Moreover, his Mission succeeded
in securing the agreement of the Group of 77 and
China to support it.
Secondly, Yemen’s Permanent Representative, as
Chair of the Group of 77 and China, ably supported by
his staff, not only took ownership of the draft
resolution, but successfully negotiated it with the other
groups at the United Nations to ensure that the
outcome would be not a contentious one, but rather one
that enjoyed unanimous support.
Thirdly, I would like to thank our development
partners, who not only understood our unique
challenges but gave us support when we needed it
most. Other negotiating groups, whose support was
equally vital to the granting of the extension, stood by
us and did not let us down.
Last but not least, you and your Office,
Mr. President, were sympathetic and accommodating
and played a facilitating role to ensure that Samoa’s
priority concern would get centre-stage attention and
be resolved successfully under your watch. Despite our
crowded agenda at this session, your Office, together
with the General Assembly Affairs Branch, prevailed
so that a decision on our resolution could become part
of the list of achievements of the sixty-fourth session.
We thank everyone I have mentioned and the
wider membership of the United Nations for their

10-50685

unanimous vote of confidence and for giving Samoa
much-needed space and time to ensure that our smooth
transition will ultimately lead to a durable and
sustainable graduation out of the category of least
developed countries in about three years.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position following
the adoption of the resolution.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 42?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/819)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.62)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.62.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): Today, I would like to
introduce draft resolution A/64/L.62 on the right of
Georgia’s internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees to finally return to their homes in a safe and
dignified manner.
Over the course of the past 17 years, more than
400,000 people have been driven from the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia.
Their homes have been destroyed or sold off and their
families and communities torn apart. Despite countless
calls by the international community and the tireless
efforts of the Government of Georgia, those men,
women and children have been prevented from
returning to their homes.
All told, IDPs represent a staggering 75 per cent
of the pre-war population of Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia. It is a testament to the
indomitable nature of the human spirit that today they
continue to live in hope of a better future. The length
of time away from their homes and their lands has not
diminished their desire to see them again. Each and
every one carries a dream in his or her heart of
returning to their roots and to the soil that nurtured

3

A/64/PV.115

generations of their ancestors, and to share all that with
their children. Any of us would feel exactly the same
sense of passionate loss if were we in a similar
situation.
The displaced are of various ethnic, religious,
linguistic and cultural backgrounds, including
Armenian, Estonian, Georgian, Greek and Ukrainian.
Among them are Christians, Muslims and Jews. There
are at least two things that unite all of them. The first is
the fact that they have lived, worked and loved in the
same cities and villages. They are attached to those
places by unbreakable, enduring emotional and
spiritual bonds. They are also bound by their common
experience as victims of brutal ethnic cleansing — a
fact that has been established, confirmed and
condemned by most credible international bodies,
including this one.
This is not the first time that we have introduced
this draft resolution. Over the past three years,
representatives gathered here have become acquainted
with the details surrounding the troubles of Georgia’s
IDPs and refugees. Since the adoption of a similar
resolution last year (resolution 63/307), the situation
on the ground has not changed. IDPs and refugees are
still unable to return. Some continue to live in
collective shelters, and others with their relatives.
Despite the efforts of the Government to fully
reintegrate them into society, challenges and pain
remain.
Only a very brave few have managed to return to
their homes. Spontaneous returns have occurred only in
places immediately adjacent to the occupation line.
Those courageous souls continue to suffer the fear of
insecurity and inequality, living under the threat of
expulsion, forced conscription, passportization, losing
their ethnic identity and the denial of their right to
education in their mother tongue. Moreover, the
authorities in effective control have taken measures
that deprive those individuals of the right to move
freely.
We strongly believe that the silent tragedy of
those people provides ample cause for the General
Assembly to again consider this issue. In that context,
in his recent report, Mr. Walter Kälin, Representative
of the Secretary-General on the Human Rights for
Internally Displaced Persons, urges all parties to
“take all necessary steps to ensure persons
displaced by the recent and past conflicts are able

4

to enjoy their right to return voluntarily to their
former homes in safety and
dignity”
(A/HRC/13/21/Add.3, annex, para. 47).
We believe that keeping this issue on the agenda of the
General Assembly is one significant step towards
contributing to the eventual return of the displaced
persons.
An important tool provided by this draft
resolution is the annual reporting by the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly on the status of IDPs
and refugees. This reporting procedure is a measure of
transparency and a necessary tool of international
engagement with the fate of the hundreds of thousands
of displaced persons. Most important, though, the draft
resolution before us resonates with the General
Assembly’s humanitarian mission. It sends a powerful
signal to all those forcefully displaced in my country,
as well as others in similar conditions all around the
world, that the international community stands by
them. We are also convinced that the draft resolution
will give positive impetus to the ongoing Geneva
process.
Despite the lack of progress over past years,
hundreds of thousands of Georgia’s IDPs and refugees
have again vested their expectations in this house,
hoping for a helpful decision from the General
Assembly. All that they have, apart from that hope, are
small sentimental items to help them remember their
past lives: fading photos, keys to houses that may have
been sold off, and their memories. We as a community
of States must have a positive impact every time it is
within our reach to do so. I believe that this is one of
those cases. The General Assembly has an inherent
responsibility to attend to the silent plea of the IDPs
and refugees. I urge the Assembly to vote in favour of
this draft resolution.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Draft resolution A/64/L.62, which is before
the General Assembly, unfortunately has nothing to do
with the noble humanitarian goals and concerns to
which its authors refer. Furthermore, this initiative is
exclusively political in its motivation and is based on
short-term calculations by the Georgian party, which
seeks to reject any responsibility for the situation that
arose precisely because of the policies of the Georgian
Government, culminating with the attack on civilians
in Tskhinvali on the night of 7 August 2008.

10-50685

A/64/PV.115

The draft resolution is disconnected from reality.
The sponsors of this initiative — stubbornly, to say the
least — refuse to recognize the existence of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia as autonomous independent States.
It is Tbilisi, through its aggressive posture, that has
forever buried the notion of the possible return of those
peoples to a unified State. The situation in the southern
Caucasus was created not by some mysterious foreign
plot, but by the actions of the Saakashvili regime.
With regard to the recommendations of the draft
resolution, they are totally unrealistic in practical
terms. As an example, I would refer to the idea of
developing a timetable for the early return of refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs). The authors of
the draft resolution have not taken account of the
relevant report of the Secretary-General (A/64/819),
which refers to the issue. Otherwise, they would have
looked at paragraph 33 of the report, which says that
“Given the prevailing environment and
continuing discussions between the parties over
status issues, it is premature at the present stage
to develop a timetable for the voluntary return of
all of the refugees and internally displaced
persons who wish to avail themselves of this
right”.
The adoption of the draft resolution would do
considerable harm to ongoing discussions in Geneva,
in which we are considering the status of refugees and
IDPs. The Georgian party fully understands that, but
stubbornly continues to press its initiative.
Furthermore, as the Secretary-General has said in his
report, it is the Geneva process, in which the
Abkhazian and South Ossetian parties are taking part,
that provides the only way forward.
This is clearly not an attempt to alleviate the
situation of those who find themselves forcibly
displaced. The adoption of the draft resolution would
serve only to detract from the realistic practical
measures being taken in the region. It would not
enhance confidence-building measures between the
Georgian, Abkhazian and South Ossetian parties,
which are a prerequisite for resolving other issues,
including that of refugees and IDPs. Everyone must
understand that, irrespective of their geopolitical
assessment of the situation in the region.
Finally, given all these considerations, the
delegation of the Russian Federation would like to
move that no action be taken on the draft resolution

10-50685

and that a vote be taken in that connection. By refusing
to consider such a politicized and confrontational
initiative, the General Assembly and States Members
of the United Nations would be doing much more for
refugees and IDPs from Abkhazia and South Ossetia
than by voting for the proposed, odious text.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has moved, under the terms of rule 74 of the
rules of procedure, that no action be taken with respect
to draft resolution A/64/L.62. The rule reads as
follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
I would therefore invite delegations that so wish
to speak either for or against the motion. There will be
no more than two delegations speaking in favour and
no more than two speaking against.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua supports the
no-action motion on draft resolution A/64/L.62 moved
by the representative of the Russian Federation. We
believe that initiatives on such important issues as
assistance to refugees and displaced persons should be
the result of a broad consensus and the product of an
open, transparent and participatory process, especially
between the parties involved. We understand that the
conversations taking place in Geneva under the joint
chairmanship of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations should remain the critical forum par excellence
in which to address issues related not only to security
and stability in the region, but also to humanitarian
problems, including those regarding refugees and
internally displaced persons.
The draft resolution before us today would
considerably undermine the discussions taking place in
Geneva. Such initiatives tend to promote partial
measures that reflect only the viewpoints of one of the
parties involved. They will not produce the positive
results needed for this issue or assist in building a
climate of mutual confidence between the parties.
Therefore, the delegation of Nicaragua supports the

5

A/64/PV.115

no-action motion and calls on other delegations to
support it.
Mr. Ovysanko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus notes the complexity of the issue
of the status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia, addressed in draft
resolution A/64/L.62. There is no agreement on it
between the main parties involved. The issue is being
discussed in Geneva, and we therefore believe that the
General Assembly should not adopt this draft
resolution.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly urges delegations to vote against
this motion. We do so for reasons of principle. A
motion to adjourn an item sine die represents an
attempt to prevent the consideration of a draft
resolution on procedural grounds. The calling of such a
motion aims at denying States Members of the United
Nations their sovereign right to bring before the
General Assembly any concern they themselves deem
to merit its attention and at limiting the agenda of the
Assembly. This runs contrary to the good practice of
the General Assembly. No-action motions contradict
one of the ideas on which the creation of the United
Nations was based, namely, that issues of concern to
Member States shall be addressed and discussed
openly. Each proposal presented in the General
Assembly deserves consideration on its own merits, so
we strongly urge delegations to vote against this
no-action motion regardless of their views and voting
intentions on the substance of the draft resolution.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): The
no-action motion that has just been moved seeks to
prevent the General Assembly from considering a
proposal that has been submitted to us for reasons of
substance. France is opposed out of principle to such a
motion. Indeed, the General Assembly should be in a
position to discuss any subject, despite any difficulties
there may be in terms of its substance. To submit such
a motion is to seek to deny the States Members of the
United Nations their sovereign right to submit to the
General Assembly any concern that they consider to
merit consideration by this organ. It is clearly contrary
to the good practices of the General Assembly. For that
reason, my delegation will vote against the no-action
motion and calls upon other delegations to do the
same, irrespective of their intention with regard to
voting on the draft resolution itself.

6

The President: I shall now put to the vote the
motion submitted by the representative of the Russian
Federation that no action be taken on draft resolution
A/64/L.62.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Armenia, Belarus, China, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Lao (People’s Democratic Republic
of), Mongolia, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Russian
Federation, Serbia, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Tonga,
Uganda, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Turkey, Tuvalu, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Angola,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritius, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Pakistan,
Panama, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the

10-50685

A/64/PV.115

Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
South Africa, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, United Arab Emirates
The motion was rejected by 32 votes to 67, with
54 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Gabon advised
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
Mr. Viinanen (Finland), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The Acting President: As the motion for no
action has not been adopted, the Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on draft resolution
A/64/L.62.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Against:
Armenia, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea,
Russian Federation, Serbia, Solomon Islands, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,

10-50685

Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Zambia
Draft resolution A/64/L.62 was adopted by 50
votes to 17, with 86 abstentions (resolution
64/296).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to explain its abstention in the
voting on resolution 64/296, introduced by Georgia and
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia”.
Switzerland underlines its support for the
discussions held in Geneva following the 2008 conflict
and agrees to provide on its territory the most
favourable conditions possible for the handling of the
issue raised by Georgia, in particular. As an
unwavering aspect of its policy, Switzerland recalls the
duty to give special attention to the status of internally
displaced persons and refugees in post-conflict
situations and to their right of return to their places of
origin.
Mr. Čekuolis (Lithuania): At the outset, I would
like once again to reiterate my country’s firm support
for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders. Lithuania
voted in favour of resolution 64/296 because we note
with concern that no major development with regard to
the ability of refugees and internally displaced persons
to exercise their right of return has taken place since
the adoption of the analogous resolution last year

7

A/64/PV.115

(resolution 63/307). There are still hundreds of
thousands of displaced persons in the area.

discuss many important issues. Most of these issues
remain unresolved.

Lithuania sees this resolution as an important
means for solving the plight of the affected population,
in particular as it calls on all participants in the Geneva
discussions to intensify their efforts to establish a
durable peace and to create favourable security
conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return of all internally displaced persons
and refugees to their places of origin.

While the resolution adopted today is
humanitarian in nature, we cannot deny the fact that
there are many unresolved, deep and long-standing
political issues that have caused and continue to cause
internal displacement in Georgia.

We also commend the Government of Georgia for
adopting the Action Plan for Engagement (see
A/64/875, annex). Its implementation will demonstrate
Georgia’s further commitment to this issue.
Lithuania also welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
63/307 (A/64/819) and supports its conclusions, which,
among other things, reiterates the readiness of the
United Nations to assist in implementing the agreed
steps and measures, despite the continued lack of
access remaining a major concern. We also fully
support the Secretary-General in his urging all
participants in the Geneva discussions
“to engage constructively, with a genuine will to
improve the situation of the local population”
(A/64/819, para. 36).
Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): Estonia voted in
favour of resolution 64/296. Our decision follows from
a strong and long-standing commitment to fundamental
humanitarian principles.
The resolution deals with the plight of internally
displaced persons in Georgia. Following the conflict in
1992, their condition has been of concern for many
years. The armed conflict in August 2008 led to further
displacement. Unfortunately, over the past year, no
major positive developments have occurred. The
situation requires continued efforts from all parties and
international support and attention, including from the
United Nations. We reiterate the importance of the
Geneva talks, of which the European Union is a
counterpart.
In 2006, Member States decided to include on the
agenda of the General Assembly the item entitled
“Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security and
development”, under which we have been able to

8

My delegation takes this opportunity to reiterate
its firm support for the security and stability of
Georgia, based on full respect of the principles of
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Çorman (Turkey): I am taking the floor to
briefly explain our position. Let me first emphasize
that, regardless of our position on the issue at hand
today, we believe that it is the right of any delegation
to bring an issue to the attention of the General
Assembly and, if it deems necessary, to present a draft
resolution.
I would also like to reiterate Turkey’s firm and
unwavering
commitment
to
the
sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders. We remain
concerned that the conflicts in the Abkhazia and South
Ossetia regions of Georgia remain unresolved and that
this situation has serious economic, social and
humanitarian consequences.
In the prevailing circumstances, the Geneva talks
provide a valuable forum to also address the issue of
the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. We hope that
the discussions in Geneva can be made to reach their
full potential in order to have positive and concrete
outcomes. To achieve that, we call on all sides to
seriously engage with the others in a cooperative and
proactive manner. We also call on all parties to refrain
from taking any steps that would aggravate the
situation of the displaced persons and to take action to
build confidence.
Turkey supports all efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of these conflicts and invites all parties to
work towards a comprehensive and sustainable peace
that would also provide for the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees. As a country of the
region and a neighbour of Georgia, my country stands
ready to contribute to all efforts towards this end and
will continue to engage with its regional counterparts
and cooperate closely with its friends and allies. It is

10-50685

A/64/PV.115

our deep conviction that steps in that direction will
enhance the stability and prosperity of the Caucasus
region as a whole.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic decided to vote in favour of resolution
64/296. We are convinced that the situation of
internally displaced persons and refugees in Georgia,
which has not changed since this case was brought for
the first time before this Assembly, requires the
attention of the international community, including the
United Nations.
The Czech Republic is strongly committed to the
principles of international humanitarian law. We are
well aware of the importance of the Geneva talks and
sincerely hope for their success. We reiterate, in the
context of this humanitarian crisis, which needs to be
resolved, our strong support for the security and
stability of Georgia, respecting fully its sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I call on the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): Together we have just
adopted a resolution that lifts the hopes of hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees who were forced by violence and fear to flee
their homes and communities. It is with my mind on
these brave men, women and children, citizens of
Georgia of many ethnic origins, that I would like to
express my most sincere gratitude to the Assembly.
Today’s vote marks the third straight year that the
Assembly has invoked the norms and principles of
international law to defend the right of every Georgian
IDP and refugee to return to his or her home. And with
each passing year, the circle of understanding and
support is widening. It is our responsibility to help
transform the anguished dream of my compatriots — to
return to their homes in our country’s region of
Abkhazia and its Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia —
into a reality.
I know that Members’ support of this resolution
did not come easily — a fact that had little to do with
the substance itself. This makes their affirmative vote
even more noteworthy. Unfortunately, the moral clarity
that guides us all on this issue has been challenged
once again by strenuous attempts to politicize these
efforts. But truth and dignity prevailed.

10-50685

Despite all the unfair attempts aimed at
persuading delegations to oppose the resolution, it was
adopted by an even wider margin than in previous
years. But they may rest assured that my country is in
no way embittered by the politics that preceded the
vote. Quite the opposite — we remain as determined as
ever to bring dignity and relief to our compatriots who
have suffered for so long. We will engage with all
parties, including those who led the opposition to this
resolution, to achieve its goals.
Today the General Assembly upheld the
principles of this institution and the norms of the
international community. I wish that this were enough.
I can only hope that, a year from now when we gather
again to discuss this issue, true progress will have been
made on the ground.
Finally, on behalf of those who have suffered
violence and discrimination because they were of the
wrong ethnic background, we would like to once again
express our heartfelt gratitude to each and every
Member State that voted in favour of this resolution. I
would also like to express my gratitude to those
delegations that shifted their position from a negative
stance last year to an abstention today. These, too,
contributed to the positive dynamic around this
resolution. It will never be forgotten by the people of
my country.
The Acting President: I call
representative of the Russian Federation.

on

the

Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In the light of the statements that have been
made on the outcome of the voting, I would simply like
to emphasize that the results once again confirm that a
certain group of countries continues to pursue a
politicized approach to and double standards on this
issue, to the detriment of the practical steps being
taken to resolve the current humanitarian problem in
the region.
It is those very same countries that obstinately
deny the Abkhazians and South Ossetians the
opportunity to inform the international community
about the truth of the situation, including with respect
to the issue of the protection of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Those who voted in favour of
resolution 64/296 will bear full responsibility for the
consequences of its adoption, including with regard to
the Geneva process.

9

A/64/PV.115

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 14?

10

It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

10-50685
