S/2015/305

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 May 2015
Original: English

Third report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 6 of resolution 2169 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
In paragraph 6 of its resolution 2169 (2014), the Security Council requested
that I report every three months on progress made towards fulf illing the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The present report covers
key developments related to Iraq, and provides an update on the activities of the
United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my second report, dated 2 February
2015 (S/2015/82).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Internal developments
2.
During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq continued to demonstrate
its commitment to the promotion of national reconciliation, including by
consolidating national support for the Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, the
popular mobilization forces and allied tribal and volunteer fighters in their struggle
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Political and religious
leaders also led efforts to delegitimize the extremist ideology of ISIL by advocating
religious tolerance and non-violence. The Government continued to implement key
tenets of its ministerial programme and the national political agreement, including
through the approval by the Council of Ministers of constitutionally -mandated
legislative and public sector reforms.
3.
Regional and international partners maintained their support for the
Government of Iraq in its fight against ISIL, which, along with associated armed
groups, remained in control of large swathes of territory in the west and north of the
country, where they have continued to inflict civilian casualties, cause massive
displacement and perpetrate systematic human rights violations that may amount to
war crimes and/or crimes against humanity.

B.

Political situation
4.
During the reporting period, the political leadership in Iraq reached out to the
Iraqi public to consolidate national support for the military campaign against ISIL.

15-06518 (E)

070515

*1506518*

S/2015/305

On 2 March, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, the Commander-in-Chief of the Iraqi
armed forces, announced to the Council of Representatives the launch of wide -scale
military operations in the governorates of Anbar and Salah al-Din. While continuing
to deploy the popular mobilization forces, the Prime Minister also held several
meetings to mobilize Sunni tribal support in the ISIL-held governorates, including
visiting the Sunni tribal leaders from the Dulaim and al -Jaghifa tribes. In one notable
visit to Ramadi on 8 April, he visited Iraqi army units and volunteers fighting ISIL
alongside the Iraqi security forces. In an effort to coordinate and control all forces
mobilized against ISIL, on 7 April the Council of Ministers adopted a resolution
requiring all ministries and State institutions to treat the Popular Mobilization
Commission as a formal institution linked to the Prime Minister and the
Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. The resolution granted the Commissio n
the command, control and regulatory authority over the popular mobilization forces.
5.
Political leaders also stepped up efforts to counter the extremist ideology of
ISIL. On 1 February, the Chairman of the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, Ammar
al-Hakim, hosted a conference to promote dialogue among religions and sects,
which was attended by President Fuad Masum, Prime Minister al -Abadi, Speaker
Salim al-Jabouri and Deputy Prime Minister Saleh al-Mutlaq, among others. All
leaders, without exception, expressed the need for a legislative reform package to
prevent extremist ideology from penetrating Iraq’s social fabric, as well as the
critical role of religious authorities in countering the extremist ideology advanced
by ISIL.
6.
During the reporting period, the Government took steps to advance the
legislative reform package identified in the national political agreement. The
legislative framework to establish a national guard, which would institutionalize the
status of volunteer fighters and promote sectarian balance in Iraq’s security forces,
was approved by the Council of Ministers on 3 February, and a first reading of the
bill was conducted by the Council of Representatives on 2 March. The Council of
Ministers also approved the revised Justice and Accountability and Banning of the
Baath Party Act, which has yet to be tabled in the Council of Representatives.
On 2 March, Prime Minister al-Abadi announced to the Council of Representatives
that a draft general amnesty law was also under consideration by the Supreme
Judicial Council.
7.
The Government of Iraq continued to take measures to expedite legal
processes and strengthen the rule of law. The Iraqi judiciary took steps to advance
Prime Minister al-Abadi’s executive order of 1 December 2014 to accelerate the
release of detainees. The federal Judicial Authority announced that new procedures
had been adopted to speed up the investigation of detainees charged with terrorism
offences, and subsequently the Authority announced that 3,902 detainees who had
been held on terrorism-related charges had been released. On 25 February, the Chief
Justice, Midhat al-Mahmoud, instructed the Prosecutor General and the courts to
expedite the cases of 140 female detainees throughout Iraq, including 43 who are
facing terrorism charges. In addition, in March, the federal Judicial Authority
circulated several directives and instructions recommending that courts of first
instance across the country release accused persons on bail, especially female
detainees.
8.
At the same time, the legislature took steps to strengthen transparency and
accountability in governance through the enactment of key legislation and prompt

2/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

inquiries into reported violations of human rights. On 16 April, the Council of
Representatives commenced a second reading of the constitutionally-mandated draft
of the federal Supreme Court law aimed at strengthening the independence of the
supreme administrative organ of the Iraqi judiciary. On 10 March, the legislature
also conducted the second reading of the amended draft of the federal Civil Service
Council law that regulates recruitment and selection in the public service. This is an
important step towards reforming the public sector and combating administrative
corruption — key tenets in the national political agreement. On 14 April, the
Council of Representatives postponed, for a second time, the first reading of the
Political Parties law to enable governorate-level consultations to take place. The
legal framework of the Political Parties law will provide greater transparency in the
work of political parties. The Parliamentary Defence and Security Committee also
tabled its report into the alleged massacre at Camp Speicher on 12 June 2014, which
included findings and recommendations, including that the military offi cers who
had fled their posts during the massacre be brought to justice.
9.
The Council of Ministers also approved constitutionally-mandated legislation
to advance decentralization and public sector reform. On 10 March, the Council of
Ministers approved the draft General Authority for the Regions law to establish a
constitutionally-mandated independent commission (article 105) with oversight
functions to guarantee the rights and fair participation of regions, as well as
governorates not organized in a region, in federal decision-making. The enactment
of the law is another commitment stipulated in the national political agreement to
promote decentralization and ensure the balanced representation of all components
of Iraqi society in the public service.
10. Reports of sectarian attacks perpetrated by militia groups operating outside
State control continued to challenge Government efforts to bring all armed
formations under its effective control in order to further national reconciliation and
strengthen the rule of law. The assassination of Sheikh Qassim Swaidan al-Janabi,
his son Mohammed al-Janabi and several bodyguards on 13 February triggered
significant unrest. During the session of the Council of Representatives held on
14 February, Speaker al-Jabouri condemned the crimes, as did Prime Minister
al-Abadi, who indicated in his statement that he made no distinction between crimes
perpetrated by terrorists and those perpetrated by militias.
11. On 14 February, the Sunni-led Iraqi Forces Coalition and secular Wataniya
Alliance suspended their participation in legislative sessions in protest, demanding
that an investigation be conducted, that the perpetrators be held to account and that
measures be imposed to limit the bearing of weapons to State institutions. On
2 March, the two political blocs resumed their participation after having received
assurances from Prime Minister al-Abadi that the Government remained committed
to protecting Iraqis from sectarian violence, dismantling armed groups and
preventing the carrying of weapons outside State control.
12. On 13 and 20 February, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani issued fatwas calling on
members of the security forces, including the popular mobilization force, to refrain
from retaliatory acts of violence against civilians.
13. In another effort to gradually restore normality for residents of the capital,
Prime Minister al-Abadi issued an order lifting the curfew restricting movement in
the Kathhimiya, Adhamiya, Mansour, Karrada and al-Sedea areas of Baghdad,

15-06518

3/17

S/2015/305

transferring responsibility for security from the Iraqi army to the federal police. The
order took effect on 7 February.
14. The Government of Iraq took measures to lay the groundwork for the
stabilization and reconstruction of areas liberated from ISIL. On 17 February, the
Council of Ministers approved the disbursement of funds to owners of property
affected by terrorist and military operations and authorized the Chair of the
reconstruction fund to oversee its implementation. On 11 March, Prime Minister
al-Abadi instructed the Salah al-Din military command to make all efforts to ensure
that normality returns to liberated areas under its jurisdiction, in coordination with
relevant ministries. Prime Minister al-Abadi also instructed the Ministry of the
Environment to clear liberated areas from mines and remnants of other explosive
devices.
15. Further enhancement of relations between Baghdad and Erbil took place
during the reporting period. On 15 February, the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
Regional Government, Nechirvan Barzani, met Prime Minister al-Abadi in Baghdad
to discuss obstacles to the implementation of the 2 December agreement on energy
exports and revenue-sharing, including technical issues related to oil exports, as
well as budgetary allocations to the Kurdistan Regional Government. On 6 April,
Prime Minister al-Abadi met with Kurdistan Regional President Masoud Barzani in
Erbil to discuss Baghdad-Erbil relations, humanitarian issues and the military
campaign against ISIL. Following the meeting Prime Minister al-Abadi declared
that an important stage had been reached in the federal Government’s relationship
with the Kurdistan Regional Government.
16. On 26 February the federal Government released $208 million to the Kurdistan
Regional Government for the payment of public salaries for January, which was
followed by a further funds transfer of $408 million on 20 March for the payment of
public salaries for February. On 2 April, the Ministry of Finance announced that a
third payment of $450 million to the Kurdistan Regional Government would take
place.
17. Baghdad and Erbil also continued to strengthen joint security cooperation. On
8 March, a tripartite meeting was held in Baghdad between military officials from
the Kurdistan Regional Government and the Iraqi security forces, as well as
representatives of the United States of America. They mainly discussed the
coordination between Erbil and Baghdad in the fight against ISIL, as well as
Peshmerga support in future operations to liberate Mosul and Hawija. Du ring the
Prime Minister’s visit to Erbil on 6 April, an agreement was reached with President
Barzani to form a joint operations centre for the liberation of Mosul.

C.

Security
18. The security situation in Iraq remained volatile throughout the report ing period.
Conflict and armed violence was largely concentrated in areas under ISIL control in
Anbar, Ninewa and Salah al-Din governorates. Iraq’s armed forces, aided by Popular
Mobilization Forces and allied tribal and volunteer fighters made progress ag ainst
ISIL in Salah al-Din and southern Kirkuk, suffering many casualties. Meanwhile,
areas recaptured in Diyala Governorate remained under Government control.

4/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

19. During the reporting period, the international coalition continued to support
the Government’s military campaign against ISIL. Coalition airstrikes targeted a
number of ISIL positions, including those around Mosul and the surrounding
districts, Mount Sinjar, south of Kirkuk, around the Baiji oil refinery and throughout
Anbar governorate. On 1 March, from the front lines in Samarra, Prime Minister
al-Abadi ordered the Iraqi security forces, aided by popular mobilization forces and
local tribal fighters, to retake the city of Tikrit and to liberate Salah al -Din
governorate from ISIL. On 25 March, in response to a direct request for assistance
from Prime Minister al-Abadi, the international coalition joined these efforts by
commencing air strikes against ISIL positions in Tikrit.
20. On 30 March, pro-Government forces liberated eastern Tikrit, after which, on
9 April, the rest of the city was freed from ISIL control. ISIL continued, however, to
maintain control over supply routes from areas of Salah al -Din to Mosul and others
under its control in northern Iraq. In early February, Iraqi security force s launched
ground operations in Baiji to expel ISIL elements from the area. Although the Iraqi
security forces control access to the town of Baiji and the refinery, ISIL continues,
at the present time, to maintain a presence outside these immediate areas. In early
February, armed clashes between pro-Government forces and ISIL in the vicinity of
Samarra resulted in heavy casualties on both sides.
21. In Ninewa, Peshmerga forces, supported by popular mobilization forces and
international coalition air assets, has maintained pressure on ISIL positions in Sinjar
and across the north-west area of the governorate, while ISIL has carried out direct
attacks on Peshmerga positions and checkpoints. Control over the city of Sinjar city
continues to be contested, with regular clashes and airstrikes taking place. On
11 February, ISIL carried out a suicide car bomb attack against Peshmerga security
forces in Sinjar and also conducted several attacks along the Kurdish defensive line
between Sinjar and Makhmour. The Peshmerga has repelled these attacks and has
prevented further territorial gains by ISIL in these areas.
22. The Peshmerga made steady gains against ISIL in Kirkuk governorate,
specifically in the west and south of Kirkuk city. On 8 March, the Peshmerga
commenced a major military operation to retake areas under ISIL control, including
the Hawija district in southern Kirkuk. By 10 March, the Peshmerga had liberated a
vast area that had been captured by ISIL on 30 January. These areas included
villages in southern Kirkuk, the Khabaza oilfield and strategic road junctions,
including between Baghdad and Mosul. The Peshmerga also pushed the militants
further away from the city of Kirkuk and its adjoining oilfields.
23. In Anbar governorate the security situation was highly fluid. In early February,
ISIL carried out a series of attacks, including in Ramadi, Hit, al -Baghdadi and
Haditha, while heavy clashes were also reported in Rawa and Al Qa’im. On
12 February, ISIL briefly took control of the city of al-Baghdadi and surrounding
villages, as well as a strategic road linking al-Baghdadi to the largest Iraqi security
forces base in the governorate, Ain al-Assad airbase. In early March, Iraqi security
forces and local tribal fighters, aided by international coalition air strikes, regained
control of al-Baghdadi and the road leading to Ain al-Assad base. On 14 April, ISIL
launched further attacks in the Ramadi area and encircled the city centre by taking
control of al-Boghanim, al-Bosoda, al-Bomahal, al-Bokhalifa and part of the
al-Sofia area. On 15 April, the Saraya al-Salam force arrived at the al-Habbaniyah
military base east of Ramadi to bolster Iraqi army forces. ISIL made further

15-06518

5/17

S/2015/305

advances into the Ramadi city centre on 17 April, leaving only the Iraqi Army’s
8th brigade headquarters and Government offices under State control. Haditha and
areas in the south of Karma remained under Government control, while the majority
of areas in the governorate remained either contested, under siege or in the control
of ISIL.
24. During the reporting period, Baghdad continued to be subjected to acts of
terrorism, including targeted killings and kidnappings, sectarian violence and the
use of small arms fire against civilians; unidentified bodies with gunshot wounds
were a common sight in Baghdad. The deadliest attack occurred in Kadhimiyah, on
9 February, when a suicide bomber carried out an attack on a restaurant, killing 21
and wounding 49. On 17 April, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device was
detonated in the Ainkawa district of Erbil, killing three people and wounding 14.
ISIL claimed responsibility for the attack.

D.

Regional and international developments
25. During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq continued to strengthen
its cooperation with neighbouring countries and the wider international community.
High-level delegations paid visits to the Islamic Republic of Iran, Qatar, Turkey and
the United Arab Emirates as part of wider efforts to strengthen ties with
neighbouring countries and promote regional security cooperation.
26. On 11 February, President Fuad Masum headed a high-level visit to Doha,
where he met with the Emir of Qatar, Tamim bin Hammad al Thani, and the Prime
Minister, Sheikh Abdallah bin Nasser al Thani. During the visit, they reached an
agreement to re-establish Qatar’s diplomatic presence in Baghdad and to create a
joint Iraq-Qatar security committee. On 21 April, President Masum visited Ankara
as part of an official visit to build bilateral relations between Iraq and Turkey. On
17 February, the Vice-President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Eshaq Jahangiri,
and Prime Minister al-Abadi agreed on the need to strengthen their bilateral and
regional ties. This was followed by a meeting on 25 February between Prime
Minister al-Abadi and the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Mohammed Javad Zarif, during which they discussed the need for joint cooperation
to counter the ISIL threat and achieve security and stability in the region. On
23 March, the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Hassan Rouhani, expressed
his country’s ongoing commitment to stand by Iraq in the war against ISIL and
confirmed its commitment to enhancing bilateral relations. On 20 April, the Speaker
of the Council of Representatives, Salim al-Jubouri, Vice-President Osama
al-Nujaifi and Deputy Prime Minister Saleh al-Mutlaq met with King Abdullah II in
Amman.
27. On 15 April, Prime Minister al-Abadi undertook a three-day visit to
Washington, D.C., where he met with President Barak Obama and other senior
Government officials, including leaders of the Congress and Senate, as well as the
heads of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to mobilize support
for Iraq.
28. On 16 March, Kuwait opened a consulate in Basra as another step towards
strengthening ties between the two States. The Government of Iraq also held high level meetings with representatives of the Governments of Jordan and Turkey to
discuss the ISIL threat. Both countries, as well as the Islamic Republic of Iran,

6/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

pledged assistance to the Iraqi security forces, including, in some cases, explicit
pledges of support to the Peshmerga.
29. On 22 March, Prime Minister al-Abadi placed a phone call to King Salman bin
Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia to reinforce bilateral relations between t he two
countries and to discuss cooperation in the fight against ISIL. During the call the
King invited Prime Minister al-Abadi to visit Saudi Arabia.
30. The Government of Iraq is also improving its relations with regional
organizations. At its ministerial meeting in Riyadh on 12 March, the Cooperation
Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (Gulf Cooperation Council) issued a
statement reiterating its support for national unity and peace in Iraq, and calling for
concerted efforts to preserve the coherence of the country and the unity of its
territory. On 29 March, the League of Arab States concluded its summit, during
which several leaders praised the work of Prime Minister al -Abadi, called upon
Iraqi leaders to unite and called on the international commu nity to assist the Iraqi
Government.
31. On 28 February, Turkey supported the rotation of the deployment by the
Kurdistan Regional Government of a fourth Peshmerga contingent, consisting of
150 soldiers, to Kobani/Ain al-Arab in the Syrian Arab Republic.
32. The international community continued to provide security and military
assistance to the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
within the framework of the global coalition against ISIL. The Government of Iraq
expressed its appreciation for the efforts of the coalition to combat terrorism. In the
Kurdistan region of Iraq, military advisers from Australia, Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States have been providing support to the
Peshmerga. In early February, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom jointly established the Kurdistan Training Coordination Centre in Erbil to
coordinate military assistance and training. On 17 March, the Iraqi Council of
Ministers reaffirmed Iraq’s commitment to its relationship with the global coalition
and expressed appreciation for its support in the fight against ISIL. The Council also
underscored the importance of full respect for Iraqi sovereig nty in all aspects.

III. Update on the activities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
33. My Special Representative continued to work in close partnership with the
Government of Iraq and stakeholders across the political spectrum to facilitate
implementation of the national political agreement and to promote political dialogue
and national reconciliation.
34. In Basra, on 5 February, in support of national reconciliation and social
cohesion efforts, my Special Representative hosted the second in a series of round table forums with representatives of civil society, community, tribal and religious
leaders and scholars to gather local perspectives on approaches to promote social
peace, reconciliation and national unity. Key recommendations from the meeting
included the need to: address economic and political marginalization, corruption and

15-06518

7/17

S/2015/305

sectarianism; disarm militia groups operating outside the state; empower the Iraqi
security forces; and strengthen the rule of law.
35. From 2 to 7 February, in both Baghdad and Erbil, my Special Representative
and my Deputy Special Representative inaugurated and participated in an Interfaith
Harmony Week observance organized by UNAMI in collabo ration with civil society
groups and religious leaders.
36. UNAMI also continued to engage Iraqi interlocutors on legislative reform.
Throughout March, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs held a
series of meetings with Vice-President Allawi, Speaker al-Jabouri, First Deputy
Speaker Hammoudi and heads of Parliamentary blocs in the Council of
Representatives to discuss important legislation. The discussions included the
national guard draft law, the draft general amnesty law and the revise d Justice and
Accountability and Banning of the Baath Party Act.
37. My Special Representative continued to use his good offices to facilitate
cooperation between Baghdad and Erbil. On 2 March, he visited Erbil where he met
with President Barzani, Kurdistan Regional Parliament Speaker Mohammed Sadiq,
the Head of the Independent High Electoral Commission, Sarbast Mustafa, and
several other high-level Kurdish officials to discuss outstanding challenges between
Baghdad and Erbil.
38. My Special Representative also continued his regional engagement. During the
reporting period he travelled to Jordan, Qatar and Saudi Arabia, where he met senior
Government officials to seek support for Iraq’s national reconciliation efforts and
for the fight against ISIL. UNAMI continued its efforts to promote women’s rights
in Iraq by working towards the implementation of Iraq’s national action plan on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), advocating renewed efforts to provide
targeted assistance to women and girls affected b y violence in conflict, promoting
an enhanced role for women in decision-making in the political and social sphere
and advising the Ministry on Women’s Affairs of the need for reform on a number
of laws. On 5 March, my Deputy Special Representative for Dev elopment and
Humanitarian Affairs joined Prime Minister al-Abadi in a ceremony in Baghdad to
commemorate International Women’s Day, at which attendees welcomed the
appointment of Thikra Alwash as the first female Mayor of Baghdad.
39. On 30 March, I visited Baghdad to underscore the continuing and full support
of the United Nations for the advancement of peace, development, humanitarian
assistance and human rights in Iraq. I held productive discussions with President
Masum, Prime Minister al-Abadi, Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari, Speaker of
the Council of Representatives al-Jabouri and President Barzani of the Iraqi
Kurdistan Region. At our meetings we reviewed the progress of ongoing military
operations to liberate areas under the control of ISIL, including, most recently, areas
around Tikrit. We also discussed the humanitarian and human rights situation in Iraq
and Iraq’s national reconciliation efforts and other challenges.

B.

Electoral assistance
40. Following up on an electoral needs assessment mission in 2012 to determine
United Nations support to the Independent High Electoral Commission ahead of the
elections in 2013 and 2014, and upon three new requests from the Independent High

8/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

Electoral Commission, the Council of Representatives and the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament for electoral assistance, a further electoral needs assessment mission was
deployed from 15 to 29 March. The team, comprised of representatives from the
Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), held meetings with representatives of the
Independent High Electoral Commission, the Council of Representatives,
Government institutions, heads of political blocs, international non -governmental
organizations, the diplomatic community, civil society organizations and other
interlocutors. The recommendations of the mission will guide the next phase of
United Nations electoral activities in Iraq.
41. During the reporting period, the UNAMI Electoral Assistance Office continued
its engagement with the Legal Committee of the Council of Representatives with
regard to the review of the national electoral framework. UNAMI delivered a
presentation to the members of the Legal Committee on seat allocation formulae and
provided inputs to discussions on voting rights for the military, special voting and
the Political Parties law as well as on parliamentary oversight over electoral
processes.
42. UNAMI held regular meetings and consultations with the Board of
Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral Commission on ongoing electoral
activities and perspectives for future United Nations electoral support. At a meeting
held on 24 February between UNAMI, the Chair of the Independent High Electoral
Commission and several electoral commissioners, the commissioners noted that
United Nations support at the policy-level would be of assistance, and that
operational support should focus on information technology, results -management
systems, voter registry and media and boundary delimitation. UNAMI a lso
reiterated its concern to the Commission with regard to the continued use of a
biometric voter registration system, which relies on contested databases based on
outdated food ration cards and special military voting list numbers. Following a
subsequent request from the Commission, UNAMI is preparing to engage more
intensely in the preparation process of the registration system to ensure its
credibility.
43. UNAMI also continued to monitor developments regarding the establishment
of the Independent High Electoral Commission of the Kurdistan Region. Its ninemember Board of Commissioners formally assumed its duties on 1 March 2015. The
commissioners have indicated to UNAMI and to the electoral needs assessment
mission that United Nations electoral support might include policy advice, oversight
and operational and coordinative support. The same request was subsequently
submitted by the Speaker of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament in a formal request
to UNAMI in early February 2015.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
44. The protection of civilians from the impact of armed conflict, terrorism and
violence, and ensuring their access to safety and humanitarian assistance, remain of
critical concern. Since my last report, UNAMI recorded a minimum nu mber of
4,750 civilian casualties (1,465 killed and 3,285 wounded), bringing the total of
civilian casualties for 2015 thus far to a minimum of 7,009 (2,255 killed and 4,754
wounded). Since the upsurge in violence at the beginning of June 2014, there has
been a minimum of 10,736 civilians killed and 18,565 wounded.

15-06518

9/17

S/2015/305

45. UNAMI continued to receive reports of systematic and widespread violations
of international law perpetrated by ISIL and associated armed groups. Reports
included: attacks directly targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, executions
and other extrajudicial and targeted killings; abductions, rape and other forms of
sexual and physical violence perpetrated against women and children; trafficking in
persons and sexual slavery; forced recruitment of children; destruction or
desecration of places of religious or cultural significance; wanton destruction and
looting of property; and denial of fundamental rights and freedoms. Iraq’s diverse
ethnic and religious communities were gravely affected , particularly Christian, Faili
Kurd, Kaka’e, Sabaean, Shabak, Shi’ite and Turkmen communities.
46. Violations of women’s rights by ISIL and associated armed groups continue to
be of grave concern. Thousands of women and children, particularly from the Yez idi
and other minority communities, remain in ISIL captivity. Women who escaped ISIL
captivity confirmed in interviews with UNAMI that many of them had been
trafficked as slaves and been subjected to sexual and physical violence.
47. ISIL and associated armed groups continue to subject civilians living in areas
under their control to grave violations of their basic human rights, including
enforcing compliance with its ideology through targeted killings, abductions and
sentences handed down by “Shari’a courts”. ISIL itself has published videos
depicting people being subjected to a range of abhorrent punishments, including
stoning, being pushed-off buildings, decapitation and crucifixion. The mass graves
found in Zumar in February, containing the remains of 60 persons, mostly of the
Yezidi community, is just one such example. Some of the bodies had been shackled
and blindfolded at the time they were killed.
48. Throughout the reporting period, ISIL and associated armed groups also
continued to target persons and groups suspected of being allied with the
Government of Iraq or opposed to their ideology, in particular members of the Iraqi
security forces and police. Examples include the abduction of 26 Sunni tribal
leaders in Mosul and 59 other members of the Sunni community from al-Alam
subdistrict in Salah al-Din on the basis that they opposed ISIL. On 14 February,
ISIL published a video depicting captured Peshmerga and Iraqi police locked up in
cages. They were wearing orange jumpsuits, and some were being parade d through
the streets of Hawija. The fate of the men remains unknown.
49. Respect for freedom of expression remains of concern in Iraq, as journalists
and media professionals continue to be subjected to threats, intimidation and more
serous violence in carrying out their work. UNAMI received reports that ISIL
continued to target journalists, executing one on 4 March. On 9 April an
international journalist working for Reuters was forced to leave Iraq after he was
subjected to a campaign involving death threats on the media after he filed reports
of violations allegedly carried out by armed militia during the campaign to liberate
Tikrit from ISIL.
50. During the reporting period, ISIL continued to destroy sites of religious and
cultural significance, causing immeasurable damage to Iraq’s historical and cultural
legacy. On 26 February, ISIL posted a video online featuring its destruction of
artefacts in Mosul’s archaeological museum, of statues located at Nineveh’s ancient
museum and of statues located at Nineveh’s ancient Nergal Gate site. These
destructive acts were followed by ISIL attacks on the Nimrud and Hatra
archaeological sites. ISIL also desecrated and destroyed other religious and historic

10/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

sites of significance in Mosul, including the thousand -year old mosque of Imam
Muhsin, the ancient al-Khidr Sunni mosque, the Sheikh Mahmoud Sunni shrine and
Christian religious places. On 22 March, the destruction of an ancient minaret,
which is of great significance to the Yezidi community in Sinjar, was reported.
Between 21 and 22 February, ISIL burnt thousands of historical books and
manuscripts looted from bookshops and the Mosul public library, which it later
demolished.
51. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) continued its close monitoring of the situation and its advocacy work
for heritage protection in Iraq. I myself and UNESCO issued several statements to
condemn the destruction of cultural heritage, call for mobilization to stop cultural
cleansing and express readiness to assist the Iraqi authorities whenever possible. On
28 March, the Director-General of UNESCO launched the “#unite4heritage” global
campaign in Baghdad to build support for the protection of cultural heritage in Iraq.
52. In addition to ISIL violations of human rights, UNAMI continued to receive
reports that anti-ISIL armed groups and militias were perpetrating extrajudicial
killings of captured ISIL fighters and associated armed groups, abducting civilians,
looting and other crimes. Members of the Sunni community were particularly
affected. On 21 February, popular mobilization forces beheaded three ISIL members
taken captive, tied their bodies to vehicles and dragged them through the streets of
Samarra in Salah al-Din.
53. On 28 March, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein, delivered a report to the Human Rights Council documenting
crimes committed by ISIL and by other armed groups.
54. The ongoing armed conflict and acts of terrorism continued to detrimentally
affect children in Iraq. The Task Force on Children and Armed Conflict, co -chaired
by UNAMI and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), documented
26 incidents negatively affecting children during the reporting period. Acts of
terrorism and armed conflict, particularly crossfiring, indiscriminate shelling and
improvised explosive devices, claimed at least 23 child casualties (7 killed and
16 injured), although many cases of child casualties may go unreported. In addition,
there was a marked increase in the number of reports received by UNAMI of child
recruitment by ISIL in all areas under its control, as well as by pro -Government
militias in all conflict-affected areas, including in Baghdad and Basra.
55. On 5 March, the United Nations Gender Task Force, led by the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women),
launched its “Lets Save Our Women and Girls” campaign. The project, which was
established in collaboration with the State Ministry for Women Affairs and the
Kurdistan High Council of Women, marked the celebration of International
Women’s Day 2015 in Iraq. The campaign calls for action to support internally
displaced women and girls, alleviate their suffering and protect their dignity.
56. During the reporting period, UNDP continued to enhance the capacity of
national and regional government institutions to ensure their meaningful and
effective participation in monitoring the human rights situation in Iraq. A total of
91 commissioners and core staff (62 male and 29 female) received training on the
documentation of human rights violations, report writing, strategic planning and
investigations.

15-06518

11/17

S/2015/305

D.

Camp New Iraq and Camp Hurriya
57. UNAMI continues to monitor the human rights and humanitarian situation of
the residents of Camp Hurriya and to facilitate solutions to camp management
issues between the Government of Iraq and representatives of camp residents.
58. On 11 February, my Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and
my Special Envoy on the relocation of Camp Hurriya residents, Jane Holl Lute,
attended a high-level meeting organized in Geneva by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on the relocation of residents
of Camp Hurriya. My Special Envoy and UNHCR continue to work together to seek
durable solutions for the residents through consular and humanitarian channels. As
of 14 April, 637 persons had been relocated outside Iraq; 30 had left for Albania
through an independent channel; 124 had been relocated through consular
readmission to nine countries (Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom); 450 had been relocated through
humanitarian admission to four countries (Albania, Italy, Switzerland and the
United States); and 33 had been resettled in five countries (Denmark, Finland,
Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom). In addition to these cases, three persons
from the temporary transit location had been accepted by two countries and are
awaiting departure from Iraq and 1,121 requests remain pending with 18 countries
through the humanitarian, relocation and consular streams. Aside from the above
successful relocations, 2,475 persons remain in Iraq, of which 2,469 reside in Camp
Hurriya and 6 in accommodations in a Baghdad hotel.

E.

Humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and development
59. More than five million people are estimated to require humanitarian assistance
in Iraq, including 2.6 million internally displaced persons living in 2,900 locations.
Nearly half of all displaced are children. Close to 30 per cent of displaced
households are in critical situations, housed in abandoned or unfinished buildings,
makeshift structures, schools and mosques; only 9 per cent are living in camps.
Hundreds of thousands of Iraqi families have opened their homes to the displaced.
As the crisis continues into a second year, conditions for these families are rapidly
worsening. Food insecurity has doubled during the reporting period, impacting an
estimated 4.4 million Iraqis. In the Kurdistan region, the overall poverty rate has
doubled. The Syrian refugee population in Iraq has continued to increase, with 150
to 200 persons arriving in Iraq per day. UNHCR reports that 247,861 refugees are
currently seeking safety in Iraq, of which 93,000 live within the 10 camps across the
Kurdistan Region.
60. Humanitarian access continues to be severely constrained in large parts of
Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewa and Salah al Din governorates. Millions of Iraqis
continue to live in areas under the control of ISIL and other armed groups. Fighting
during the reporting period in Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk and Salah al -Din governorates
has displaced thousands of new families. In Haditha and Al-Baghdadi, under siege
since an ISIL attack in February 2015, tens of thousands of households have been at
extreme risk. The United Nations has used innovative solutions to continue its work
in hard-to-reach areas. In February, the World Food Programme (WFP) launched a
remote monitoring project through telephone surveys. Ot her agencies have relied on
local partners to reach difficult areas and provide life -saving assistance.

12/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

61. Under the leadership of my Deputy Special Representative for Development
and Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations and its partners have continue d to
provide life-saving assistance under the declared level 3 emergency, reaching two
million internally displaced persons each month. Front-line responses have been
expanded and strengthened. UNICEF, WFP and the International Organization for
Migration (IOM) have delivered thousands of life-saving kits through the rapid
response mechanism, reaching people within 48 hours of their displacement. WFP
has provided hundreds of thousands of emergency rations with in the first days of
displacement and millions of family rations in the first weeks. UNHCR and IOM
have provided tens of thousands of emergency kits to highly vulnerable households,
including in areas under siege.
62. Government coordination of the operation has continued. The joint
Government-United Nations Coordination and Monitoring Centre, opened in
January in Baghdad with the support of UNDP, including United Nations staff, has
provided situational reports on the crisis and coordinated first -line responses. The
Joint Crisis Centre in Erbil has coordinated interventions in the Kurdistan Region. A
comprehensive registration effort by the Government has improved the tracking and
identification of displaced households.
63. During the reporting period, major efforts have been made through the cluster
system to support the most vulnerable. Under the food security cluster, WFP has
provided food assistance to nearly 1.8 million displaced and conflict -affected people
across Iraq. WFP food vouchers have benefitted 423,000 people in the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq, contributing $10 million per month to the local economy.
Emergency assistance provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) has boosted support for crop production and expanded
livestock and veterinary services. Hard-hit famers have produced wheat to feed
120,000 people and 2,000 metric tons of animal feed, grown 52,000 metric tons of
vegetables and bred 50,000 hens. Under the education cluster, UNICEF and
UNESCO have completed prefabricated schools in camps and host communi ties in
Kirkuk, Baghdad, Najaf, Erbil, Dohuk and Basra. UNICEF has rehabilitated
154 schools in Wassit, Anbar, Diyala and Missan governorates, which had
previously served as shelters for internally displaced persons, and UNESCO has
renovated 16 secondary schools in Dohuk.
64. Under the shelter cluster, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
has provided 60 prefabricated shelter units in Basra and is building an additional
1,700 in Baghdad, Karbala and Dohuk. UNHCR has continued to accommodate tens
of thousands of internally displaced persons in eight camps and is constructing three
new camps and rehabilitating 650 collective centres and 660 family shelters to help
ensure that households at high risk are able to gain access to safe living conditions.
The United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has distributed 125,000
solar-powered lighting and mobile telephone charging kits and installed 280 solar
streetlights to improve the safety and security of internally displaced persons in
19 camps. With one of the largest humanitarian networks in Iraq, IOM has provided
tens of thousands of non-food and shelter kits as well as multi-season tents.
65. Under the health cluster, the World Health Organization (WHO) has procured
medicines, supplies and medical devices to support the delivery of health-care
services to internally displaced persons. In February, WHO, UNICEF and the
Ministry of Health implemented a nationwide polio immunization campaign, and on

15-06518

13/17

S/2015/305

27 April Iraq marked its first polio-free year, a milestone for the country and the
international community. Over 5.3 million (94%) of 5.6 million targeted children,
aged between 9 months to 5 years, were vaccinated against polio, while 3.9 million
of 4.1 million children (96%) were vaccinated against me asles.
66. In support of the emergency social protection floor, UNOPS continued to
administer the “humanitarian relief quick impact grant” programme on behalf of
UNHCR, distributing small grants to fund urgent humanitarian assistance efforts
across central and southern Iraq. UNICEF disbursed emergency cash assistance to
tens of thousands of displaced families in camps and UNHCR distributed cash
assistance to vulnerable families which had been internally displaced. The FAO
cash-for-work programmes have created temporary jobs for internally displaced
persons, enabling them to purchase life-saving necessities.
67. Under the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All (WASH) cluster, UNICEF and
its partners have built sanitation facilities for internally displaced per sons in 40
locations and provided water purification materials for 1.2 million people in central
and northern Iraq. Under the livelihoods and social cohesion cluster, UNDP has
partnered with Iraqi authorities and non-governmental organizations to provide job
skills training and cash grants to promote entrepreneurship and job creation for Iraqi
displaced persons, Syrian refugees and host communities. In partnership with
UNHCR, UNDP has supported the multi-sector needs assessments for refugees with
specific resilience indicators and a host community assessment to measure service
delivery and the perceptions of host communities about refugees.
68. Since the time of my second report, internally displaced persons have started
to return in small numbers to their areas of origin after the withdrawal of armed
groups; many of these families have received non-food items from UNHCR.
Without exception, all newly liberated areas require significant rehabilitation; many
will require the almost total reconstruction of essential public and private
infrastructure and basic services.
69. During the reporting period, funding has emerged as one of the major
constraints facing the humanitarian operation, notably the extraordinary
contribution of $500 million from Saudi Arabia in support of the humanitarian
operation that concluded at the end of March. With less than 40 per cent of the
humanitarian strategic response plan funded, on 18 February the United Nations in
Iraq made a funding appeal for $150 million to support fast -track priorities.
Although donors have come forward to cover a significant portion of this appeal,
60 per cent of emergency activities, including health and food security life -saving
programmes, are currently at risk of being curtailed or shut down due to lack of
funds. My Deputy Special Representative for Development and Humanitarian
Affairs is overseeing the elaboration of a new, streamlined and highly prioritized
humanitarian response plan, which will be launched in Brussels at the end of May.
Major efforts are also under way to secure funding for stabilization and
reconstruction in newly liberated areas. Dr. Abdul Basit Turki has been appointed by
the office of the Prime Minister as the Chair of the Fund for Areas Affected by
Terrorist Operations, with discussions continuing on the status of a funding
mechanism to be managed by the United Nations.

14/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

F.

Security and operational issues
70. The conclusion and entry into force of a status of mission agreement between
the United Nations and the Government of Iraq is still pending, and the delay in its
finalization is significantly hampering the effectiveness of United Nations
operations. The cumbersome entry and exit procedures for United Nations staff
affect all personnel, and in particular the normal rotation and deployment of United
Nations guard units.
71. Despite the volatile security environment in Iraq, United Nations operations in
the country are ongoing. On 31 January, United Nations staff in Kirkuk were
temporarily relocated to Erbil following ISIL rocket attacks against the al-Hurriyah
airbase, with two rounds of ammunition landing within 100 metres of the United
Nations compound in Kirkuk. On 4 February, after a security assessment, relocated
United Nations staff returned to Kirkuk. The Baghdad office and the field offices
continue to monitor security closely and have taken requisite mitigation measures
accordingly.
72. Procurement and logistical operations also continued under challenging
conditions. The lengthy procedures required to obtain access author izations and
escorts for staff, including the receipt of equipment and supplies at locations
throughout Iraq, have been major constraints to the efficiency of such operations.
73. In Baghdad, the building of three-storey and five-storey accommodation
structures meant to house United Nations staff has been delayed due to the ongoing
security situation. As an alternative, UNAMI is in the process of building two two storey buildings and four single-storey buildings. These new buildings, which are
estimated to be completed by February 2016, will add 84 units to the existing
accommodation in the D-2 compound (formerly housing the United States Agency
for International Development). In addition to the new construction, most existing
units are being divided to accommodate an additional staff member. New buildings
and modified units will bring the total capacity of the D -2 compound to 271 living
spaces.

IV. Observations
74. While the security and humanitarian situation in Iraq remains complex, fluid
and challenging, Iraqis and their regional and international partners have together
made progress in the fight against ISIL in Iraq. The recent liberation of towns in the
Salah al-Din governorate and elsewhere are encouraging signs of hope.
75. I am convinced that the Government of Iraq, under the leadership of Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi, is committed to the promotion of national reconciliation
and adoption of laws that help consolidate national unity at a time of war against
ISIL. The United Nations is fully engaged and I reiterate the readiness of the
Organization to continue its support for all efforts towards national reconciliation,
social cohesion and legislative reform. In this regard, I urge all Iraqi stakeholders to
cooperate with each other and with the Government in this endeavour, including on
consensus on a number of pending essential laws and in particular on a national
guard law.

15-06518

15/17

S/2015/305

76. The partnership of the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government is vital to maintaining national unity at this time of crisis. I welcome
the commitment from both Bagdad and Erbil to implement the oil and revenue sharing agreement of 2 December 2014 and urge further progress in its full
implementation. I encourage both sides to seize the momentum and take fur ther
steps towards a comprehensive, fair and constitutional solution for all pending
issues. I also call upon both sides to enable internally displaced persons to return to
their homes. The eventual return to normality in areas liberated from ISIL will, in
large part, depend on close coordination and cooperation between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government on all related aspects.
77. It is with appreciation that I have followed the Government’s success in
improving its relations with its neighbours and other countries in the region,
notwithstanding their own differences. The challenges that face Iraq and the region
are of a vast and unprecedented nature. They require regional cooperation and
support, including political, security and financial support. I call on all members of
the international community to continue and to increase support to Iraq and to
jointly work towards eradication of the challenges that confront it.
78. As a consequence of the continued activities of ISIL in Iraq , one of the largest
humanitarian crises in the world continues to unfold before our eyes. I commend the
federal Government and Kurdistan Regional Government for their relief efforts as
the needs of millions of displaced persons continue to increase. Addit ional resources
are urgently needed to maintain lifesaving interventions for the more than five
million Iraqi people. I call on all partners of Iraq to generously support the new
Humanitarian Response Plan to help alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi peopl e.
79. The Government must do all it can to ensure the safety of civilians in these
areas and enable the displaced to return voluntarily to a stable and safe environment
where their lives and property are protected by law. Establishing law and order in
these areas should include the handover of security to civilian police as soon as
practicable and the ensuring to civilians of access to humanitarian assistance.
80. I am appalled by the continuing brutality of ISIL and its total disregard for
fundamental human rights. I am also dismayed by the ongoing targeting of minority
communities and those who oppose, or are suspected by ISIL of opposing, its
ideology. The terrible crimes of ISIL, which include crimes that may amount to war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, have been documented in the report
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to the Human Rights
Council. I remind all parties of the need for solidarity as we, together, fight
extremist violent ideologies in the region. I also remind all parties engaged in the
fight against ISIL that any military operations must be conducted with the utmost
care in order to avoid civilian casualties and with full respect for fundamental
human rights and humanitarian law. I welcome Prime Minister al-Abadi’s calls to all
pro-Government forces fighting ISIL to ensure the protection of civilians and their
property. I expect that crimes will be duly investigated so that their perpetrators can
be held accountable and justice established.
81. The United Nations remains committed to supporting the people and
Government of Iraq in meeting these enormous challenges and moving the country
in a positive direction. Given the complex changes on the ground, I have requested
that a United Nations strategic assessment for Iraq be carried out in order to identify
how best the United Nations system could extend such assistance in the coming

16/17

15-06518

S/2015/305

period. The assessment process is ongoing, and I intend to report on its outcome
during my next report on UNAMI to the Security Council.
82. I also thank my former Special Representative, Nickolay Mladenov, who
completed his tenure on 22 March, for his outstanding efforts in support of the
Government and people of Iraq through promoting agreement among all
interlocutors on issues of common interest to Iraqi society. I welcome my new
Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, who has assumed his duties in Iraq. Finally, I
thank all United Nations staff in Iraq for their unfailing and courageous efforts to
support Iraq in the present challenging circumstances.

15-06518

17/17
