S/2020/754

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2020
Original: English

Action taken by Member States and United Nations entities
to address the issue of linkages between terrorism and
organized crime
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
On 19 July 2019, the Security Council adopted resolution 2482 (2019), in which
it expressed concern that terrorists could benefit from organized crime, whether
domestic or transnational, as a source of financing or logistical support through,
among other activities, trafficking in arms, persons, drugs, artefacts, cultural property,
the illicit trade in natural resources and wildlife and the abuse of legitimate
commercial enterprise, non-profit organizations, donations, crowdfunding and
proceeds of criminal activity, including but not limited to kidnapping for ransom,
extortion and bank robbery, as well as transnational organized crime at s ea.
2.
It requested the Secretary-General to submit a joint report by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, with
input from relevant entities of the United Nations system, including the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, on action taken by Member States and United Nations entities to
address the issue of linkages between terrorism and organized crime, whether
transnational or domestic.
3.
The present report, submitted in response to the above-mentioned request, is
informed by contributions from 50 Member States and 15 United Nations entities.
Detailed herein are measures implemented or planned by States, at the policy,
legislative and operational levels, to address the linkages between terrorism and
organized crime and action taken by United Nations entities, including those based in
the field, to support States in those efforts. Areas in which States have actively
addressed the resolution and those in which further efforts would be beneficial are
highlighted.
4.
Member States reported various manifestations of the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime, most notably regarding the financing of terrorism.
Some reported opportunistic alliances in which terrorists and organized crime groups
cooperated on the basis of shared hostile perspectives towards national authorities,
limited socioeconomic opportunities, shared operational territory or ethnic
background or for profit. Others reported linkages based on personal relationships
potentially developed in prisons.

20-09860 (E)

030820

*2009860*

S/2020/754

5.
Some Member States described linkages between terrorism and organized crime
involving the smuggling of migrants, the illicit trade in arms, light weapons and other
military equipment, fraudulent documents, kidnapping for ransom, car theft, illicit
mineral extraction and trafficking in drugs, cultural property or other licit or illicit
goods. Other reported manifestations include the involvement of organized criminal
groups in transporting terrorists across borders and of returning foreign terrorist
fighters in organized crime activities.
6.
Some Member States, however, observed that criminal organizations were
increasingly uninterested in cooperating with terrorist groups, in some cases to avoid
possible additional scrutiny from the national authorities. Others noted that, owing to
the limited terrorist activity in their countries or the lack of investigative capacity, the
existence of linkages between terrorism and organized crime could not be confirmed.

II. Action by Member States
A.

Legislative responses
7.
Responding to the need to establish legislative frameworks that address the links
between terrorism and organized crime, many Member States emphasized their
ratification of international and regional counter-terrorism legal instruments,
including the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. States also reported on the ratification of international legal instruments
against organized crime, including the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols thereto, the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of
1988 and regional treaties such as the Convention on Cybercrime and the Council of
Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.
8.
In implementing those instruments, many Member States adopted comprehensive
legal frameworks criminalizing a range of acts of terrorism, including preparatory or
support acts and financing of terrorism, so as to allow for the prosecution of those
who provide support for terrorism, including organized criminal groups. States also
reported criminalizing acts related to foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance with the
provisions of Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017).
9.
Member States have implemented or enhanced national legislation to
criminalize terrorism financing and money-laundering, also in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2462 (2019). 1 Some reported that the financing of
terrorism had been criminalized as a stand-alone offence, while others said that they
had increased the relevant penalties. States have strengthened mechanisms for the
prevention, detection, control, investigation and prosecution of those crimes,
including measures to regulate electronic financial transactions, to deal with proceeds
of crime and asset freezing and for listing individuals and entities subjected to
targeted financial sanctions as required in relevant United Nations instruments and
resolutions and Financial Action Task Force recommendations.
10. Some legislative updates have strengthened the role of specific agencies and
supported inter-agency coordination on measures related to terrorism financing and
money-laundering. Member States made particular reference to the importance of the
roles and efforts of financial intelligence units and customs authorities.

__________________
1

2/18

See the joint report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team on actions taken by Member States to disrupt terrorist
financing, prepared pursuant to paragraph 37 of resolution 2462 (2019) (S/2020/493, annex).
20-09860

S/2020/754

11. Member States highlighted criminal legislative provisions specifically relevant
to addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, including the
enhancement of investigative techniques using new technologies, witness protection
measures and cybercrime provisions. Several have also updated legislation promoting
cooperation and information-sharing at the national level.
12. Some Member States noted the intersection between their legislation on
terrorism and on organized crime. In one State, organized crime offences can be
prosecuted in parallel with terrorism offences. In another, meeting the characteristics
of a terrorist group does not preclude the application of the provisions related to
organized crime. Other States reported legal provisions to treat membership of a
transnational criminal group as an aggravating circumstance for sentencing. However,
some federal States reported challenges in prosecuting cases involving organized
crime and terrorism when terrorism was a federal offence and organized crime was
handled by state-level courts.
13. A number of Member States highlighted the importance of addressing the links
between trafficking in drugs and terrorism financing, with one noting that its national
counter-narcotics legislation criminalized related crimes to address links between
financing, organization and distribution channels for trafficking in drugs and
terrorism financing.
14. In terms of efforts to address the linkages between terrorism and organized
crime, several Member States reported amendments to bring legislation on trafficking
in persons and smuggling of migrants into line with the Protocols to the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. One referenced higher
penalties for sexual exploitation, trafficking in organs and trafficking in minors.
Others focused on protection and services for victims of trafficking, preventing
victims from being forcibly returned to their home countries and the forfeiture of the
proceeds of those crimes to a special fund to combat the issue and provide
rehabilitation for victims.
15. Some Member States indicated that their national legislative frameworks
relating to trafficking in and sales of arms and for regulating dual-use goods provided
for higher criminal penalties when firearms, ammunition, explosives or equipment
are unlawfully purchased, stored, carried, manufactured, transported, transferred, sold
or used for terrorist purposes.
16. Member States reported on legislation addressing links between trafficking in
cultural property or artefacts and terrorism, which imposed, under penalty of criminal
sanction, specific duties of diligence on art dealers and auction houses that traded in
cultural property, such as submitting suspicious transaction reports, and customs
legislation requiring that cultural property be declared at borders. Other legislation
prohibits the import, export, transit, sale, distribution and acquisition of cultural
property that was exported illegally or stolen or looted from Iraq or the Syrian Arab
Republic, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2199 (2015).
17. Legislative measures to prevent and combat corruption were mentioned by
several Member States as an important element in addressing terrorism and organized
crime. Those laws notably include requirements for State officials to report on
irregularities discovered in the course of their work and whistle-blower protection.
18. Many Member States underlined the importance of legal frameworks that
supported international cooperation on criminal matters, including extradition and
mutual legal assistance, in addressing the linkages between terrorism and organized
crime. States have negotiated bilateral extradition and mutual legal assistance treaties
and enacted legislation to provide for jurisdiction over acts committed abroad, if
certain conditions are met.
20-09860

3/18

S/2020/754

B.

Strategic and policy responses
19. Member States have developed national strategic frameworks and action plans
on countering terrorism and security to facilitate cooperation and the exchange of
information between agencies, implement good practice and strengthen operational
capacity to address terrorism, violent extremism conducive to terrorism and linkages
with organized crime. Many have produced corresponding multisectoral intervention
plans that address terrorism and terrorism financing issues, focusing on detection,
prevention, protection, pursuit and response. Under such plans, national counterterrorism units are often established or strengthened to lead the efforts.
20. Other States highlighted the development and implementation of national
strategies and intervention plans for preventing and countering violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. The strategies engage Governments, civil society and
religious communities in a whole-of-society approach that incorporates dialogue and
conflict prevention, good governance, respect for human rights, youth participation,
health policy, gender equality, strategic communications on the Internet and education
initiatives, including the development of religious tolerance curricula.
21. Many Member States consider preventing money-laundering and terrorism
financing to be key elements in their national counter-terrorism frameworks. They
have conducted multisectoral or targeted terrorism financing risk assessments to
identify, evaluate and mitigate current threats with regard to money-laundering,
terrorism financing and financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
States draw on the assistance of international or regional organizations, utilizing
World Bank or other risk assessment methodologies and carrying out assessmen ts in
compliance with Financial Action Task Force recommendation 1. The assessments
contribute to an evidence-based approach to regulating sectors with a significant risk
for terrorism financing.
22. Member States have created national financial action plans and strategies
against money-laundering and terrorism financing on the basis of risk assessments,
but also according priority to the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) and subsequent resolutions and related sanctions
measures, and in some cases specifically addressing the potential linkages between
terrorism and organized crime. In many States, working groups and committees have
been established to draft and implement the action plans, coordinate national efforts
and liaise with other States and international partners to respond to Financial Action
Task Force standards and targeted financial sanctions and obligations pursuant to
relevant Council resolutions.
23. Member States noted the importance of targeting the proceeds of crime and
reported on the development of national strategies or strategic principles for tracing,
freezing, seizing, confiscating and recovering instrumentalities and proceeds of crime
and countering the financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
24. Member States highlighted the importance of combating organized crime
through the development of multisectoral policies and strategies. Some have updated
strategies to consider new trends in terrorism and organized crime, including changes
in criminal use of technology, and to provide a reference framework for national
officials to prevent and combat criminal phenomena with a focus on the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime. One State reported the development of a new
policy road map to address the linkages and noted the subsequent development of
national criminal policy to enhance technological capacity during c riminal
investigations and adjudication.
25. Member States referenced policy efforts to comprehensively address forms of
trafficking, including in drugs, firearms and cultural property, which could have links

4/18

20-09860

S/2020/754

to terrorism. Those efforts included strategies to dismantle criminal organizations
trafficking in drugs and confiscate drugs and chemical precursors, the development
of standard operating procedures for counter-narcotics forces to monitor and counter
terrorism financing through trafficking in drugs, standards to regulate firearms,
including their deactivation and the implementation of amnesty programmes, and
national action plans on trafficking in persons to ensure coordination between
national public institutions, non-governmental organizations and source countries.
26. Member States described efforts to combat environmental crime by dismantling
transnational criminal organizations, with one, in response to Security Council
resolution 2482 (2019), having recently prepared a policy paper on environmental
crime as a funding source for terrorism.
27. The negative impact of corruption on government efforts to tackle terrorism and
organized crime was noted by Member States, which reported the preparati on of
multi-year national and regional strategies against corruption with measures for
prevention, detection and repression and to support international cooperation.
28. Several Member States acknowledged policy-level engagement and close
cooperation with a range of United Nations agencies, including the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, the Office of Counter-Terrorism,
UNODC and the International Organization for Migration, as well as regional
organizations and other technical assistance partners, such as the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
to address the linkages between terrorism and organized crime and respond to
resolution 2482 (2019), the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
other relevant United Nations resolutions on terrorism and organized crime. That
work includes participation in and the organization of conferences and other policy
forums on thematic issues, technical assistance and capacity-building programmes on
terrorism and organized crime.
29. Several Member States are conducting or have conducted research in
cooperation with national criminal justice agencies, focused on the linka ges between
terrorism and organized crime or issues that may be related, such as trafficking in
drugs and the financing of foreign terrorist fighters. Other States supported the
research efforts of international organizations such as INTERPOL and UNODC.

C.

Collection and sharing of intelligence
30. Member States have taken measures to enhance the collection and sharing of
intelligence, including through the establishment or expansion of national multi agency intelligence or specialized coordination centres on specific issues, such as
counter-terrorism and trafficking in drugs. The coordination platforms promote
participation and information exchange on terrorism and organized crime and allow
for the joint monitoring and assessment of threats and responses, such as the
development of focused intelligence analysis on trafficking in persons and potential
linkages with terrorism.
31. In some Member States, specialized operations centres, for example on maritime
operations, support an integrated, inter-agency approach to detecting and responding
to a broad range of illicit activities. Others reported intelligence collection and
analysis responses, including the regular analysis of potential terrorism targets, the
planning of mitigating measures and the collection of open-source intelligence
through social media. Some States have developed watch lists or databases of specific
risk groups, such as foreign terrorist fighters and drug traffickers, to analyse trends,
assess risks and develop cases for investigation.

20-09860

5/18

S/2020/754

32. Member States highlighted the usefulness of intelligence-led policing to address
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime, including the establishment of
intelligence analysis centres involving police forces, intelligence agencies, prisons
and military forces, which collect and analyse information from national and
international databases, as well as intelligence gathered from special investigative
techniques and informants, among other sources. While some States reported legal
restrictions on sharing intelligence between the intelligence community and law
enforcement authorities, in other jurisdictions the legal system supported such
sharing, with possibilities to adduce intelligence-derived information in court.
33. In many States, financial intelligence units collect and analyse financi al
intelligence and disseminate it to law enforcement agencies to identify patterns and
linkages between terrorism and organized crime. Coordination groups can facilitate
financial intelligence exchange and provide multidisciplinary intelligence to police
and tax units dealing with serious crimes, including terrorism financing.
34. Member States have enhanced information exchange with financial institutions,
including through public-private partnerships that help to identify sectoral risks and
mitigation strategies and share real-time leads to help financial institutions to detect
terrorism financing. Some States, however, noted legal obstacles to public -private
information exchange.

D.

Border security measures and interdiction
35. Effective border security and screening were identified by many Member States
as important responses to addressing linkages between terrorism and organized crime,
the perpetrators of which exploit porous borders for trafficking, terrorist travel and
terrorism financing.
36. Member States have developed and implemented national border management
strategies, strengthening land, maritime and air border controls on both goods and
individuals, according priority to the identification of various forms of trafficking and
prohibiting the entry of persons associated with terrorist groups or criminal
organizations.
37. Some Member States have tightened security at maritime borders and ports by
improving control systems for people, cargo and baggage in passenger port terminals
and cargo facilities, undertaking early checks of documents for ships arriving in
national ports, expanding new technologies for maritime traffic control systems,
improving risk analysis through coordination with intelligence and criminal justice
agencies and expanding monitoring along the entire territorial maritime coastline.
38. Reported aviation security measures include the implementation of new aviation
security and risk identification systems and improved cooperation with other
countries. Specifically, the implementation of an advance passenger information and
passenger name record data system for the civil aviation sector, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 2396 (2017), was emphasized by States as a key border
security measure. Those systems monitor the transit of passengers in order to better
detect and prevent the travel of terrorists and other criminals involved in serious
crimes, with the support of specialized units.
39. Member States reported building the capacity of national customs agencies
through the establishment of specialized units on specific forms of organized crime
and closer cooperation between customs and law enforcement agencies. Those efforts
identify possible connections between terrorism and organized crime groups and
produce analysis on smuggling trends and networks that can feed into border control
activities, such as tightened controls on the import and export of cultural property.

6/18

20-09860

S/2020/754

E.

Investigation and prosecution
40. Many Member States reported on structural arrangements that increased their
capacity to investigate and prosecute crimes involving linkages between terrorism
and organized crime, including the establishment of investigative and prosecution
units focused on specialized crimes, such as countering terrorism, narcotics or
trafficking in persons, and placing financial investigation teams within those units.
The units can be centralized at the national level or placed at the provincial level.
Their work is often guided by protocols emanating from national strategies and led
by a national coordinator or coordinating body facilitating cooperation between
relevant authorities, non-governmental organizations and international bodies.
41. Many Member States encourage close inter-agency cooperation between financial
intelligence, military, law enforcement, prosecution, aviation, customs, coast guard
policy officials and the private sector, at both the working and management levels.
42. In some jurisdictions, operational coordination takes place through task forces
on specialized issues or joint investigative teams. The task forces may be established
formally through national regulations or policies or operate informally. They allow
information to be exchanged on specific cases and the development of criminal analysis
and joint investigation and prosecution strategies. Other Member States utilize different
approaches to promoting cooperation: one tasks senior prosecution officials with
monitoring ongoing cases, ensuring common strategies and promoting cooperation,
linking different units if necessary; another tasks its counter-terrorism investigative
unit with ensuring cooperation between specialized units dealing with organized crime;
and a third expanded the mandate of its organized crime unit to incorporate terrorism
and enlarged the role of its district prosecutors to include organized crime and
terrorism. Nevertheless, some States noted challenges in sharing information between
prosecutorial and non-prosecutorial services owing to strict legal frameworks.
43. Member States noted the importance of financial investigations, often led by
specialized financial investigators, in addressing the linkages between terrorism and
organized crime. Terrorism financing coordination committees or task forces bring
together representatives of various agencies, including prosecution, interior, finance,
foreign affairs, law enforcement and the central bank, to find common solutions and
raise awareness of Financial Action Task Force recommendations, including among
local investigators and prosecutors.
44. Cooperation between national and local authorities was mentioned as a possible
challenge, given the complex and often transnational nature of terrorism and
organized crime cases. To overcome that obstacle, one Member State has designated
one prosecution representative per region to coordinate with national agencies on
terrorism and organized crime matters, while in other States, local criminal justice
officials are assigned to joint task forces.
45. Member States utilized a range of investigative techniques to address the
linkages between terrorism and organized crime, including covert surveillance,
wiretapping, communication interception and electronic surveillance, alongside more
standard methods. Several States noted that those methods required prior judicial
authorization and adherence to proper legal procedures and human rights standards to
ensure that the information obtained was admissible in court.
46. Several Member States updated guidelines on financial investigations to task
terrorism and organized crime investigators and prosecutors with examining the
financial aspects of all cases, conducting financial investigations of all proceeds generating crimes, detecting, freezing and confiscating proceeds of crime and
prosecuting offenders.
47. Member States use criminal databases to establish typologies and risk factors in
relation to terrorism and serious crimes to guide investigations, with one noting tha t

20-09860

7/18

S/2020/754

its national terrorism case database could be accessed by national and local
prosecutors alike.
48. Several Member States utilize plea bargaining and build on shared information
to expand investigations, while others prosecute terrorism cases under non -terrorist
statutes to protect sensitive intelligence sources and methods. Some use a broad range
of legal approaches to disrupt the financing of terrorism and organized crime, noting
that, outside of the usual criminal statutes on terrorism financing, other criminal
charges related to financial activities, false statements and fraud or administrative
measures such as fines or asset forfeiture can be utilized.
49. Some Member States highlighted the importance of combating corruption
through measures such as codes of conduct, segregation of duties and adequate
control systems, promotion of transparency and integrity, training and awareness raising and consistent monitoring and prosecution of corruption offences.
50. To build national and regional capacity to address those threats, many Member
States conduct training for criminal justice officials and benefit from training led by
bilateral, regional and international technical assistance providers. Training activities
are often determined through regular training needs assessments and are focused on
intelligence and information analysis, terrorism financing and money-laundering,
including through virtual assets, preventing and combating economic and financial
crimes, countering trafficking in drugs and in persons, combating corruption, support
for victims and terrorism profiling. Some States have established national criminal
justice training centres focused on specialized issues, while others have developed
guides, manuals and booklets on terrorism and organized crime topics to build
knowledge and share good practice with national and local officials.

F.

International cooperation
51. Many Member States mentioned extensive bilateral and regional intelligence
and information-sharing, including through agreements on the exchange and mutual
protection of classified information. Some established units within the national
police, intelligence or security agencies to continuously monitor the intelligence and
criminal data exchanged through international channels, so as to guide intelligence
analysis, including by tracking illicit goods and persons of interest, and ongoing
criminal investigations.
52. The use of INTERPOL databases and tools, including green or red notices, was
highlighted by Member States as helping to facilitate organized crime and terrorism
investigations. States also referred to the role of regional organizations, databases and
platforms in supporting international intelligence, law enforcement and financial
cooperation through information exchange, the development of specific and joint
actions based on the identified threats in the region and training. 2

__________________
2

8/18

This includes cooperation through the Police Community of the Americas; the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations; the Caribbean Customs Organization; the European Union Agency for
Law Enforcement Training; the Office for Coordination of the Fight against Organized Crime and
Other Dangerous Forms of Crime in the Territory of the States Members of the Commonwealth
of Independent States; the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of Independent States;
the Council of Europe, including through its 24/7 contact points and the monitoring body, the
Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money-Laundering Measures and the Financing
of Terrorism; the Economic Community of West African States; the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units; the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation; the European
Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation; the Financial Intelligence C onsultative Group;
the Financial Action Task Force; the Financial Action Task Force of Latin America; the
international counter-ISIL coalition; the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization; the Southern African Development Community; and the South
American Intelligence Network against Organized Crime and Terrorism.
20-09860

S/2020/754

53. With regard to international cooperation on financial intelligence, Member
States highlighted the benefits of exchanges and coordination among financial
analysts from different jurisdictions. Some States cooperate bilaterally to conduct
proactive financial investigations into terrorism financing and money -laundering.
54. Many Member States gave examples of informal cooperation with law
enforcement and judicial personnel from other States to investigate and prosecute
terrorism and organized crime offences, including exchanging law enforcement
liaison officers to facilitate the sharing of intelligence and information.
55. Member States also rely on formal legal coordination through specialized units
dealing with international cooperation, often referred to as a central authority, and
actively cooperate with other jurisdictions on mutual legal assistance and extradition
requests. Mutual legal assistance on a wide variety of crimes, including those that
could directly or indirectly support terrorism, takes place using the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime or bilateral mutual legal
assistance treaties as the legal basis.
56. The importance of international cooperation on border security was stressed by
Member States and includes collaboration with foreign customs and border agencies
guided by national counter-terrorism coordinating bodies, the use of INTERPOL
secure communications systems and close contact with international and regional
organizations, including through data-sharing.

G.

Prison management
57. Several Member States highlighted their efforts to monitor links between
prisoners with connections to organized crime and terrorism, respectively, by
promoting intelligence-sharing between law enforcement and prison officials, for
example through a working group to guide and implement police-prison cooperation
and a central investigative unit responsible for gathering and analysing intelligence.
58. Member States shared a range of efforts to prevent the development of links
between violent extremist prisoners and the general prison population, including
drafting guidelines to limit contact in prison settings, promoting alternatives to
imprisonment for minors and others when appropriate, separating violent extremist
prisoners from prisoners charged with non-terrorism crimes, closely monitoring
prisoners’ interactions, utilizing indicators to assess the risk of radicalization to
terrorism for each prisoner and implementing drug addiction, education,
rehabilitation and other mental health programmes in prison settings.

III. Action by United Nations entities
59. United Nations entities, within their mandates, support Member States in
addressing the linkages that may exist between terrorism and organized crime, in line
with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions and in accordance with international law,
including international human rights law, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law.
60. The coherence and coordination of such efforts are ensured through the CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact, chaired by the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and its
eight inter-agency working groups, notably those on criminal justice, legal responses
and countering the financing of terrorism, chaired by UNODC, border management
and law enforcement relating to counter-terrorism, chaired by the Counter-Terrorism

20-09860

9/18

S/2020/754

Committee Executive Directorate, and emerging threats and critical infrastructure
protection, chaired by INTERPOL.

A.

Legislative, strategic and policy assistance
61. UNODC continued to provide legislative technical assistance and drafting
support to Member States in developing and revising their legislative and regulatory
frameworks to comply with the international legal frameworks on terrorism,
corruption and transnational organized crime, including trafficking in persons,
smuggling of migrants, trafficking in firearms, narcotics and money-laundering, with
a view to addressing linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
62. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute developed,
in partnership with the Global Counterterrorism Forum, the Hague Good Practices on
the Nexus between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism, and a subsequent
policy toolkit, to facilitate the development of strategies to counter linkages between
terrorism and organized crime. Using those tools, the Institute provides States with
advice on legal considerations, research and information-sharing, local engagement
and capacity-building support, promoting a multidisciplinary approach. UNODC, the
Institute, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team have contributed to the development, by the
Forum, of an addendum to the Good Practices focused on criminal justi ce responses.
63. UNODC and the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute organized side events in 2019 on the linkages between terrorism and
organized crime during the twenty-eighth session of the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice and the African Regional High-level Conference on
Counter-Terrorism and the Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism,
organized by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and Kenya. Also in 2019, UNODC
organized a global conference for national practitioners, international organizations
and researchers to develop a strategic approach to policy and criminal justice
responses to trafficking in firearms in the context of organized crime and terrorism.
The Office of Counter-Terrorism, Tajikistan, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe held in 2019 a regional high level conference on international and regional cooperation on countering terrorism
and its financing through trafficking in drugs and organized crime.
64. In 2020, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Office for Disarmament Affairs launched a
project on addressing the terrorism-arms-crime nexus, aimed at developing joint
approaches to preventing and combating trafficking in firearms and light weapons
and terrorists’ access thereto, supporting the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2370 (2017), the guiding principles on foreign terrorist fighters
(S/2015/939, annex II) and the addendum thereto (S/2018/1177, annex) and relevant
global instruments on arms control and organized crime.
65. UNODC continued to support the development of international policy on
transnational organized crime, corruption and narcotic drugs through the facilitation
of the work of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, the Conference of the States Parties to the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and
the development of criminal justice norms. It also continued to promote the
ratification of those legal instruments and the international instruments against
terrorism.
66. UNODC continued to provide strategic input and support to States, in particular
in Central and South-East Asia and Southern and West Africa, in developing and

10/18

20-09860

S/2020/754

adopting national terrorism financing risk assessments, plans of action and strategies
on countering terrorism financing.
67. In response to Security Council resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017), in
which the Council highlighted the links between the abduction and enslavement of
women and children by terrorist groups and trafficking in persons, UNODC worked
in 2020 with the police component of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to integrate a session on trafficking in persons and
smuggling of migrants, including when perpetrated by terrorist groups or armed
groups, into its induction programme. The UNODC Handbook on Gender Dimensions
of Criminal Justice Responses to Terrorism provides guidance to States on a gendersensitive and victim-centred approach to address trafficking in persons by terrorist
groups.
68. To support policymakers and practitioners to prevent the exploitation of and
trafficking in children by terrorist groups, to rehabilitate and reintegrate those
children, to protect them when coming into contact with the justice system and to
hold recruiters accountable, UNODC developed a policy road map and training
package for States through the Handbook on Children Recruited and Exploited by
Terrorist and Violence Extremist Groups: the Role of the Justice System.
69. The United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research developed a capability
maturity model and self-assessment tool designed to assist States in identifying gaps
and challenges in their national regulations and preparedness in relation to improvised
explosive devices, including on risk education and the control of precursors.
70. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs has addressed, within its
mandate, linkages between terrorism and organized crime. The United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, in cooperation with partners, including UNODC, facilitated the
provision of strategic advice to national law enforcement agencies to counter
organized crime and terrorism, promoting good governance, the implementation of
border management strategies and the improved detection of trafficking.
71. In view of concerns over the potential impact of measures addressing the
linkages between terrorism and organized crime on the protection of human rights
and on humanitarian activities and actors, the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
is examining the intersection between human rights, organized crime and counterterrorism during country visits conducted pursuant to Human Rights Council
resolution 40/16.
72. UNODC has developed a range of practical resources and guidance material,
conducted research on regional trends, including in the Sahel and Eastern Africa, and
carried out project evaluations that identified commonalities and best practice in
preventing and countering organized crime and terrorism. Its Education for Justice
initiative has produced a university module on the linkages between organized crime
and terrorism. The UNODC knowledge management portal known as Sharing
Electronic Resources and Laws on Crime (SHERLOC) contains databases of case
law, legislation and national strategies involving linkages between terrorism and
organized crime.

B.

Intelligence collection and sharing assistance
73. The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team has convened regular
regional meetings of heads or other senior members of Member States’ counterterrorism agencies, including in the Middle East and North Africa, East Africa, West

20-09860

11/18

S/2020/754

Africa and South-East Asia, to enhance international intelligence liaison on counterterrorism issues, including those overlapping with organized crime.
74. UNODC continued to build State capacity with regard to intelligence-sharing
mechanisms, the collection and exploitation of electronic data and open-source
intelligence and the use of special investigative techniques and other criminal
intelligence collection and cooperation good practice, in compliance with human
rights, that can identify and address linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
75. The Office of Counter-Terrorism launched a new global programme to support
Member States in establishing what are known as “fusion cells” to strengthen national
inter-agency intelligence capacity and cooperation to detect, prevent, investigate and
respond to terrorism through the collation and analysis of information, including on
other serious crimes, while respecting international human rights obligations and
standards. The United Nations Police Division provided strategic and technical
expertise to the programme.
76. The police component of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali has supported the national analysis and intelligence
fusion centre through capacity-building activities. The police component of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has supported the Congolese police in establishing a dedicated crime
intelligence unit through strategic advice and operational capacity-building support.
77. INTERPOL reported that it had analysed linkages between terrorism and
organized crime through the identification of trafficking and smuggling convergences
and the collection of intelligence on bomb makers and improvised explosive devices.
It indicated that it was also conducting component material sourcing and device
profiling to highlight the role of organized crime in supplying terrorist groups with
component parts of improvised explosive devices.
78. INTERPOL reported supporting State law enforcement organizations to address
the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon and identify possible links with organized
crime by providing analytical support to uncover connections, facilitating, in
cooperation with the global counter-ISIL coalition, the dissemination of foreign
terrorist fighter biometric records collected in conflict zones to global law
enforcement, identifying terrorists within irregular migration routes using
INTERPOL biometric databases and issuing blue notices to warn countries of a
suspected terrorist’s cross-border movement.

C.

Anti-money-laundering and countering financing of terrorism
79. INTERPOL indicated that it had supported national financial intelligence units
to exchange and cross-check data on terrorism financing and money-laundering, with
the information disseminated to States to enhance existing investigations, trigger new
cases and address linkages between terrorism and organized crime.
80. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute supported
States in building improved methodologies for tracing, seizing and confiscating assets
linked to terrorism financing or organized crime and to implement the measures.
81. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has incorporated
elements of Security Council resolution 2482 (2019) into its assessment methodology,
tools and engagement with Member States. Pursuant to resolutions 2331 (2016) and
2388 (2017), it has also routinely enquired about alleged or noted links between
trafficking in persons and terrorism financing for sexual violence or terrorism
purposes.

12/18

20-09860

S/2020/754

82. UNODC, working closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Financial Action Task Force and Financial Action Task Force -style
regional bodies, continued to support States to combat terrorism financing and
money-laundering, implementing policies consistent with Security Council
resolutions and Financial Action Task Force recommendations. Such efforts include
facilitating the identification of trends, vulnerabilities and disruption options,
including on linkages between organized crime and terrorism financing, raising
awareness of potential organized crime involvement in the abuse of non-profit
organizations for terrorism financing and developing financial red flag indicators for
the identification of suspicious transactions related to trafficking. UNODC delivered
training packages for law enforcement officials, prosecutors, intelligence agencies,
the military, bank authorities, financial intelligence units and decision makers on
disrupting opportunistic linkages between organized crime and terrorism financing,
conducting financial intelligence analysis and investigations and drafting Council
sanctions listings. UNODC also continued to promote inter-agency cooperation,
including joint investigative task forces and public-private information-sharing
partnerships.
83. In response to Security Council resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre of the Office of Counter-Terrorism
expanded its programme on countering the financing of terrorism to provide States
with relevant guidance, including through an updated technological platform to
support financial intelligence units. The programme, with UNODC, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, INTERPOL and the Office of
Information and Communications Technology as key implementing partners, includes
priorities that directly address linkages between terrorism and transnational organized
crime, including illegal cross-border transportation of cash and bearer-negotiable
instruments, innovative financial technology, including mobile payment services and
virtual assets, and regulation of money and value transfer systems.

D.

Interdiction and border security assistance
84. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre has assisted States in establishing
dedicated border control units, strengthening inter-agency coordination and
developing regional and national border security and management strategies and
action plans, including policies to counter terrorism and transnational organized
crime, in accordance with international law, including international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law. The programme has helped States to improve databases
on organized crime and terrorism to enhance early detection of possible links. The
programme published a handbook on human rights and screening in border security
and management.
85. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre has developed, jointly with the
Global Counterterrorism Forum, a trainers’ curriculum on the implementation of the
Forum’s good practices in the area of border security and management in the context
of countering terrorism and stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, in which
synergies in countering terrorism and cross-border organized crime are highlighted.
86. The Office of Counter-Terrorism has launched the United Nations Countering
Terrorist Travel Programme to support States in building detection capabilities
through the establishment of passenger information units. The Programme is
implemented jointly with UNODC, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the Office of Information
and Communications Technology and INTERPOL to assist (currently) 36 States in
establishing legislative frameworks, setting up passenger information units,
connecting with travel carriers and deploying the United Nations goTravel software

20-09860

13/18

S/2020/754

for the timely processing of passenger data such as advance passenger informa tion
and passenger name records. The units allow mapping and analysis of the nexus
between suspected terrorists and serious criminals. The Programme is being expanded
to include a maritime component.
87. The World Customs Organization has supported States to address trafficking in
arms, drugs, cigarettes, counterfeit goods, cultural heritage, wildlife and natural
goods, the proceeds of which are often used to fund terrorist activities. It offered
training to promote good practice in relation to evidence collection, case
management, intelligence handling and electronic systems to record seizure data and
provided detection equipment and training to countries in South-East Asia and West
and Central Africa to support customs agencies in addressing terrorism.
88. UNODC and the World Customs Organization have continued to build the
capacity of global ports and cargo facilities to disrupt organized criminal and terrorist
networks seeking to exploit the containerized trade supply chain. UNODC continued
to enhance the capabilities of customs and law enforcement personnel to detect and
interdict shipments of illicit goods that may be used to fuel organized crime and
finance terrorist groups.
89. UNODC continued to support States to enhance maritime border controls,
identify and disrupt transnational threats by sea and improve maritime coordination
and information-sharing, including efforts to disrupt linkages between terrorism and
trafficking in Central Asia, Eastern and Southern Africa and Indonesia.
90. UNODC, the World Customs Organization and INTERPOL continued to jointly
implement a project to strengthen the capacity of participating international airports
to detect and intercept drugs, other illicit goods and high-risk passengers, including
foreign terrorist fighters, in origin, transit and destination countries and to
communicate and cooperate with one another.
91. UNODC continued to support countries in the Middle East, North Africa, the
Western Balkans and Central, South and South-East Asia to effectively investigate
and prosecute foreign terrorist fighters, including to combat the illegal production of
identity documents, smuggling networks and other criminal acts that facilitate the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters.

E.

Law enforcement and criminal justice assistance
92. UNODC continued to support States globally to build criminal justice capacity
to effectively investigate, prosecute and adjudicate terrorism acts with links to
organized crime, including through specialized investigative skills and t he capacity
to utilize financial evidence. It has promoted inter-agency cooperation between
criminal justice officials to better address complex terrorism cases with potential links
to organized crime.
93. UNODC continued to provide capacity-building support to strengthen law
enforcement and border control capacity to collect, stockpile and dispose of seized
and confiscated firearms, mark and register weapons and detect, investigate and
prosecute trafficking in firearms and related crimes, addressing interlinkages with
organized crime, trafficking in drugs and terrorism. UNODC created guiding
templates for firearms-relevant investigations, is developing a case digest of good
practice in the investigation and prosecution of firearms trafficking cases in the
context of organized crime and terrorism and supported States in developing firearms
record-keeping systems and implementing national arms surrender campaigns.
94. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNODC,
in cooperation with INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and the

14/18

20-09860

S/2020/754

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, have built States ’ capacity to
implement Security Council resolution 2347 (2017) on the protection of cultural
heritage in the context of armed conflict and countering trafficking in cultural
property and linkages that may benefit terrorist groups. Activities include raising
awareness, supporting international cooperation and building the capacity of cultural
heritage professionals, the judiciary, the police, customs officers and art market and
financial services professionals to prevent and counter trafficking in cultural property
as a source of terrorism financing. UNODC developed a practical assistance tool to
assist States in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 69/196 on the
International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with
Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences.
95. The police components in all United Nations peace operations have established
serious and organized crime support units to help State authorities with their
investigative capability to address organized crime and terrorism cases. That includes
support to investigate, prosecute, disrupt and dismantle trafficking networks and to
prevent acts of terrorism. In non-mission settings, at the request of Member States,
the Standing Police Capacity provides operational and strategic support to police
forces, including to support criminal investigations.
96. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC, the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute and INTERPOL have supported States ’ efforts
to prevent organized crime and terrorist groups from gaining access to chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear materials and dual-use equipment, including
through the darknet. Through programmes, they help to build law enforcement
capacity and enhance information-sharing to prevent, detect, respond to and
investigate radiological and nuclear crime and strengthen biological and chemical
security.
97. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and its United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre continued to support States in enhancing their capacity to prevent the misuse
of new technologies for terrorism purposes, including terrorists’ access to
cybercapabilities through organized criminal organizations, and to counter and
investigate terrorist activities online and to gather digital forensic evidence while
respecting human rights.
98. UNODC continued to support States to combat corruption, which can
undermine effective criminal justice responses to the linkages between terrorism and
organized crime, by training border, police and other criminal justice officials on
integrity and conducting effective corruption investigations.

F.

International cooperation
99. UNODC continued to support improved coordination and cooperation between
regional and international criminal intelligence centres and is developing informal
standardized operating procedures therefor.
100. UNODC has continued to contribute to enhancing international cooperation on
organized crime and terrorism, supporting the establishment and operation of
networks of central authorities and prosecutors, as well as on asset recovery, in West
Africa, Central Africa, the Sahel and globally.
101. UNODC, jointly with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the International Association of Prosecutors, has supported States to identify the
steps required to gather, preserve and obtain electronic evidence from foreign
jurisdictions in investigations related to counter-terrorism and cross-border organized

20-09860

15/18

S/2020/754

crime, utilizing the Practical Guide for Requesting Electronic Evidence across
Borders developed in 2018.

G.

Prison management
102. In Mali, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
has developed tailored rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for violent
extremist prisoners, which benefit from interviews with such prisoners to understand
the path to violent extremism and any linkages between terrorism and organized
crime. The Institute also conducted research inside and outside prisons to increase
understanding of the subject and develop context-specific responses.
103. The Institute has supported States to adopt alternative and diversion measures
in the juvenile justice system, given that juveniles recruited by organized crime
groups and sentenced to imprisonment may be more vulnerable to recruitment by
terrorist organizations.
104. UNODC and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in partnership with the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, have established a joint project to
support States to prevent the spread of violent extremism in prisons by building the
capacity of prison services to effectively manage violent extremist prisoners and
prevent risks of radicalization to violence among prisoners.

IV. Concluding observations
105. Terrorism and organized crime undermine the rule of law and human rights as
the foundations of peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies. The ability of
terrorists to draw on organized crime, whether domestic or transnational, online or
offline, can exacerbate the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and
security.
106. Many Member States have already adopted responses that anticipate and address
the possible linkages between terrorism and organized crime, as identified in Security
Council resolution 2482 (2019). States highlighted a range of legislative, policy and
operational measures to combat organized crime and terrorism financing in its various
manifestations, to combat corruption, to strengthen border security and cross -border
cooperation mechanisms and interdict terrorist travel, to comprehensively tackle
trafficking, including in drugs, and to address linkages between terrorism and
organized crime in prison settings. States reported working closely with United
Nations entities and regional organizations in that respect.
107. The Security Council, in its resolution 2482 (2019), urged Member States to
ensure that all measures taken to counter terrorism complied with their obligations
under international law, including international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, and took into account the potential effect of the measures on exclusively
humanitarian activities. Few States reported action being taken to protect human
rights and humanitarian action and actors in the context of measures addressing
linkages between terrorism and organized crime. While effectively combating
terrorism and organized crime require in many respects the same tools, such as special
investigative techniques, detection and financial investigations, it is important that
States adopt human rights-based approaches to address those crimes and not conflate
the legal regimes in order to ensure that counter-terrorism legislation and measures,
which are generally more restrictive than other criminal law provisions, are not
broadly applied to other criminal acts. That requires using precise and clear
definitions of terrorism and organized crime offences, consistent with the principle of
16/18

20-09860

S/2020/754

legality, the imposition of safeguards and limitations regarding the use of special
investigatory powers in accordance with applicable international human rights law
obligations and the establishment of independent and effective oversight mechanisms.
108. While the potential linkages between terrorism and organized crime are many
and varied, some Member States reported limited information and capacity to
establish their existence and nature within their jurisdiction. States should continue
to proactively exchange information to support additional research and collect
empirical evidence. Doing so is critical to accurately identify the risks, nature and
scope of any linkages, including the vulnerability of certain economic sectors and the
impact of the linkages and responses to them on human rights, to ensure appropriate
legal and operational responses that do not overstate linkages or resort to unnecessary
or disproportionate measures that could result in human rights violations.
109. While some Member States reported on efforts to combat trafficking in persons,
further action would be necessary to implement Security Council resolutions 2331
(2016), 2388 (2017) and 2482 (2019) to investigate all instances of trafficking in
persons and related financial aspects, to ensure that those responsible are punished
with penalties that are commensurate with the gravity of the crime and to amend
national legislation to ensure that it comprehensively addresses all forms of
trafficking in persons and all other acts of sexual and gender-based violence,
including when committed by armed or terrorist groups, while supporting victims.
110. The Security Council, in its resolution 2482 (2019), encouraged Member States
to address the illicit exploitation of and trafficking in natural resources, drugs and
other goods that could benefit terrorist groups and to address the illegal trafficking in
and manufacture and possession of small arms, explosives, military and dual-use
materials and related components. Some States reported on efforts in that regard.
States are encouraged to continue and, as appropriate, increase their efforts to address
possible linkages, including by ratifying and implementing the relevant international
instruments and establishing criminal offences to hold those responsible accountable.
111. Some States reported on their efforts to prevent linkages between prisoners held
for terrorism offences and those for other offences. It would be beneficial to continue
and further build police-prison intelligence, rehabilitation programmes for violent
extremist prisoners and prison management strategies conducive to rehabilitation and
reintegration. Those efforts should uphold the human rights and fundamental
freedoms afforded to any person deprived of liberty.
112. Given the complexity of addressing the multifaceted and potentially evolving
linkages between terrorism and organized crime, Member States are encouraged to
continue their efforts to develop integrated approaches and capacities to assess,
identify and respond to such linkages, taking into account their national context and
acting in accordance with the relevant international legal frameworks related to
terrorism and organized crime, including international human rights law. In their
contributions, States reported measures that could be beneficial for others. However,
States should ensure that measures are adopted and implemented in accordance with
international law, including international human rights law, and in line with the
principles of legality, necessity, proportionality and non-discrimination. It is also
recommended that States take gender and age considerations into account.
113. Member States should consider strengthening national coordination
mechanisms to promote inter-agency participation and information exchange,
facilitating joint monitoring, threat assessments and responses to linkages between
terrorism and organized crime. They include the development of strategic policy
frameworks and action plans promoting and guiding a whole-of-government
approach, establishing intelligence and operational coordination mechanisms or
centres and encouraging public-private partnerships.
20-09860

17/18

S/2020/754

114. Responding to Security Council resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019),
Member States could further develop their capacity to prevent terrorism financing,
including through the adoption of the necessary legislation, the development of
national financial action plans, the establishment of mechanisms such as inter-agency
coordination groups to facilitate the timely exchange of financial information and
intelligence, the use of regular terrorism financing risk assessments and the further
promotion and strengthening of the role of financial intelligence units in collecting,
analysing and disseminating financial intelligence to investigators.
115. To further promote border security efforts to prevent the illicit transit of goods
and people while facilitating legitimate movement, Member States could consider
strengthening, with appropriate human rights safeguards, control systems for people,
cargo and baggage, utilizing new technology, expanding the use of risk analysis based
on intelligence and law enforcement data and supporting closer cooperation between
customs and law enforcement agencies.
116. Member States could also consider building criminal justice capacity to address
the linkages by encouraging intelligence and law enforcement coordination to
promote intelligence-led policing, establishing specialized units dealing with
terrorism, organized crime and its financing, using financial intelligence and special
investigative techniques to proactively investigate cases, establishing databases and
benefiting from new technologies to collect and analyse information, strengthening
evidence collection and preservation, including electronic evidence, establishing joint
inter-agency investigation task forces and promoting mechanisms to encourage
coordination between federal and local investigators and prosecutors. States could
also consider adopting investigative and prosecutorial strategies that accord priority
to building cases against organized crime or terrorism networks, and those who
finance and support them. States should carefully design, implement, monitor and
assess such measures and subject them to independent and effective oversight, to
uphold the rule of law and protection of human rights, in particular freedom from
torture, inhuman and degrading treatment, the rights to liberty and security of person,
privacy and a fair trial.
117. States could consider updating national legislation to ensure that terrorist and
organized crime offences are precisely, narrowly and distinctly defined, in accordance
with international law and in line with international standards and good practice, 3
criminalize support and other facilitation acts in order to enable the prosecution of
criminal and terrorist networks, enable inter-agency intelligence and criminal justice
cooperation on terrorism and organized crime and clarify domestic courts’ jurisdiction
over terrorism or organized crime cases.

__________________
3

18/18

See, in particular, the model definition recommended by the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism
(A/HRC/16/51).
20-09860
