A/RES/56/8

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 December 2001

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 177

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/56/L.13 and Add.1)]

56/8. United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage, 2002
The General Assembly,
Recalling the international conventions dealing with the protection of cultural
and natural heritage, including the Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict adopted at The Hague in 1954 1 and the two
Protocols thereto, the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 2 and the
1972 Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 3 and
recalling also the 1989 Recommendation on the Safeguarding of Traditional Culture
and Folklore, 4
Welcoming the ratification of the Convention for the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage by one hundred and sixty-seven States parties, and
noting the inscription of more than six hundred and ninety sites on the World
Heritage List,
Mindful of the importance of protecting the world cultural tangible and
intangible heritage as a common ground for the promotion of mutual understanding
and enrichment among cultures and civilizations,
Noting the work already undertaken to protect the world cultural and natural
heritage by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
including international campaigns,
Welcoming the decisions adopted at the twenty-ninth and thirty-first sessions
of the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the one hundred and sixty-first session of the Executive
Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
envisaging and calling for the proclamation of a United Nations year for cultural
heritage,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 249, No. 3511.
Ibid., vol. 823, No. 11806.
3
Ibid., vol. 1037, No. 15511.
4
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Twenty-fifth Session, Paris, 17 October–16 November 1989, vol. 1: Resolutions, annex IB.
2

01 47556

A/RES/56/8

Taking into consideration the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention for the
Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage in 2002,
1.

Proclaims 2002 as the United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage;

2.
Invites the United Nations Educational,
Organization to serve as the lead agency for the year;

Scientific

and

Cultural

3.
Also invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in collaboration with States, observers, relevant United Nations
bodies, within their respective mandates, other international organizations and
relevant non-governmental organizations, to intensify the implementation of
programmes, activities and projects aimed at the promotion and protection of the
world cultural heritage;
4.
Invites Member States and observers to promote education and raise
public awareness to foster respect for the national and world cultural heritage;
5.
Calls upon Member States, observers, national and international
organizations, non-governmental organizations and the private sector to make
voluntary contributions to finance and support activities aimed at the promotion and
protection of the national and world cultural heritage, including relevant activities of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
6.
Decides to devote one day of plenary meetings at the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, on 4 December 2002, to mark the end of the
United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage, and encourages Member States and
observers to be represented in those meetings at the highest level possible;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session on the activities carried out during the United Nations Year for
Cultural Heritage;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-seventh session
an item entitled “United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage”.
61st plenary meeting
21 November 2001

2
