V.
Philippines
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
B.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Republic of Cameroon
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Vanuatu
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (b)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany, Federal Republic of
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein
C.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (c)

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
D.

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America

Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
German Democratic Republic
Hungary

36/182.

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

115

in which, inter alia. it stressed the importance of industrialization in the development of developing countries,
Recalling also the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action
on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 90 adopted at
the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in which were laid
down the main measures and principles for industrial development and co-operation within the framework of the
establishment of the new international economic order,
Recalling further the New Delhi Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrialization of Developing Countries and
International Co-operation for their Industrial Development, 91 adopted at the Third General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in
which a strategy was spelt out for the further industrialization of developing countries for the I 980s and beyond,
as well as a plan of action for the restructuring of world
industry within the framework of the establishment of the
new international economic order,
Endorsing the consensus reached at the fourteenth session
of the Industrial Development Board on the follow-up to
the decisions and recommendations of the Third General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, 92
Reaffirming its resolution 35/66 of 5 December 1980 and
Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/75 of 24 July
1981, both on industrial development co-operation, as
adopted,
Bearing in mind the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa. adopted by the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its second extraordinary session, held at Lagos on
28 and 29 April 1980, 9 '
Conscious of the role of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization as the central co-ordinating organ within the United Nations system for the promotion of
industrial development co-operation and for the fulfifment
of the agreed measures and the attainment of the targets
agreed upon in both the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action
and the New Delhi Declaration and Plan of Action,
Bearing in mind that, within the framework of the new
international economic order, far-reaching changes in the
structure of the world economy involve the restructuring of
world industry, taking fully into account the capacities and
potential of the developing countries,
Reiterating the need for a substantially increased transfer
of financial and technical resources to developing countries
for their accelerated industrialization,
Welcoming the efforts made by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in the field of technical
assistance and stressing the need for a further increase in
the flow of such assistance to developing countries,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on its fifteenth session. 94

Industrial development co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the
annex to which contains the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,

REPORT OF THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOARD ON ITS
FIFTEENTH SESSION

I. Takes note of the report of the Industrial Development Board on its fifteenth session;
9

See A/10112. chap. IV.
ID/CONF.4/22 and Corr. I. chap. VI.
92
See Official Records ,if the General Assemblv. Thinv-fifth Session,
Supplement No. 16 (A/35'16i. vol. II. chap. V. ·
91
A/S-11 /14, annex I.
94
Official Records of th,• General Assemblv, Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/36/16)
"

91

116

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

2. Reiterates the importance of redeployment of industrial capacities as described in paragrap~ 73 ~f the I~ternational Development Strategy for the Thlfd Umted Nations
Development Decade and considers that the secretll?at_ of
the United Nations Industrial Development Orgamzat10n
should undertake to continue studies in this field;
3. Requests the secretariat of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to continue to improve
and further develop its programme on industrial redeployment along the lines approved by the Industrial Development
Board at its thirteenth95 and fifteenth 96 sessions, as well as
by the General Assembly in resolution 34/98 of 13 £?ecember 1979, entitled '' Industrial development co-operat10n and
Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization", and in its resolutions 35/56
and 35/66;
4. Strongly supports the strengthening of the System
of Consultations, in the light of experience gained and of
the relevant decisions of the Industrial Development Board, 97
giving particular attention to measures that could increase
the industrial capacities of developing countries, and requests the Board to consider, at its sixteenth session, the
possibility of including in the biennium l 982-1983 Consultation meetings in addition to those listed in paragraph
I 71 of the report of the Board on the work of its fifteenth
session;94
5. Urges all States that have not yet done so to ratify
the Constitution of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization as soon as possible in order to allow the
conversion of the organization into a new specialized agency
in 1982;
6: Reiterates also the importance of facilitating the restructuring of world industrial production through, inter
alia, the implementation of its resolution 35/66 and of resolution 131 (V) of 3 June 1979 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 98
7. Decides to ensure that adequate resources are made
available to the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization for priority activities on the basis of the consensus reflected in recent sessions of the Permanent Committee of the Industrial Development Board and of the Board
itself;
8 . • Also urges all States, in particular the developed
countries, to contribute to the United Nations Industrial
Development Fund or to raise their contributions, taking
into account the need for maximum flexibility, with a view
to reaching the agreed desirable funding level of $50 million
annually;
9. Requests the Industrial Development Board at its
sixteenth session to continue to consider carefully the proposal of the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for an international bank
for industrial development99 with a view to taking a decision
on it, and requests the Executive Director to continue his
efforts on the subject in accordance with the relevant decision of the Permanent Committee at its sixteenth session;
10. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, at the request
of the developing countries, to increase technical co-operation and programmes and projects in energy-related industrial technology on the basis, inter alia, of agreements

reached at the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy; 100
11. Also requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to increase
technical co-operation and the programmes and projects for
the least developed countries on the basis of their requests
and as envisaged in the Substantial New Programme of
Action for the 1980s for the least developed countnes; 101
12. Decides to ensure that adequate resources shall be
made available to the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to assist developing countri~s in the preparation of the industrial programmes and projects referred
to in paragraphs 10 and 11 above;
13. Requests the Industrial Development Boar:d at its
sixteenth session, to be held in May 1982, to begm functioning as the Preparatory Committee for the Fourth General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, to be convened in 1984, and accordingly to
formulate an agenda and other proposals and submit recommendations to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
14. Welcomes the offer of the Government of Kenya
to act as host to the Fourth General Conference of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization;

II
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT DECADE FOR AFRICA

I. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General of
5 October 1981 on the implementation of the Industrial
Development Decade for Africa; 102
2. Declares the Industrial Development Decade for
Africa to be one of the most important programmes of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization;
3. Requests the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to provide adequate resources, including human resources, for the coordination unit for the Industrial Development Decade for
Africa;
4. Decides to allocate adequate financial resources to
assist in the rapid industrialization of Africa within the timeframe and scope of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa, 93 with particular reference to the
least developed countries, as from the 1982-1983 biennium;
5. Also requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa
to continue and intensify contacts with the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system in order
to contribute to the success of the Industrial Development
Decade for Africa, and to submit, through the Industrial
Development Board at its sixteenth session and the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1982, a comprehensive report on the Decade to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

95

Ibid .. Thirtyjourth Session. Supplement No. 16 (A/34/16), para. l05.
Ibid .. Thirty-sixth Session. Supplement No. 16 (A/36/16). para. 148.
97
Ibid .. Supplement No. 16 (A/36/16), chap. Vlll.
98
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session. vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14). part one. sect. A.
99
ID/B/261/Add.7.
96

"" See Report of the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable
Sources of Energy, Nairobi, /0-21 August /98/ (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.1.24), chap. I.
101
Report of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries. Paris. /-14 September /98/ (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one. sect. A.
102
A/36/466.
