United Nations

A/RES/64/39

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 96 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2009
[on the report of the First Committee (A/64/391)]

64/39. Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 62/31 of 5 December 2007, entitled “Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone (Bangkok Treaty)”,
Welcoming the desire of the South-East Asian States to maintain peace and
stability in the region in the spirit of peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding
and cooperation,
Noting the entry into force of the Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations on 15 December 2008, which states, inter alia, that one of the purposes of
the Association is to preserve South-East Asia as a nuclear-weapon-free zone, free
of all other weapons of mass destruction,
Noting also the convening of the second Conference of States Parties and
Signatories of Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia,
Reaffirming its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones
in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and in extending the areas of
the world that are nuclear-weapon-free, and, with particular reference to the
responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calling upon all States to support the
process of nuclear disarmament and to work for the total elimination of all nuclear
weapons,
Convinced that the establishment of a South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, as an essential component of the Declaration on the Zone of Peace, Freedom
and Neutrality, signed in Kuala Lumpur on 27 November 1971, will contribute
towards strengthening the security of States within the Zone and towards enhancing
international peace and security as a whole,
Noting the entry into force of the Treaty on the South-East Asia NuclearWeapon-Free Zone on 27 March 1997 1 and the tenth anniversary of its entry into
force in 2007,
0F

_______________
1

09-46417

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.

*0946417*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/39

Welcoming the reaffirmation of South-East Asian States that the South-East
Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone shall continue to play a pivotal role in the area of
confidence-building measures, preventive diplomacy and the approaches to conflict
resolution as enshrined in the Declaration of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Concord II (Bali Concord II), 2
1F

Reaffirming the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty on the SouthEast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3
2F

Recognizing that by signing and ratifying the relevant protocols to the treaties
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, nuclear-weapon States undertake legally
binding commitments to respect the status of such zones and not to use or threaten
to use nuclear weapons against States parties to such treaties,
Recalling the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to
the freedom of the high seas and the rights of innocent passage, archipelagic sea
lanes passage or transit passage of ships and aircraft, particularly those of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 4
3F

1.
Welcomes the commitment and efforts of the Commission for the Treaty
on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to further enhance and
strengthen the implementation of the Bangkok Treaty1 by implementing the Plan of
Action for the period 2007–2012, adopted in Manila on 29 July 2007, and the recent
decision of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Political-Security
Community Council, established under the Charter of the Association, to give
priority to the implementation of the Plan of Action;
Encourages States parties to the Treaty to resume direct consultations
2.
with the five nuclear-weapon States to resolve comprehensively, in accordance with
the objectives and principles of the Treaty, existing outstanding issues on a number
of provisions of the Treaty and the Protocol thereto;
Encourages nuclear-weapon States and States parties to the Treaty to
3.
work constructively with a view to ensuring the early accession of the nuclearweapon States to the Protocol to the Treaty;
Underlines the value of enhancing and implementing further ways and
4.
means of cooperation among nuclear-weapon-free zones;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the
item entitled “Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok
Treaty)”.
55th plenary meeting
2 December 2009

_______________
2

A/58/548, annex I.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
4
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
3

2
