United Nations

S/PV.9253

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9253

rd meeting
Thursday, 2 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-sixth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2023/51)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2631
(2022) (S/2023/58)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-03135 (E)
*2303135*

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Ishikane Kimihiro, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of January. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Ishikane and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Thirty-sixth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of paragraph 4 of
Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
(S/2023/51)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2631 (2022)
(S/2023/58)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq; and Mr. Ahmed, Director
of Donor and International Relations at the Iraqi Health
and Social Care Organization.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/51, which contains the thirty-sixth
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107
(2013), and document S/2023/58, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2631 (2022).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
2/21

02/02/2023

Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: In May 2003, nearly 20
years ago, the Council adopted resolution 1483 (2003) to
chart a way forward for post-Saddam Iraq. Sergio Vieira
de Mello was appointed as the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, for four months, to help set up
United Nations operations at their early stages. At the
time, he stated: “The people of Iraq, as we know only too
well, have suffered and have suffered enough. It is time
that we all […] come together to ensure that this suffering
comes to an end, and that Iraqi people take their destiny
into their own hands”.
That same year, in mid-August, the Council
established the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). A few days later, Sergio Vieira de Mello
and 21 colleagues lost their lives in an attack on the
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad. Another 150
colleagues were wounded in the blast. While they fell
victim to the violence they were committed to stopping,
our work continued. But yes, 2023 will surely be a year
of remembrance in many ways. I would like to use this
opportunity to thank the successive Iraqi Governments
for the constructive working relationship that they have
maintained with the United Nations throughout these
two decades.
In the past four years, I have often said that Iraq’s
situation could hardly be judged without placing it in the
context of Iraq’s history, as decades of trouble continue
to have an impact on the present. This still holds true
today. Iraq’s challenges did not arise overnight, and
dealing with both the legacy of the past and the many
challenges of the present will take time, no matter who
is in the driver’s seat. It should also be underlined that
no government can go it alone. In other words, it is of
the greatest importance that political parties and other
actors prioritize the country’s interest above all else. At
the end of the day, it is and remains a joint responsibility.
As any government will require both time and broad
political support to move Iraq forward, let me emphasize
the importance of managing public expectations.
Overpromising and underdelivering can have dire
consequences, and sugar-coating the situation will only
add to feelings of frustration and disillusionment.
Some three months ago, the Council of
Representatives confirmed Iraq’s new President and
Government, ending more than a year of tensions,
political discord and power plays. Three out of 23 cabinet
ministers are women. Needless to say, we eagerly await a
further increase of women in decision-making positions.
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Looking ahead, and as I explained, no one can expect
Iraq’s challenges to be resolved overnight, but I would
also like to see the glass as half full. In my most recent
briefing to the Council, last October (see S/PV.9145), I
emphasized — not for the first time — that, since 2003,
too many opportunities to conduct meaningful and
much-needed reform have been wasted, while stressing
that pervasive corruption is a major root cause of Iraqi
dysfunctionality. I made it clear that it is past time to
act on several key issues, and that the window to do so
is only too brief.
In its first three months in office, Iraq’s new
Government, under the lead of Prime Minister
Mohammed Shia‘ al-Sudani, showed its commitment
to tackling the most pressing challenges facing the
country, including endemic corruption, poor public
service delivery and high levels of unemployment.
On the fight against corruption, the Government
has taken a number of important steps, including
with regard to the recovery of stolen funds and the
investigation of corruption allegations. I can only
encourage the Iraqi Government to persevere, as those
who stand to lose will undoubtedly seek to hinder those
efforts. But if Iraq is to build a system that serves the
needs of society rather than of a closed community of
collusion, ensuring accountability across the spectrum
is absolutely essential. That means giving no respite to
those who extract State resources for private or other
interests. Moreover, systemic change will prove vital. I
have spelled it out so many times. Over the years, Iraq’s
corruption has turned into a system — that is, it has
become something that has gone beyond a collection
of individuals or a series of events. The ongoing
Government efforts to improve public service delivery
should also be acknowledged. That said, and mindful
of managing public expectations, I want to remind
the Council that effecting meaningful change that has
a positive impact on the lives of all citizens will take
time, because it can happen only through structural
change, which requires systemic socioeconomic
reform, stronger institutions and better governance at
every level.
Furthermore, and there is no denying it, delays in
introducing much-needed and long-awaited economic,
fiscal and financial reforms are palpable throughout the
country. Most recently, it has been concerning to see
increases in the exchange rate on the parallel market
adding to the pressure on ordinary Iraqi women and
men. In the short term, it is obviously essential that a

S/PV.9253

federal budget be passed as soon as possible. Further
delay will only worsen the situation resulting from the
well-known spending constraints. On that topic, I would
like to yet again caution against measures that will
further bloat Iraq’s public service sector. Despite the
pressing need to address high levels of unemployment,
Iraq simply cannot afford to add to the burden of an
already extremely inflated public sector. In a related
observation, let me reiterate that oil dependency
leaves the Iraqi economy more vulnerable to external
shocks. Iraq should therefore prioritize sustainable
economic diversification, including the development of
a value-adding, employment-generating private sector.
There are of course many other areas that require
the immediate attention of Iraq’s Government. They
range from the significant environmental challenges,
the importance of energy independence, the continued
returns of Iraqi nationals from Al-Hol and other
camps and prisons in north-eastern Syrian Arab
Republic, the need to swiftly implement the Sinjar
Agreement, the long-awaited finalization of the Kirkuk
dialogue, the transition from humanitarian response to
durable solutions and development, to constitutional
amendments and substantive progress on securitysector reform, to name but a few.
I will certainly report on those issues in future
briefings, but there is one more area I would like to
mention now, which is the protection and promotion of
human rights, including accountability for human rights
violations and abuses. I believe that Sergio Vieira de
Mello, before he flew out to Baghdad in 2003, said that
respect for human rights is the only solid foundation
for durable peace and development. In line with his
words, I want to emphasize that silencing, obstructing,
dismissing or undermining constructive criticism
achieves only one thing. It tarnishes the image of the
State and erodes public trust, whereas encouraging
public discourse enables institutions to flourish and
adapt. Needless to say, a genuine commitment to human
rights is pivotal to any country, including Iraq.
Turning to relations between Baghdad and Erbil,
the Government programme expressed a commitment
to resolving outstanding issues between the federal
authorities and the Kurdistan Regional Governments,
including legislating the oil and gas law within six
months. Some initial steps have been taken to that
end, including a number of high-level visits and the
creation of joint technical committees. The dynamics
have been generally described as positive, and that is a

23-031353/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

good thing. Yet a structured dialogue, which continues
to be of great importance to institutionalizing relations,
is still missing. And crucially, those consultations
have yet to be translated into concrete agreements,
including, as mentioned, on the pressing issue of the
2023 federal budget. All things considered, it is our
hope that the recent ruling of the Federal Supreme
Court will not stymie the ongoing negotiations on the
budget. Rather, we want to see both Baghdad and Erbil
remaining incentivized to reach a lasting arrangement
that will enable them to move away from constant
crisis management.
Zooming in on the Kurdistan region, in my
previous briefings I outlined the risks of political
infighting. Regrettably, divisions among the ruling
parties in the region continue to have adverse effects on
its institutions and its people and have even translated
into one coalition party boycotting the Cabinet sessions
since October. Last Saturday, a meeting of the parties
in Sulaymaniyah offered a glimmer of hope. While the
meeting in itself was an important message, I can only
emphasize the need to act quickly and pragmatically. To
be clear, the Kurdistan region’s political parties cannot
afford to lose any more time, and swift compromises
on outstanding fiscal, administrative, security and
electoral disagreements are therefore urgently needed.
With regard to Iraq’s external relations, I am
pleased to report that the Government continued its
policy of openness and balance, based on, of course,
mutual interests and on respect for the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and goodneighbourliness. As I stated on 20 December, during
the second Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and
Partnership, held in Amman, I wholeheartedly support
the Prime Minister in his endeavour to make Iraq a
platform for dialogue and investment. That said, Iraq
continues to face repeated and destabilizing violations
of its sovereignty and territorial integrity. To state the
obvious, messaging through strikes does nothing but
recklessly heighten tensions, kill people and destroy
property. Again, established diplomatic instruments are
at everyone’s disposal, including when neighbours are
faced with perceived national security threats. For Iraq
to further bolster its domestic stability, it is incumbent
on all of us to help foster an enabling environment.
In anticipation of the next speaker, I should reiterate
that Iraq remains one of the countries of the world most
badly contaminated by explosive ordnance. Its nationally
led clearance efforts, including national budget
4/21

02/02/2023

allocations, are truly commendable. However, the sector
as a whole remains underfunded, and Iraqi civilians
are consequently paying the price. In 2022, explosive
remnants of war continued to be the leading cause of
child casualties in Iraq and the cause of a third of civilian
casualties overall. I can therefore only encourage the
international community to continue its support.
I would now like to turn to the issue of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property, including the national archives. Of course, we
very much welcome the steps taken by the Government
of Iraq to encourage more witnesses to come forward.
We also commend the continuing cooperation of the
members of the Tripartite Committee on the provision of
satellite imagery. Both are vital to the efforts to identify
other potential burial sites.
In conclusion, I would like to convey both a sense
of hope and a sense of urgency. The hope is that the
confirmation of Iraq’s new Government will provide an
opportunity to structurally address the many pressing
issues facing the country and its people. The urgency
is for Iraq’s political class to seize the brief window
of opportunity it has been awarded and finally lift
the country out of its recurring cycles of instability
and fragility.
Lastly, I would like to once again congratulate Iraq’s
national football team on its recent Arabian Gulf Cup
victory. It is worth noting that Iraq hosted the tournament
for the first time since 1979, after decades of isolation,
violence, strife and tensions. In my humble opinion, it
is a great testimony to Iraq’s return to normality and its
potential to rally not only the nation but also its regional
partners around a common and positive objective.
The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ahmed.
Mr. Ahmed: Iraq is one of the most
explosive-ordnance-contaminated countries in the
world. The contamination consists of large volumes
of different types of both recorded and unquantified
explosive remnants of war throughout the country. It is
a result of successive wars and conflicts, including the
Iran-Iraq war, the Gulf wars and the latest conflict with
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), when a
new era of unprecedented types of improvised explosive
devices emerged. Large civilian areas suffered both from
fighting on the ground and from aerial bombing.
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Explosive-ordnance contamination remains an
obstacle to people’s safe and dignified return. It is a
huge threat to people’s lives and causes disabilities.
Its latest victims were some children in Nineveh on
16 December 2022. Four children between the ages of
eight and nine went out that Friday afternoon to play
near a historical shrine on the outskirts of their village.
They encountered a metal object that they tampered with
and that subsequently exploded when they threw stones
at it. That tragic incident claimed the lives of three of
the children and injured the fourth. That sad accident is
not unique, as dozens of other different occasions have
led to fatalities and physical implications for civilians.
Explosive-ordnance contamination impedes normal
daily life, socioeconomic activities, stabilization efforts,
reconstruction, development and the safe return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their homelands.
Explosive-hazard contamination blocks housing, roads,
agriculture, irrigation, industry and infrastructure in
general. According to the International Organization
for Migration’s Displacement Tracking Matrix, by the
end of 2022 approximately 1.2 million people were
still displaced across Iraq, and they are returning at a
very slow rate. Around 13 per cent of IDPs noted that
they could not return to their areas of origin due to
explosive-ordnance contamination. Meanwhile, that
contamination often results in secondary displacement
and the occupation of other people’s property.
International donors, the United Nations, the
Government of Iraq, national and international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and the
private sector have joined forces to mitigate the
negative humanitarian and socioeconomic impact
of explosive hazards. Search-and-clearance efforts,
explosive-ordnance risk education and victimassistance activities have been conducted. There has
been much progress in the mitigation processes, with
many notable achievements in terms of surveying
and clearing critical infrastructure, providing risk
education to millions of Iraqis and integrating
explosive-ordnance risk education into the national
educational curriculum. There are nonetheless still
some shortcomings that have been identified and that
demand stakeholders’ attention and efforts. Assistance
for victims and their family members through various
medical and health services, physical rehabilitation,
socioeconomic integration and the empowerment of
victims are generally not considered by mine-action
programmes in Iraq. At this stage, it will be crucial

S/PV.9253

to rethink the planning and implementation of such
programmes by donors and mine-action operators by
including victim-assistance components to be aligned
with the national mine-action strategy.
It is worth noting that the Iraqi Government’s
Directorate for Mine Action, with the support of
the Geneva International Centre for Humanitarian
Demining, has developed a 2022–2028 strategic plan
and a relevant 2022–2023 implementation plan, in
consultation with stakeholders. However, the plans
completed in mid-2022 still have to be endorsed by the
Government of Iraq in order to be activated, and the
process in that regard is slow. Iraq is not expected to meet
its Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention obligations by
the 2028 target because of the slow rate of clearance.
It is acknowledged that various Iraqi authorities
are working to facilitate the mine-action operations
implemented by organizations, but challenges still exist.
The accreditation and accreditation renewal processes
are very lengthy and can have further implications
by interrupting the implementation of operations and
hampering the ability to reach project objectives, with
a consequent waste of resources.
Access permissions issued by the authorities
for mine-action organizations to operate in the task
areas are another challenge. Access letters issued by
the Government are valid only for 30 days, which is
not practical. Organizations have to start the process
all over again on a monthly basis, adding stress and
administrative burdens, and new requests by the
authorities for additional documentation are piling
up. Recently, mine-action operators have not been the
only ones suffering due to newly added demands for
tax-clearance documentation as a prerequisite for the
reissuance of access letters, as wider humanitarian
work is also at or nearing a standstill. Ad hoc decisions
and rules are issued by different Government entities
and take immediate effect without any buffer period.
After the ISIL crisis, the donor community
generously provided significant emergency funding
in the liberated areas. Lately, however, the dwindling
of international donor funds has been evident, due to
various factors, and is posing a serious threat to the
continuation and sustainability of efforts initiated and
capacities developed in the post-ISIL era. The fact is
that donor Governments have new internal priorities
in the post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) situation.
Other crises have emerged globally in Europe, Africa
and Asia. New global thematic issues related to

23-031355/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

climate change and environmental challenges are clear
and have prompted donors to redirect funds to those
priority areas.
It is also true that according to the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development’s list,
Iraq is an upper-middle-income country, and that it has
accumulated unprecedented revenues in the wake of the
spike in oil prices. But corruption, disparity, unequal
distribution and high poverty rates persist nevertheless.
According to Iraq’s Ministry of Planning, the poverty
rate has increased from 20 per cent in 2019 and 2020 to
25 per cent in 2022. Children have been hit the hardest,
with 38 per cent of them living below the poverty line.
And Iraq’s national budget lacks allocations for funding
operational mine-action programmes.
All of those factors have contributed to Iraq falling
off the donors’ radar, and mine-action operators have
been suffering from that steep drop in donor funding.
National NGOs have been hit the hardest, with
their very survival at stake. The drop in support is
detrimental to the international community’s efforts to
promote localization and live up to commitments under
the Grand Bargain and the Charter for Change. The
United Nations Mine Action Service has been leading
the localization agenda in mine action in Iraq through
a model that brings together international NGOs with
national NGOs to facilitate the transfer of the knowledge
and skills that national NGOs need to operate as
independent humanitarian mine-action operators.
However, capacity-building projects cannot be
limited to two or three years only, as they require a
complete learning and development process that must
be adequately funded. Developing local mine-action
capacities is a longer and continuing journey, not
merely a destination. Globally, humanitarian funding
provided to local actors was 3.8 per cent in 2019 and
4.7 per cent in 2020, but it fell to only 2 per cent in
2021, while the Grand Bargain target is 25 per cent. So
there is a stark gap between the localization rhetoric
and practice that must be addressed. The number of
Iraqi operative mine-action NGOs is less than 25 per
cent of the number of the operative international NGO
counterparts and commercial options.
Before the ISIL crisis, only two or three
international NGOs were accredited for mine action in
Iraq, but since 2018, with donor money pouring into
liberated areas, there has been an influx of international
NGO registrations and accreditations with the federal
Government. It is understandable that international
6/21

02/02/2023

NGOs come and go based on external factors, including
donor strategies and supply and demand in terms of
availability of funds, as well as because of internal
factors such as legal and bureaucratic issues or security
implications. Meanwhile, local NGOs are destined to
remain in the country. After the 2003 terrorist attacks
on the United Nations compound and the offices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in Baghdad,
United Nations agencies and the vast majority of
international NGOs had to leave Iraq for security
reasons. That created a big vacuum during a critical
period in Iraq’s history. National NGOs, although they
were fledgling institutions during that period, had to
step up and try to bridge the gaps.
In mine action, national organizations will continue
to add significant value from various angles, including
but not limited to a better understanding of the country’s
cultural, sociopolitical and bureaucratic structures
and dynamics; the ability to implement projects costeffectively; sustainable knowledge and capacity;
and the capacity for innovation. My organization,
for instance, an Iraqi NGO, created the world’s first
bilingual electronic application for explosive-ordnance
risk education. During the COVID-19 response period,
the Iraqi Health and Social Care Organization worked
to adapt risk education techniques and methodologies
to reach beneficiaries safely without physical contact.
We also developed and implemented multiple levels of
community-based initiatives to which children, young
people and adults of both genders have been contributing
to keep their communities safe. Those innovative
experiences have been shared with stakeholders on
various platforms inside and outside Iraq, and national
and international NGOs have followed suit.
Non-governmental organizations are integral
components of civil society. And civil society remains
the best way to ensure local ownership and involvement
in an increasingly political world that all too often
marginalizes and disenfranchises large swaths of the
population. Giving support and empowerment to that
structure contributes to maintaining a functional
democratic system, holding the State accountable,
supporting the Government in providing services,
representing local constituents and ensuring the
sustainability of local capacities.
Localization is not just about making the
humanitarian system as local as possible and as
international as necessary. It must first and foremost
be about local ownership and empowerment to ensure
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

a better internal balance of power between civil society
and the State, on the one hand, and a better balance of
power externally between national organizations, the
United Nations and the international NGO community,
on the other. We urgently need to transform planning,
programme design and funding modalities if we are
to ensure a genuine commitment to localization.
Localization must exist within and be enabled by both
the strategic and operational contexts, and greater
effort must be made to understand the premises for
localization and ensure that strategic factors are
fully integrated.
In conclusion, Iraq remains one of the most
contaminated countries in the world. Its obligations
under the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention will not
be met as the situation currently stands. Donors have
prioritized clearance and risk education over victim
assistance. The Government of Iraq should be funding
mine action in a transparent manner with a focus on
NGOs. Generally, donor funding is decreasing and is
being allocated one-sidedly to international agencies,
with only limited investment in Iraqi civil-society
organizations. We urge donors to break the taboos of
engaging, funding and dealing directly with national
NGOs. There is no reason why they should not use direct
channels with local partners and listen to those partners
before, during and after projects are implemented. More
efforts need to made towards localization.
The President: I thank Mr. Ahmed for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): Let me
first thank the delegation of Japan for its effective
stewardship of our work last month. I also welcome
you, Madam President, and your delegation to the
presidency, and we look forward to working with you on
a busy and important programme of work this month.
I would like to thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert for her thoughtful and frank briefing, and
Mr. Ahmed for his extensive briefing on the worrying
situation regarding unexploded ordnance in Iraq.
Let me start by offering the United States’
congratulations to Iraq and Prime Minister Mohammed
Shia‘ al-Sudani on forming a Government in October.
We encourage the new Government to act with urgency
to address the many challenges facing the country.
The Iraqi people deserve economic opportunity and
effective governance. We therefore seek to support

S/PV.9253

Prime Minister Al-Sudani’s efforts to achieve his stated
goals of rooting out corruption and improving public
services, particularly the provision of electricity. We also
encourage the Government to promote private-sector
development and job growth, with a focus on increasing
women’s participation in the workforce. We welcome
the reports of progress towards an agreement between
the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government on budgetary arrangements and the
management of Iraq’s oil and gas resources.
We are eager to work with the Government of
Iraq to address the negative effects of climate change,
including through sustainable development, water
management, the use of renewable energy, natural-gas
capture and gas-flaring reduction. We applaud the
establishment by the United Nations of the post of
Adviser to Iraq on climate change and climate security.
We encourage the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) to continue its support to Iraq in that
area. Addressing climate change will have a positive
economic impact in Iraq.
The new Government of Iraq must respond to the call
from its constituents to improve its respect for human
rights. To demonstrate its human rights commitment,
the new Government should hold accountable those
responsible for the brutal repression of protesters by
Iran-affiliated militias in October 2019, which left
hundreds dead and thousands wounded.
Turning to the critical issue of displaced persons,
the United States encourages continued cooperation
between the Government and UNAMI in seeking
durable solutions for all displaced Iraqis by providing
families and orphans with essential legal documents
and supporting their safe, voluntary and dignified
reintegration into communities in accordance with
their wishes. To that end, it is also important to commit
to the implementation of the 2020 Sinjar Agreement, in
close consultation with the Yazidi community.
The United States calls on all Member States
to repatriate, rehabilitate, reintegrate and, where
appropriate, prosecute their foreign terrorist fighters
and associated family members from Iraq and Syria.
We also urge States to support the Global Framework
on United Nations Support to Member States on
Individuals returning from the Syrian Arab Republic
and Iraq, a multi-partner trust fund, to provide Member
States with all-of-United Nations assistance for
returning individuals. As highlighted by the Secretary-

23-031357/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

General at the Framework’s launch, the current
untenable situation poses humanitarian, security and
human rights concerns.
Thanks to the bravery of the Iraqi security forces,
attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) in 2022 were significantly fewer than the year
before. Nonetheless, the threat remains. The attacks
near Kirkuk and Albu Bali in December 2022 provide
a stark reminder that ISIS remains bent on death and
destruction, and it must be confronted. The United States
remains committed to the Global Coalition to Defeat
ISIS and working with our Iraqi partners to eliminate
the terrorist group. We urge Prime Minister Al-Sudani
to follow through on his commitment to bring weapons
under the control of official and legitimate State
institutions in order to preserve stability and security.
Before I conclude my remarks, I want to join the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
congratulating the Government and the people of Iraq
on hosting and winning the twenty-fifth Arabian Gulf
Cup. Like the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, I agree that the fact that Iraq was able to host the
tournament — the first major international tournament
that the country has hosted in 43 years — speaks to
the significant improvements that Iraq has achievement
over the years. There is still much work to be done, as
the Council knows, but we are confident that Iraq can
continue to build on its success, and the people of Iraq
can count on UNAMI and the United States to continue
to assist them in this process.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to wish you
every success. I also express my sincere gratitude and
appreciation to our colleagues in the delegation of Japan
for their outstanding efforts and professionalism during
Japan’s successful presidency of the Council in January.
Additionally, I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
for her important briefing, as well as Mr. Ahmed for his
valuable intervention. I also welcome the participation
of Iraq’s representative in this meeting.
In the light of Iraq’s long-awaited formation of a
new Government, in October 2022, we emphasize
the importance of building on that welcome step and
prioritizing Iraq’s national interest and unity. That
will enable the country to address its challenges and
8/21

02/02/2023

strengthen its security and stability. Going forward,
it is critical for Iraq to continue to work diligently
at reforming various sectors, particularly through
promoting the rule of law, strengthening state
institutions, accelerating development and achieving
economic progress. We look forward to Iraq’s adoption
of this year’s annual budget, which will support vital
projects in the country.
In terms of the appointment of three women in
the new Government and the recently ongoing efforts
to empower Iraqi women economically, we stress the
importance of promoting the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in various fields, especially in
the public and private sectors. Women have an essential
role in building prosperous, stable and sustainable
societies. We also commend the United Nations
activities to support Iraqi women, including through
raising awareness of the psychosocial and social needs
of women survivors of crimes perpetrated by Da’esh.
While Iraq recently commemorated the fifth
anniversary of the declaration of victory over Da’esh,
we must not lose sight of the continuous threats posed
by that terrorist organization to the security and
stability of Iraq and the region. The Da’esh organization
continues its activities across several areas of Iraq. Just
recently, terrorist attacks by Da’esh have taken place,
most notably near the village of Albu Bali, in Kirkuk
governorate, on 18 December 2022, which claimed the
lives of eight civilians and nine police officers. We
reiterate our support for all measures taken by Iraq to
protect its gains in the fight against terrorism and to
eliminate it completely.
My country condemns any interference in the
internal affairs of Iraq and any actions under any
pretext that may undermine its security and stability.
Considering the increase of attacks against Iraq in
recent months, we stress the need for the international
community to reject, in one voice, such acts that not
only violate the sovereignty of Iraq, but also constitute
a flagrant violation of international law and threaten
the stability of the region.
Our region has recently witnessed two different
events that reflect positively on the engagement between
Iraq and its region. The first event, in December 2022,
was the joint organization, by Iraq, Jordan, and France,
of the second Baghdad Conference for Cooperation
and Partnership. The Conference demonstrated the
willingness of the countries of the region to strengthen
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

cooperation with Iraq and support its stability. The
second event was the Arabian Gulf Cup tournament
hosted by Iraq. The Iraqi people’s warm reception of
Arab visitors during that event reflected their broad
desire to build bridges with the Arab region, to which
they belong.
With regard to the missing Kuwaitis and thirdcountry nationals, as well as lost Kuwaiti property,
including national archives, we hope that progress will
be made on that dossier during the upcoming period.
We commend the efforts of both Kuwait and Iraq in
that regard.
In conclusion, we commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for the efforts it is making
within its mandate to assist Iraq in overcoming the
difficulties the country is currently facing. That
includes supporting the Government’s efforts to
address emerging challenges, such as climate change,
which affects the lives of Iraqis in many ways. We hope
that Iraq will continue on its path towards peace and
stability and that its people will achieve their aspirations
for security and prosperity.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
First of all, the A3 would like to warmly
congratulate you, Madam President, and your country,
Malta, on your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. We assure you of our full support
and convey our best wishes for an excellent leadership
of the Council’s proceedings. In the same vein, we
highly commend the remarkable work done by Japan
during its presidency in the exacting month of January.
We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
and Mr. Ahmed for their important briefings. We
welcome the participation of the representative of Iraq
in this meeting.
I will address the political, security, economic,
regional and humanitarian issues of the reporting period.
We note, in this connection, that, after almost a year-long
political deadlock, following the 2021 elections, we are
witnessing today an encouraging political development
in the situation in Iraq. The election of the President of
the Republic, the subsequent appointment of the Prime
Minister and the formation of a Government with a

S/PV.9253

vote of confidence by Parliament constitute a great
step forward towards the creation of solid foundations
for stability in Iraq. We were interested to note the
appointment of three women to the Cabinet, which is an
important step towards inclusive governance, and we
encourage the Iraqi Government to continue its efforts
to expand the meaningful participation of women in the
political decision-making process.
We call on the Government to implement the
reforms needed to improve the Iraqi people’s living
conditions by prioritizing combating corruption,
addressing
unemployment
and
creating
job
opportunities, supporting vulnerable and low-income
groups, reforming the economic and financial sectors
and enhancing public services. We also encourage
it in its quest to resolve the issues between Baghdad
and Erbil, increase the capacity and effectiveness of
local governance, return internally displaced persons
to their places of origin, address human rights and
women’s empowerment, support the security forces,
preserve judicial independence and promote Iraq’s role
in the region. We reaffirm the importance of regional
dialogue in promoting security and stability in Iraq
as well as adaptation to the impact of environmental
challenges and climate change.
On the security front, the A3 countries are deeply
concerned about the continued asymmetric attacks
conducted by Da’esh and other terrorist groups, as
well as the proliferation of arms in the region and the
serious risk they pose to peace and security. Despite
extensive counter-terrorism operations, Da’esh attacks
continue to be a serious security challenge for the
Iraqi Government. The A3 stresses the importance of
continuing the efforts to ensure the defeat of Da’esh
and of supporting Iraq’s regional role in the fight
against terrorism. We therefore support the continued
engagement of the Iraqi security forces’ operations to
counter Da’esh activity. In that regard, we welcomed
the second round of the Baghdad Conference for
Partnership and Cooperation, hosted by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan in December 2022, an event that
brought together Iraq’s neighbours to address security
challenges in the region, including the threats posed by
Da’esh.
With regard to the economic situation, we
expect that the implementation of the Government
programme on matters pertaining to combating
corruption, addressing unemployment and creating
work opportunities, supporting vulnerable and low-

23-031359/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

income groups, reforming the economic and financial
sectors, and enhancing public services will help to deal
with the economic difficulties Iraq is facing. It will
certainly create a platform to stabilize the economy and
promote development.
At the regional level, we welcome the importance
that the Iraqi Government’s programme has assigned to
fostering relations with other countries, particularly its
neighbours and the members of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and other Arab countries. That framework,
and the Government’s intention to promote Iraqi
sovereignty and strengthen the role of Iraq in Arab,
regional and international organizations, will be critical
to addressing the current regional security challenges.
On the humanitarian situation, the A3 is concerned
about the fact that as of 31 December, approximately
1.2 million people remained internally displaced in Iraq.
In that context, we welcome the work being undertaken
by the United Nations humanitarian country team in
Iraq on the development of a humanitarian transition
strategy for 2023, by focusing on the remaining
humanitarian needs while work on the transition from
humanitarian to development aid continues.
We take note of the report of the Committee on
Enforced Disappearances following its visit to Iraq,
and encourage the Iraqi Government to implement its
recommendations, including the adoption of legislation
criminalizing enforced disappearances.
In conclusion, the A3 countries reiterate their
strong support to the Special Representative and the
UNAMI team for their commitment to supporting the
interests of the Iraqi people and Government.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by joining my colleagues in
congratulating you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are sure that with your team and experience, you will
be successful. I would also like to thank the delegation
of Japan for its excellent work and professionalism in
the month of January.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Iraq, Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, for the
information she provided and Dr. Ahmed, Director of
Donor and International Relations at the Iraqi Health
and Social Care Organization. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to this meeting.
10/21

02/02/2023

Ecuador recognizes the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq and the actions undertaken
by the Special Representative to facilitate the
conditions for an inclusive political dialogue that can
lead to a period of stability and governance that would
make it possible to address the fundamental demands
of the Iraqi people, in accordance with resolution 2631
(2022). In particular, we commend their efforts to
pursue the effective implementation and regulation of
the law on Yazidi female survivors, as outlined in
resolution 2631 (2022). The enactment of that law
constitutes a significant step in the pursuit of justice
and reparations for female victims of intersectional
violence, and is a clear signal pointing in the direction
of national reconciliation.
Nonetheless, my delegation, like other colleagues
before me, is concerned about the persistent attacks
attributed to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Those incidents, along with explosive improvised
devices, have been the main cause of civilian deaths,
including among women and children. Ecuador
condemns such acts, and we urge all parties to refrain
from violence.
Four months ago, during the previous briefing on
Iraq (see S/PV.9145), Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert provided
the members of the Security Council with a clear
assessment of the causes of the political stalemate and
its impact regarding the lack of control over non-State
armed groups operating on Iraqi territory.
We are encouraged to learn that the political
stalemate came to an end following the parliamentary
elections and the election of the Kurdish President,
Abdullatif Rashid, and the appointment of Prime
Minister Mohammed Shia‘ al-Sudani. Free elections and
the establishment of democracy have a positive impact
on institution-building, which is the very approach by
which people can find stability and overcome conflicts.
Today it should be acknowledged that steps have
been taken to overcome the political crisis, strengthen
State authority, eliminate the ongoing security threats in
the country and reconfigure the institutional framework
and the rule of law. However, more resources must be
invested so as to intensify the fight against terrorism,
identify mechanisms to counter desertification and the
subsequent decline in water sources, and strengthen
the planning and implementation of policies in order to
improve access to health services, education and justice
and the protection of the human rights of Iraqis.
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

As signatories to the declaration of shared commitments on the women and peace and security agenda, we
are convinced that including a participatory approach
to gender and intergenerational equity in dialogue and
negotiation processes is essential to consolidating and
sustaining peace. We therefore commend the establishment of conditions to promote the technical training of
women and their participation in electoral processes
and democratic political activities. We encourage the
conclusion of legislation against domestic violence.
We support what the Secretary-General says in
his report on children and armed conflict in Iraq
(S/2022/46) with regard to the need to continue the
demining efforts and the call for children illegally
recruited by rebel armed groups to be treated as victims,
not as combatants.
Ecuador believes in the value of regional and global
multilateralism. In that regard, we welcome all the Iraqi
Government’s efforts to promote internal unity and,
at the same time, its focus on building constructive
and cooperative multidimensional relations with
other countries of the region, regional bodies and
international organizations.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the delegation of
Japan for having presided over the Security Council
in January. We wish you, Madam President, and your
team success and work that is as smooth as possible
this month.
First of all, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing on the situation
in the Republic of Iraq. We reiterate our continued
support for the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. The Mission marks its twentieth
anniversary this year. We listened carefully to Dr.
Ahmed’s assessments. We welcome the participation of
Iraqi representatives to the United Nations.
We note the Organization’s various efforts in Iraq to
improve public and political life and the functioning of
the State. At the same time, we must acknowledge that
the friendly country of Iraq continues to face complex
domestic political and socioeconomic challenges
against the backdrop of the continuing terrorist threat
posed by the militant Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) group.

S/PV.9253

In that regard, we would like to welcome the
election by the Council of Representatives of Iraq of the
new President of the Republic, Mr. Abdullatif Rashid,
and the formation of the Government, headed by Prime
Minister Mohammed al-Sudani. We reaffirm our full
support for the efforts of the new Cabinet to improve the
situation in the Republic and ensure stability, security
and the rule of law. We hope that all Iraqi political
forces will take a responsible approach and seek to
resolve their differences solely through negotiations
in the interests of all ethnic and religious communities
and population groups.
We understand that it is impossible to instantly
resolve the many problems facing the Iraqi authorities,
which have accumulated over the years. The
socioeconomic and humanitarian areas, disrupted by
the events of 2003 and the ensuing war against ISIL,
require international attention and assistance. In
that context, the adoption of the new Government’s
programme, one of the priority tasks of which is
reforming the Republic’s financial sector, is especially
timely. We hope that that will pave the way towards
addressing pressing issues affecting the Iraqi people,
such as tackling unemployment and providing support
to vulnerable groups of the population.
At the same time, we are well aware of how
difficult it will be for the Iraqi leadership to take into
account the views of all representatives of the country’s
political, social, ethnic and religious contexts. We are
convinced that inclusive dialogue will help to overcome
internal differences in Iraq.
We highly commend the ongoing substantive
dialogue between the Iraqi Government and the
Kurdish Autonomous Region to resolve existing
differences, particularly regarding oil and gas. The
further improvement of relations between them will
clearly help Iraq to strengthen its security and will
benefit the entire Iraqi people.
We regret to note that, despite the counter-terrorism
achievements of the Iraqis, the security situation remains
fragile owing, inter alia, to the resurgence of terrorist
cells, which, according to the Secretary-General’s most
recent report (S/2023/58), regularly launch attacks in
various provinces of the Republic. We are convinced
that that challenge can be effectively overcome only
through the broadest possible coordination of counterterrorism efforts, while respecting the sovereignty of
the Iraqi State and the need to coordinate all actions

23-0313511/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

with Baghdad. Ensuring the national security of
Iraq’s neighbouring countries should not be achieved
at the expense of its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
Sustained normalization in the country is being
hampered by the attempts of certain external forces to
exploit intra-Iraqi tensions. In that regard, we would
like to once again emphasize that it is unacceptable for
Iraqi territory to become an arena for settling scores
and confrontation between third States. We highly
appreciate Baghdad’s efforts to build good-neighbourly
relations, and we welcome the Republic’s everincreasing role in regional, including pan-Arab, ties.
We hope that Iraq and other regional actors will use
their diplomatic potential to collectively promote peace
and stability throughout the Middle East, including
on the basis of resolution 598 (1987) and the relevant
Russian collective security concept in the region.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to join my colleagues in thanking Japan
for its excellent work during the month of January
and wish you, Madam President, every success for
the month of February. You can count, Madam, on
Switzerland’s support.
My thanks also go to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq and to Mr. Ahmed
for their briefings. Switzerland appreciates the work of
the Special Representative and the entire staff of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
who have been committed to peace and stability in the
country for almost 20 years. We welcome the presence
among us of the representative of Iraq.
I would like to reaffirm Switzerland’s support for
security and stability in Iraq. The country and its people
have come a long way and aspire to consolidating
a prosperous and democratic future. Such an Iraq
could further contribute to stability in the region by
facilitating dialogue. The second Baghdad Conference
for Cooperation and Partnership, hosted in December
by Jordan and co-organized by Iraq and France, is an
example that Switzerland welcomes.
Switzerland congratulates the new Iraqi Government
and wishes it every success in implementing its reform
programme, including the fight against corruption,
the provision of basic social services, the protection
of human rights and the establishment of responsible
institutions. It is also crucial that the dialogue with the
Kurdistan Regional Government be deepened.
12/21

02/02/2023

We thank UNAMI for supporting the Government
in implementing these reforms. In addition, we welcome
the proper representation of women in parliament and
note that three women hold Ministerial positions.
We encourage Iraq’s commitment to strengthening
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in all
aspects of life, particularly in political decision-making.
In addition, approval of the law against domestic
violence would be an important step towards reaching
gender equality.
With a view to attaining a stable and prosperous
Iraq, I would like to highlight three additional points.
First, the return and reintegration of the nearly
1.2 million internally displaced Iraqi men and women
is essential to stability and social cohesion. We
encourage Iraq to continue its efforts aimed at finding
durable solutions in a secure, voluntary and dignified
manner. We support Iraq in these efforts. Civilian
documentation for all displaced persons is fundamental
to enabling them to gain access to basic social services,
including education.
Mines also impede the return of displaced persons,
as they bring casualties, especially among children.
Humanitarian mine clearance, risk education and
assistance to mine victims must therefore be intensified.
Secondly, the security situation in Iraq remains
worrying. Switzerland condemns all violations of Iraqi
sovereignty. We call for respect for Iraqi sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
We are also very concerned about the more than
110 attacks attributed to Da’esh between October
and December. In this context, we wish to recall that
measures to combat terrorism must be carried out in
full respect of international law, particularly human
rights law and international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, climate change is a destabilizing factor in
Iraq. It is one of the elements contributing to droughts
and water scarcity, with serious consequences for
agriculture and livelihoods. At the recent Baghdad
Conference for Cooperation and Partnership, the Iraqi
Prime Minister called water scarcity an existential threat
to his country. We are pleased with Iraq’s willingness
to work with its neighbours on joint management of
transboundary water resources and welcome UNAMI’s
support to this end. Switzerland is also pleased to
continue its long-standing cooperation with the Iraqi
authorities on this issue in the framework of the Blue
Peace Initiative.
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Finally, Switzerland welcomes the close cooperation
between the members of the Tripartite Commission on
missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals.
The formation of the new Government in Iraq
and the ambitious agenda it has announced are a sign
of hope after a prolonged period of political stalemate.
Nevertheless, the challenges remain significant. The
Security Council must support Iraq with a united voice
as the country continues on its journey to a stable and
prosperous future.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Japan on the seamless
completion of its presidency last month and look forward
to positive results in the work of the Security Council in
February under the leadership of Malta.
Just now, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Hennis-Plasschaert gave us an in-depth briefing,
for which I thank her. I welcome the presence of the
representative of Iraq at today’s meeting. I have also
listened carefully to Mr. Ahmed’s briefing.
Last October, Iraq completed the formation of a new
Government, laying a political foundation for reform
and development in the country. China welcomes this
achievement and supports the new Iraqi Government
in delivering effective governance and independently
exploring a development path that corresponds to its
national conditions. It is in the fundamental interests of
the Iraqi people for all parties in Iraq to enhance unity,
achieve reconciliation and accelerate development.
The current security situation in Iraq remains dire,
and terrorist remnants are still conducting asymmetric
attacks, resulting in casualties, including among
civilians. The international community should continue
to support Iraq in combating terrorism, eliminating
terrorist extremist forces such as Da’esh, preventing the
return and spread of these groups, and consolidating the
hard-won achievements in counter-terrorism. The United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant should hand over the collected evidence
to Iraq as soon as possible to help the country bring the
terrorists to justice in accordance with its national laws.
We welcome Iraq’s continued efforts aimed at advancing
the repatriation and resettlement of Iraqi nationals from
Al-Hol camp in Syria and urge relevant countries to
assume responsibilities as Iraq did and move forward
as soon as possible on the identification and repatriation
of foreign terrorist fighters and their families in Iraq.

S/PV.9253

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/58), explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices continue to cause civilian casualties
and are the leading cause of child casualties in Iraq.
Much of this explosive ordnance was left behind by the
war 20 years ago. The country that launched the war at
that time should step up to the plate and take concrete
actions to help Iraq with mine clearance and victim
assistance, among other aspects.
Peace in Iraq hinges on a stable regional
environment. China has repeatedly stressed that
Iraq is not an arena for geopolitical competition.
China supports Iraq in developing good-neighbourly
friendships with countries in the region with a view to
jointly responding to cross-border challenges. We call
on all parties concerned to respect Iraq’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and resolve their
own security concerns through cooperation with the
Iraqi Government.
Over the past few decades, Iraq has been hit hard
by wars, and its people have suffered a great deal. The
international community should actively help Iraq to
rebuild its infrastructure, accelerate economic and
social development, and improve people’s livelihoods
and well-being. The United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and other United Nations entities in
Iraq should devote greater resources and energy to the
priority areas most needed by the Iraqi people, carry out
work in accordance with their mandates and division of
labour, and fully tap the role of the country team.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
UNAMI. On that basis, it is necessary to take this
opportunity to seek the opinions of Iraq, systematically
examine and evaluate the work and performance of
UNAMI, and carefully study the medium- and longterm prospects of the Mission.
China is a sincere friend of Iraq. Last December,
President Xi Jinping of China met with Iraqi Prime
Minister Al-Sudani and reiterated that China will
continue to firmly support Iraq in safeguarding its
national sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and in rebuilding its economy, restoring its
industry, improving people’s livelihoods and achieving
sustainable development. We are ready to work with the
international community to make positive contributions
to long-term peace and stability in Iraq, as well as to
peace and development in the region.

23-0313513/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Let me start by
thanking Japan for a highly professional and effective
presidency in the month of January. Let me assure
you, Madam, and your team of the full support of my
delegation for your presidency this month. I would also
like to thank the Special Representative for her briefing
and Mr. Ahmed for the messages he brought to the
Council today.
The United Kingdom commends the vital work
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). As the Special Representative said, we also
commend the long-standing commitment of successive
Iraqi Governments to working closely with the United
Nations Mission.
We welcome the formation of the new Government
of Iraq and Prime Minister Al-Sudani’s focus on the
delivery of services that the people of Iraq need. The
United Kingdom will continue to support the Iraqi
Government on the range of challenges it faces. Key
among those challenges are securing the country’s
economic stability and the need for climate action,
including energy transition and green economic
reform. We hope to see the Government propose and
pass a sustainable budget that stimulates investment
in Iraq’s future. We encourage the Government’s
continued focus on tackling corruption, as the Special
Representative said, and we echo her and others on the
importance of human rights and accountability.
Another central challenge is Iraq’s security. We
remain committed to supporting the Government of
Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government in their
efforts to ensure the safety of Iraqi civilians, not least
in the ongoing fight against the scourge of Da’esh, and
to safeguard the security and sovereignty of Iraq. We
welcome Prime Minister Al-Sudani’s work to reinforce
the security of Iraq’s borders.
We commend Prime Minister Al-Sudani’s
engagements throughout the region and his
Government’s efforts to encourage regional stability
through broader bilateral relations. We encourage
further regional dialogue, including on crucial
transnational issues such as water security and the
adverse impacts of climate change, and we welcome the
important role of UNAMI in support of those efforts.
Continued close cooperation between the Government
of Iraq and regional partners is important to reinforce
both Iraqi and regional security and stability.
14/21

02/02/2023

We welcome ongoing contacts between Baghdad
and Erbil in order to settle outstanding issues of concern.
We encourage all sides to engage in dialogue in order
to resolve differences where they exist, including on
the hydrocarbon law and the budget. We also welcome
and encourage dialogue between the Kurdish political
parties, and we will continue to emphasize the urgent
importance of passing a law facilitating elections in the
Kurdistan region this year.
Finally, we would also like to thank the Special
Representative for her update on missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti
property. We welcome and encourage the commitment
of all parties to making further progress on this
important issue.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I join the rest of my colleagues in congratulating
the delegation of Japan for a very successful and
professional presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January and in wishing you, Madam President,
every success during your presidency this month. You
can count on our full support.
I thank the Special Representative for her very
complete briefing, and I also thank Mr. Ahmed for his
briefing. I would also like to welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of Iraq.
I would like to emphasize four points today.
First, the Council has a duty to support the stability
and security of Iraq. France reiterates its commitment
to the sovereignty of Iraq and to the stability of the
autonomous Region of Kurdistan within it. At the end
of December, the President of the Republic, Emmanuel
Macron, visited Jordan on the occasion of the second
Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and Partnership.
He reaffirmed, alongside the countries of the region,
the importance of strengthening Iraq’s security and
supporting the democratic and constitutional processes
under way.
France condemns all violations of Iraqi sovereignty.
We agree with the Iraqi authorities, who have repeatedly
stated that Iraq is not a place for settling scores among
regional Powers. We call on the actors concerned to
stop interfering in Iraq’s internal affairs.
Secondly, Iraq must continue to play a positive role
at the regional level. France welcomes the balanced
regional diplomacy led by Iraq, which allows key
countries of the region to resume dialogue. We welcome
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

the Iraqi Prime Minister’s efforts in that regard. The
participants in the second Baghdad Conference for
Cooperation and Partnership unanimously promoted
dialogue as a means of resolving regional disputes.
Future meetings in that format will follow. A credible
regional dialogue is also the first step towards
cooperation based on joint projects that will promote
the economic integration of the region and make it
possible to respond to climate and environmental
challenges in particular.
I would also like to stress the importance of
cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait on the issue of
missing Kuwaitis and third-country nationals. We
encourage the two States to continue their dialogue on
that subject.
Thirdly, Iraq’s partners also have a responsibility
to support it in implementing the necessary reforms.
France is a strategic partner and ally of Iraq. That
partnership took concrete form with the official visit
to Paris, on 26 and 27 January, of Iraqi Prime Minister
Mohammed Shia‘ al-Sudani and the signing of a
strategic partnership treaty between our two countries.
France is ready to support Iraq in the implementation
of the reforms expected by the Iraqi people. One of the
concrete expressions of that commitment, for example,
was the signing of a memorandum of understanding
by the Iraqi Commission on Integrity and the French
anti-corruption agency in order to structure our
cooperation in that area.
France also calls for the resumption of a constructive
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil, particularly with
regard to security and the sharing of oil revenue. The
revival of cooperation between the federal authorities
and the autonomous region is essential, and we are
willing to facilitate exchanges.
Fourthly, recent weeks have shown the persistence
of the terrorist threat. On 20 December, the Council
condemned the recent terrorist attacks in Iraq. France
salutes Iraq’s courageous fight against Da’esh. Together
with its partners in the Global Coalition against Da’esh,
France will continue to stand by Iraq in its fight against
terrorism, in full respect of Iraqi sovereignty, for as
long as necessary and as long as Iraq requests it.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating Japan for its efficient and successful
presidency during the month of January. We congratulate
you, Madam President, on Malta’s accession to the

S/PV.9253

presidency of the Security Council. Malta’s presidency
can count on the full support of the delegation of Brazil
during the month of February.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her briefing and for remembering Sergio
Vieira de Mello, whose commitment to the cause of
peace and human rights makes us proud and inspired. I
thank Mr. Ahmed for the information he provided, and
I welcome the Iraqi delegation to today’s meeting.
Last October, Brazil was pleased with the
formation of the new Iraqi Government. We note that
the Government of Iraq has set out a comprehensive
list of priorities, including important reforms aimed
at meeting the aspirations of the Iraqi people. We
encourage all political actors to support the Government
plan in all the areas that the country — through its own
domestic political processes — has determined to be a
priority, in the exercise of its right to determine its own
destiny without foreign interference.
The inclusion of Iraqi women in high-ranking
positions in the new Government also deserves
praise, particularly in the light of women candidates’
performance during the 2021 elections, including
beyond the quota system. The appointment of women
to senior Government positions signals an effort to
translate the will of the Iraqi people for inclusive
representation. We hope that the new Government
can contribute to an environment that enables the
meaningful participation of women in politics and
society, in general, without discrimination based on
gender. The adoption of the anti-domestic violence law
would contribute to that end.
Brazil also commends Government efforts, in
accordance with the constitutional framework of Iraq,
to resolve outstanding issues in the relations between
the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, including regarding the management
of oil revenues. We underscore the importance of
sustained dialogue among all the relevant authorities,
bearing in mind their shared responsibility towards the
Iraqi people. It is our belief that mutual understanding
and cooperation, with a unity of duty and purpose, will
strengthen the capacity of all governmental entities to
pursue Iraq’s right to development in a manner that is
consistent with the permanent sovereignty of the Iraqi
people over their country’s natural wealth and resources.
Brazil acknowledges Iraq’s efforts to repatriate
its citizens from refugee camps in northern Syria and
reintegrate them into Iraqi society. We commend the

23-0313515/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

partnership established with the United Nations and
other humanitarian organizations in that endeavour, as
well as the priority given to the care and protection of
children, who are otherwise prone to recruitment by
armed militias and terrorist groups when they return.
Promoting the economic development and wellbeing of the population should also be considered a
key instrument in countering terrorism. The threat
posed by Da’esh in Iraq, and in other countries as well,
cannot be eradicated through sanctions and individual
accountability mechanisms alone. It is essential to
address the root causes of violent extremism, one of
which can be the sense of injustice felt by marginalized
populations, including economic injustice arising from
poverty, inequality, income disparities and lack of
opportunities, locally and at the global level. Countering
the global threat of terrorism in Iraq also requires
cooperation among States, particularly neighbouring
countries. Regrettably, where Iraqi territory is
concerned we have been witnessing a number of actions
that are in disregard of the most fundamental tenets of
the Charter of the United Nations. Brazil reiterates that
there can be no legitimate right to self-defence against
any State unless it is in response to an actual armed
attack attributable to that State. Furthermore, there is
no right to preventive self-defence. Attempts to justify
violations of the prohibition on the use of force on those
grounds have no place under Article 51 of the Charter
or in customary international law.
In terms of progress in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), Brazil would like to point out that
the Mission’s existence has hinged on the consent of
the Iraqi Government for many years already. As
a Chapter VI Mission, UNAMI was established to
assist Iraq in realizing its full potential as a sovereign
and independent country, following the progressive
devolution to Iraqis of control over all aspects of the
country’s life after the collapse of its institutions in
2003. In our view, that objective is better served by a
focus on measures that can actively support political
dialogue and national reconciliation, as well as the
Iraqi people’s ownership of their political system
and institutions. We therefore encourage UNAMI
to continue working constructively with the Iraqi
Government within the limits of the Mission’s mandate,
in a manner that contributes to building capacities in
Iraqi society and accelerates the transfer to the Iraqi
Government of all remaining public services currently
provided by humanitarian organizations.
16/21

02/02/2023

Brazil commends the continued efforts of the
tripartite mechanism, under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, in the
search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals.
We also note the resolve of the Iraqi Government to
continue searching for missing property, which we
hope will bear fruit as soon as possible.
Let me end by congratulating Iraq on successfully
hosting and winning the Gulf Cup in January. Well
done to the Iraqi national football team, the Lions of
Mesopotamia, for their remarkable triumph.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to congratulate
you, Madam President, and your team on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month,
and to assure you of our full cooperation. We reiterate
our thanks to Japan for steering the work of the
Council very successfully in January. I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert for her update on recent developments
in Iraq. I also thank Mr. Ahmed for his informative
remarks and welcome the representative of Iraq to the
Council today.
Today’s meeting comes not quite three months
after the formation of a new Iraqi Government, which
we welcome. Putting an end to political deadlock,
partisan rivalry and power plays is a significant step
forward and we commend the Iraqi political forces
for taking that important and necessary step towards
political stability. A stable, sovereign, prosperous and
democratic Iraq is what the people want and what the
region needs.
We support Prime Minister Al-Sudani’s inspiring
reform agenda and encourage all political leaders to
collaborate in tackling the many issues and policies
before them, including through a serious commitment
to the fight against corruption and to ensuring human
rights for all. We reiterate our support for the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to deliver meaningful reforms
through inclusive dialogue and by increasing women’s
participation in the workforce. We are pleased to note
the appointment of three women to ministerial positions
and encourage the Iraqi Government to go further and
broaden women’s participation in decision-making
positions and institutions in order to be in a better
position to respond to the legitimate aspirations
of the Iraqi people. In that respect, we echo the call
to the Council of Representatives to accelerate its
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

consideration of the proposed anti-domestic-violence
law. Iraqi society needs vital tools of that kind to
prevent and combat domestic violence.
We welcome the first steps taken by the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government
to address pending issues. Continued efforts are
required if they are to create the right conditions to
adopt a budget and develop oil and gas legislation that
is acceptable to both Governments.
We remain worried about the security situation
in Iraq and especially the continued attacks by
armed groups, including the persistent threats posed
by Da’esh. Albania commends Prime Minister
Al-Sudani’s determination to reassert State control
over armed militias, and stands with the Iraqi leaders
in Baghdad and Erbil. We reaffirm our strong support
for Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and
condemn all attempts to undermine Iraq’s stability and
political independence.
Despite an overall positive assessment and
outlook, it is clear that Iraq continues to face a number
of political, security, economic and environmental
challenges. To tackle them properly, it needs support
from the international community, but it also needs
the understanding and cooperation of its neighbours,
which should engage constructively in diplomacy and
dialogue, not malicious interference. In that respect,
we welcome the second Baghdad Conference for
Cooperation and Partnership, held in December 2022 in
Jordan, as a joint effort to promote dialogue among the
main actors in the Middle East, in support of activities
that promote and support foreign investment initiatives
and programmes.
In conclusion, let me mention the issue of climate
change, which is a serious challenge for Iraq. The
historically fertile lands between the Tigris and
Euphrates rivers have been adversely affected,
and if the manifestations of climate change are not
properly mitigated, they will make the country more
inhospitable by the year. Dust storms and sandstorms,
as well as drought and water scarcity, are resulting in
considerable financial and human costs for Iraq and will
have a negative impact on fundamental human rights,
security, economic viability and political stability.
We see UNAMI as a critical partner in working
together with the Government and domestic stakeholders
to help Iraq face all those multifaceted challenges, as

S/PV.9253

the country embarks on a newly charted path towards
its development and political transition.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): At the outset, we congratulate
you, Madam President, and Malta on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for February.
I wish you all the best during your presidency. I
thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI),
and Mr. Ahmed for their briefings.
The stability, prosperity and security of Iraq are
indispensable to the peace and security of the Middle
East. In that regard, Iraq took an important step forward
in successfully forming a new Government last October.
We strongly support the Iraqi Government’s priority
of tackling corruption and welcome its commitment
to responding to its people’s aspirations by pursuing
economic and fiscal reform as well as job creation.
In that respect, Japan hopes that the Government will
take concrete measures as soon as possible to show its
people tangible results from its reforms.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the role played by UNAMI in areas such as the provision
of electoral assistance and in its tireless engagement
with political leaders and civil society throughout
Iraq’s difficult path to overcoming its political impasse.
It will be important to discuss the best approach in
future for the United Nations to support Iraq’s efforts
to become ultimately truly self-reliant by building on
what has been achieved so far.
A prerequisite for peace and stability in Iraq is full
respect for its sovereignty and territorial integrity, as
well as good-neighbourly relations. Any attack that
threatens the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq, including in the Kurdistan region, is contrary to
international law and must cease. We also condemn
the series of recent terrorist attacks in Kirkuk, Diyala
and other areas in Iraq. Japan commends the Iraqi
Government’s active engagement in building confidence
among its neighbours through regional dialogue. The
successful convening of the second Baghdad Conference
for Cooperation and Partnership last December is proof
that its efforts are making progress.
Compliance with international obligations is also
part of the foundations of regional stability. The closure
of the United Nations Compensation Commission
last December, which followed Iraq’s final payment
of compensation to Kuwait, marked an important

23-0313517/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

milestone. Japan welcomes the steady cooperation
between Iraq and Kuwait on missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
and takes note of the progress made towards a mutually
agreeable conclusion.
Finally, investing in people, including women
and young people, is a way to turn the diversity of
Iraqi society into a real strength for the country.
To ensure a resilient society, investments must be
made in basic socioeconomic infrastructure such as
energy, water, electricity, education and health care.
Institution-building is also of critical importance.
Moreover, the challenges posed by climate change are
concerning and must be addressed urgently. UNAMI’s
assistance to Iraq in such areas is crucial. Japan will
remain a reliable partner of UNAMI and Iraq and will
continue to provide its full support to their efforts.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Hennis-Plasschaert and Mr. Ahmed of
the Health and Social Care Organization in Iraq for
their briefings. The recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/58) notes the significant progress we
have witnessed in Iraq, as well as the work still to be
done. Central to that progress is the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) over the
past 20 years.
Malta welcomes the formation of a new Government
in Iraq and encourages all political stakeholders and
institutions in Iraq to work constructively together to
enable the Government to address the country’s needs,
including in the implementation of relevant reforms. We
also welcome the adherence to the country’s legislated
gender quotas. Echoing the Secretary-General, we
urge Iraq’s political leaders to ensure the full, equal
and meaningful inclusion of women in all political
processes and at all levels of governance, including the
executive and judicial branches.
Malta urges the Government of Iraq to enact its
draft anti-domestic-violence law and to rigorously
pursue accountability for gender-based crimes with a
view to protecting all women and girls, regardless of
nationality. On the political front, we also welcome
the clear commitment and steps taken by the federal
and Kurdistan Regional Governments to address
outstanding issues.
18/21

02/02/2023

The deadly clashes that occurred at the end of
August in Baghdad underline the fragility of the security
situation. We call on the new Government to address the
root causes of that instability, manifest in its political,
economic, social and environmental challenges, and
express our support for its continued pursuit of muchneeded reforms in that context. Such action is essential
to promoting long-term stability in Iraq. In that respect,
the timely passage of a new budget is vital. In that regard,
we also call on all States, particularly neighbouring
countries, to respect and support Iraq’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and democratic political process.
Any attacks on Iraqi territory imperil its stability and
that of the region, and should cease immediately. We
welcome and commend the positive role played by Iraq
in the region, in particular its diplomatic efforts to
advance stability, including through its engagement and
facilitation of dialogue with regional partners. We also
stress the importance of fighting terrorism and Da’esh’s
recurring attacks in accordance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, and reiterate our
steadfast support for the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Malta emphasizes the importance of respecting
human rights and democratic principles, and expresses
concern about the attacks on protesters, activists and
journalists. In that context, we thank and commend
non-governmental organizations for their constant and
tireless efforts aimed at improving the situation on the
ground. As we heard today, landmines remain a real
problem with devastating consequences. Efforts aimed
at addressing the issue must also be adequately funded.
We are deeply concerned about the 42 grave
violations committed against children, the high incidence
of conflict-related sexual violence and the 84 civilian
casualties documented by UNAMI. Furthermore, we
urge the Government of Iraq to fully implement the
Yazidi Female Survivors Law and to consider similar
provisions for the children of survivors, including those
born of conflict-related rape. On the humanitarian front,
significant needs remain, and we urge for the lifting of
all restrictions on humanitarian access. As Mr. Ahmed
alluded to in his briefing today, it is civilians who are
paying the heaviest price for the instability in Iraq.
As of 31 December, a staggering 1.17 million Iraqis
remained internally displaced and 990,000 people were
in acute need of humanitarian assistance.
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

Malta stresses the importance of addressing issues
related to climate and security in Iraq, which is fifth
on the list of the countries in the world most affected
by climate change. We welcome UNAMI’s efforts to
assist it in mitigating the effects of the climate crisis,
including through sustainable development and the
use of renewable energies. Malta calls for increased
international and regional efforts to address the
challenge of water scarcity.
We urge the Government to work to remove the key
barriers to ending displacement, including extensive
explosive-ordnance contamination and the incomplete
restoration of housing and basic services in areas
retaken from ISIL. The return of internally displaced
persons must be safe, voluntary, dignified and based
on consent. Malta urges regional and international
partners to ensure that both national and international
aid and development organizations are equipped and
facilitated to address those challenges.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Fatah (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also
thank Ambassador Ishikane for his outstanding efforts
during Japan’s presidency of the Council in January.
And I am grateful to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI), for her briefing. We also took note with
appreciation of the remarks delivered by Mr. Ahmed,
Director of Donor and International Relations at the
Iraqi Health and Social Care Organization.
The new Government of Iraq was formed
according to the principle of national partnership,
with a ministerial approach that focuses on a number
of key pillars, most notably maintaining openness
to all political forces; holding early elections;
combating administrative and financial corruption
and uncontrolled weapons; comprehensively reforming
State institutions and sectors; addressing the electricity
crisis; implementing strategic projects; promoting
human rights and empowering women; addressing the
issue of displaced persons and minorities; combating
poverty, unemployment and inflation; meeting the
demands of the people in general and young protestors

S/PV.9253

in particular; ensuring Iraq’s share of water; improving
and increasing agricultural production; and establishing
the security and stability of Iraq.
In terms of foreign relations, Iraq seeks, through
diplomacy, to become a source of stability in the region
and to play an active role in communication and dialogue
towards converging points of view. We welcomed the
successful outcomes of the first and second rounds
of the Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and
Partnership, in addition to the growing regional and
international momentum we gained from hosting the
twenty-fifth Arabian Gulf Cup for football, which was
won by Iraq’s national team.
I would like to briefly share with the Council the
most important developments that have taken place in
Iraq over the past four months.
First, on the relations between the federal
Government in Baghdad and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, understandings have been reached, and
dialogue continues between Baghdad and Erbil in order
to resolve a number of important outstanding issues,
including the issuance of oil and gas legislation, the
distribution of oil revenues and customs revenues
and the appointment of a chairperson for the special
committee on article 140 of Iraq’s Constitution.
Second, on the security dossier, Iraq is committed
to cooperating with the international community, the
United Nations and specialized agencies in order to
combat and eliminate terrorism once and for all, as
well as to ensure judicial accountability, securityrelated follow-up and support for victims. We stress the
importance of the United Nations adopting a unified
definition of the term “terrorism”.
Iraq extends its thanks to the United Nations and
welcomes the meeting that took place in the city of
Najaf between Mr. Miguel Ángel Moratinos, High
Representative of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations; Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq; and the
Grand Ayatollah, His Eminence Sayyid Ali Al-Sistani.
We welcome the United Nations action plan for the
protection of holy sites in order to ensure that religious
sites and places of worship and meditation are a refuge for
all worshippers. Iraq also commends the Security Council
for its support and for condemning the various acts of
terrorism that Iraq has endured, as well as for consistently

23-0313519/21

S/PV.9253

The situation concerning Iraq

affirming Iraq’s demands for its territories not to be used
as an arena for settling scores, political purposes or
under the pretext of combating terrorism.
Third, on Turkey and Iran’s violations, Iraq
strongly condemns the repeated aggressions by
Turkey and Iran targeting Iraq’s territories under the
pretexts of self-defence and invoking Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Iraq reaffirms
its constitutional commitment to refraining from
threatening the territories of its neighbours, as well its
desire to engage in bilateral dialogue with them to find
peaceful solutions, and addressing internal problems of
countries within their borders and not outside of them.
Moreover, Iraq commends the League of Arab States’
adoption of resolution 759, entitled “Taking a unified
Arab position regarding the Turkish forces’ violation
of Iraqi sovereignty” at the Algiers summit held in
November 2022.
Fourth, regarding support for liberated areas, Iraq
commends the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), in partnership with the international
community, for the support it has provided to Iraq’s
national plan geared towards alleviating the suffering
of displaced persons, a plan that has facilitated the
safe, dignified and voluntary return of nearly 4 million
internally displaced persons. Moreover, on 27 December
2022, Iraq’s Council of Ministers adopted a series
of decisions on that same issue, including a decree
guaranteeing thousands of Iraqi Yezidis in the Sinjar
region the right to own their homes, after depriving
them of those rights for more than four decades, during
which discriminatory and exclusionary policies were
practiced against them.
Fifth, regarding the governmental programme,
Iraq is committed to implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals. We submitted our second national
report to the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development, and we voiced our desire to submit a
third voluntary report. Iraq is working to promote
cooperation and partnership with neighbouring
countries through integrated infrastructure, economic
integration and mutual investments. The Iraqi
Government has launched a broad campaign at the
highest level to counter financial and administrative
corruption. We call on the international community to
help us to restore the stolen and smuggled Iraqi money
and to facilitate the extradition of the perpetrators who
reside in certain countries.
20/21

02/02/2023

The financial situation in Iraq is at present stable,
despite the volatility of exchange rates, specifically
the dollar rate. The Government has adopted a number
of urgent measures to address the volatility in the
exchange rate.
Sixth, on the empowerment of women, preparations
are under way to implement the second national
action plan for 2021–2024 pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000) and to discuss the national strategy on Iraqi
women for the period 2023 to 2030 at the local level,
in cooperation with UNDP in Iraq, to support the
participation, protection and empowerment of women
socially and economically.
Seventh, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Iraq has continued to cooperate with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
its educational activities on civil, political, economic,
cultural and social rights. Iraq calls on the United
Nations to deliver psychosocial support services to
the women survivors of sexual violence committed by
elements of the Da’esh terrorist organization. We would
like to thank the United Nations and its specialized
agencies working in Iraq, and we call on them to provide
technical assistance pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 75/233 on policies on operational activities,
as per the mandate of each of them and in accordance
with the principle of national ownership, in line with
national plans and priorities.
Eighth, on countering desertification and addressing
climate change, climate change and dwindling river
water levels due to water policies adopted by co-riparian
States that either restrict water or change river courses
represent a challenge for the Iraqi Government, which
has been seeking to implement the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the governmental
programme. That also has a negative impact on food
security, health care and transportation. It causes
displacement and demographic change. It threatens
biodiversity and historical sites included in the list of
world heritage sites, as well as wetlands classified by
the Ramsar Convention.
Iraq stresses its commitment to improving measures
to adapt to climate change based on the outcome of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP27).
Iraq also began to take practical steps towards promoting
23-03135

02/02/2023

The situation concerning Iraq

the use of modern irrigation systems and countering the
squandering of water while implementing important
strategic projects related to the green economy.
Ninth, turning to the relations with the sisterly
State of Kuwait, Iraq is keen to promote bilateral
relations with Kuwait as part of a series of positive
developments at the political, economic, cultural and
historic levels. That has been reflected through the visit
of His Excellency Prime Minister Mohammed Shia‘
al-Sudani to the sisterly State of Kuwait. It was the first
official visit of the Prime Minister to a Gulf State since
he assumed office.
Iraq has been following with interest the shared
electricity production project with the Al-Wafra station
in the south of Kuwait with the aim of enhancing
electricity production between the States of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and Iraq.
The Ministries for Foreign Affairs and Defence in
Iraq have reiterated the humanitarian call for those who
have information related to the burial sites of Iraqi or
Kuwaiti citizens who were lost during the second Gulf
War to come forward; or any information on Kuwaiti
property, including the Kuwaiti national archives. They
are requested to urgently contact the two aforementioned
Ministries, or the International Committee of the Red
Cross in Baghdad. In that context, Iraq wishes to
express its thanks and appreciation to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for its tireless efforts. That
Committee has chaired the Tripartite Commission,
which has been tasked with addressing the issue of

S/PV.9253

Kuwaiti prisoners and missing persons as well as thirdcountry nationals. Iraq is committed to cooperating
with the Committee and with any party that may assist
in achieving our goals.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the United
Nations Secretary-General for his firm position on
respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq. We highly value the important visit of
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, to Iraq in response
to an invitation that was extended to her by the Iraqi
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs.
She met with Iraqi officials in Baghdad and Kurdistan.
I also highly appreciate the continued support to Iraq by
the international community for achieving prosperity
and stability for the Iraqi people. At the same time, I
note that my country and the Iraqi people are grateful to
UNAMI for its efforts during the last two decades, to the
country team representing a number of United Nations
specialized organizations and to the specialized funds
for their provision of basic humanitarian assistance.
We commend the important work they undertook,
especially their work related to prevention, mediation,
peacebuilding and counter-terrorism, as well as their
response to the humanitarian situation.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-0313521/21
