SECURITY COUNCIL
. \ OFFICIAL R-ECORDS
,

SECOND YEAR

.

....

.

CONSEIL·DE
SECURITE
,
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIElS
r

DEUXIEME ANNEE

.

No. 29

. 122nd rneeting

122emeseance

25 March 1947

25 mars 1947

Lake Success
,( 54 p.)

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIi:RES

. h~undred and twenty-second meeting
105. Provisional agenda

Cent-vingt-deuxieme seance

. Page

PaiSS

593

105. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . . . .. 593

59~

106. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

:

106. Adoption of the agenda

107. Continuation of the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 593

593

107. Suite de la discussion de la plainte du
Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie
593

"
Documents

Documants
Annex

Annsxes

Les documents se rapportant a la cent-vingtdeuxieme seance figurent dans les publications suivantes:

The documents'relevant to the hundred and
twenty-second meeting appear as follows:
Supplem'ent No. 3. Second Year .

Supplement No 3. Deuxieme Annee

Letter from.the representative of t~e United
. Kingdom on the Security Council addressed to the Secretary General dated
10 January 1947 and en~losures (document Sjg47)

Lettre en date du 10 janvier 1947 adressee
au Secretaire genera! par le representant
du Royaume-Un1 au Conseil de securite
et pieces jointes (document S/247) . . . . .

8

Communications du 'Gouvernement albanais relatives aux incidents survenus dans
le detroit de Corfo'j (document S/250)

9

Communications from the Albanian Government concerning incidents in the
Corfu Channel (document S/250) .....

8

9

Supplement No. 10. Second Year

Supplement No 10. Deuxieme Annee

Report of the Sub-Committee of the Security Council· on incidents in the Corfu
Channel (document S/300) . . . . . . . . . .. 22

Rapport. de la Sous-Commission du Conseil
de securite chargee cl'enqueter sur les incidents surirenus dans le detroit de Corfou
(document S/300)
22

/

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. ~9

HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND

oeUXIEME ANNEE

No 29

CENT-VINGT-DEUXIEME SEANCE

MEETING
Held at Lake SuccessJ New York J
on TuesdaYJ 25 March 1947J at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. O. ARANHA (Brazil).

Tenue aLake SuccessJ New-YorkJ
le mardi 25 mars 1947J a11 heures.
President: M. O.1\RANHA (Bresil).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Unior. of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, France, Pologne,
Royaume-Uni, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques.

105. Provisional agenda (document
5/307)

105. Ordre du iour provlsolre (document
5/307)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Incidents in tile Corfu Channel.

2. Incidents survenus dans le detroit de Corfou.

(a) Letter from the representative of the
United Kingdom dated 10 January
1947 and enclosures (document. S/

247).1

a) Lettre en date du 10 janvier 1947 adressee au Secretaire general par le representant du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de
securite et pieces jointes (document

S/247)1.
(b) . Communications from the Albanian
Government (document S/250).2

b) Communications du Gouvernement albanais relatives aux incidents survenus dans
le detroit de Corfou (document S/250) :I.

(c) Report of the Sub-Committee of the
Security Council on incidents in the
Corfu Channel (document S/300).8

c) Rapport de la Sous-Commission' du
Conseil de securite chargee d'enqueter
sur les incidents survenus dans le detroit
de Corfou (document S/300) 8.

106. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

106. Adoption de I'ordre du iour
L'ordre du jour est adopee.

107. Continuation of the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania

107. Suite cl~' la discussion de la plainte
du Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie

On the President's invitationJ the representative of AlbaniaJ Mr. Hysni KapoJ took his seat
~t the Council table.

Sur l'invitationdu PresidimtJ M. Hysni KapoJ
representant de l'Albanie J prend place ato. table
du Conseil.

• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8.
• Ibid., Supplement No. 3, Annex 9.
o Ibid., Supplement No. 10, Annex 22.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8.
• Ibid., Supplement No 3, Annexe 9.
• Ibid., Supplement No 10, Annexe 22.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): ~s a member of the Security Council,
I am going to tell you what opinion I have
formed h~ this matter after considering the documents and hearing the various remarks offered.
This opinion as whole closely follows that of
Mr. Zuleta Angel, the representative of Colombia, as stated at our previous meetings. The
'view he expressed, both in the name of his Government and as Chairman of the Sub-Committee we appointed to investigate this matter,
struck me as very judicious and balanced.

a

A few points have been established beyond
doubt. It is certa.h~ that two British ships were
damaged by the explosion of two mines in the
Corfu Channel, It has been established that a
sweep carried out as soon as {'~ l'cumstances permitted revealed that in the ;:...me vicinitv there
existed a minefield. which could not have been
laid more than a few months previously. There
is no reason to doubt seriousl1' that the two
mines which exploded in October belonged to
the minefield discovered three weeks later.
At this point, I should like to refer in passing
to the evidence of Captain Mestre. 1 I can assure the respresentative of the Soviet Union that
I am reverting to this evidence for just one moment not out of any considerations of prestige,.
but merely because he himself, in his statements,
attached importance to tills evidence.
Mr. Grorryko stated that this evidence was
self-contradictory and also conflicted with certain British findings. He quoted one instance
where he said the evid~nce was self-contradictory; but this had already been pointed out by
the witness himself, and related to the ,type of
mines. Since he spoke of several other contradictions, I should have liked him to have mentioned at least one other. In actual fact, there
is no contradiction other than that p~inted out
by the witness himself as soon as he was in a
position to examine the mines more closely: in
my view, this correction by the witness himself
is a proof of the seriousness and integrity of his
evidence.
.
Moreover, the single contradiction in question
was on a point of a quite technical and secondary nature, namely, the type of mines, and not
on the question whether it was true that there
really were mines at the place in question,
whether they were of German origin and so on.
Nor has there been any specific statement of
how the evidence conflicted with certain British evidence. Since it has been said that there
are such inconsistencies, I admit their existence,
but I do not know of what they consist; in any
case, they are a proof of the impartiality of the
witness:
This ends my digression, on which I embarked. only because members of the Council
who spoke before me attached importance to
this evidence.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit V.

M. PAROD! (France): En ma qualite de membre du Conseii de securite, je vais indiquer
l'opinion que je me suis formce sur cette afIaire
apres examen des pie~es du clossier et audition
des diverses observations presentees.
D'une maniere generale, elle se rattache
etroitement a celle que M. Zuleta Angel, representant de la Colombie, a exposee au cours de
no!> precedentes reunions. L'opinion qu'il a ~­
primee, aussi bien au nom de son Gouvernement
qu'en sa qualite de President de la Sous~Com­
mission que nous avons instituee pour instruire
cette affaire, m'a paru fort judicieuse et equilibree.
Quelques points sont etablis sans l'ombre d'un
doute. n est certain que deux navires britanniques ont ete endommages par l'explosion de
deux mines dans le detroit de Corfou. Il est
etabli qu'un dragage, effectue des que les circonstances 1'0nt permis, a revele l'existence, dans
Ies memes parages, d'un champ de mines dont
le mouillage remontait au plus a quelques mois.
Rien ne permet de douter serieusement que les
deux mines qui ont explose au mois d'octobre
appartenaient au champ de mines dont la presence a ete constatee trois semaines plus tard.
Je voudrais ouvrir ici une parenth~se concernant le temoignage du capitaine de fregate
Mestre1 • Je puis assurer le representant. de
I'Union sovietique que, si je reviens un instant
sur ce tem::>ignage, ce n'est aucunement pour des
considerations de prestige, mais simplement en
raison de l'imponance que lui-meme a donnee,
clans ses declarations, a ce temoignage.
M. Qromyko a indique que ce dernier contenait d'une part des contradictions interness
d'autre part des contradictions avec certaines
COi.i3tatations britaIlPiques. En ce qui conceme
les contradictions internes, il en a cite une, qui
avait deja ete relevee par le temoin lui-meme, et
qui se rapporte an type q.es mines. Comme il a
fait allusion a plusieurs autres contradictions,
j'aurais souhaite qu'il en signalat au moins une
autre. En realite, il n'y en a pas d'autre que celle
dont le temoin lui-meme a fait mention, des
qu'il a pu proceder a un examen plus minutieux
des mines; et cette rectification du teIl!oin me
paralt etre une preuve du serieux et de la probite de son temoignage.
De plus, I'unique contradiction dont il s'agit
portait sur un point tout a fait technique et
secondaire: le type des mines, et non sur la question de savoir s'il y avait bien des mines a l'endroit ine.tique, si elles etaient d'origine allemande,
etc.
Quant aux contradictions avec certains temoi~
gnages britanniques, elles n'ont pas non plus ete
precisees. J'admets qu'elles existent, puisqu'on
l'a dit, mais je ne sais en quoi eUes consistent;
en tout cas, eUes sont une preuve de l'impartialite du temoin.
Je ferme id cette parenthese. Je ne l'ai d'ailIeurs ouverte qu'en raison de l'importance que
Ies membres du Conseil qui ont pris la parole
avant moi ont attachee a ce temoignage.
1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securif,e,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece V.

Let us now consider the main question: who
is responsible for laying this minefield? The
British delegation has asked us to say that the
minefield was laid by the Albanian Government,
or with its connivance. I cannot myself agree
that responsibility can be laid at the door of the
Albanian Government in this form. It is not
proven that the minefi~d ~as la;id by the Albanian Government, or WIth Its assIStance; nor can
I agree to our Australian colleague's contention1
that thcre are strong presumptions that the Albanian Government was responsible. Such a
presumption would require two conditions.
First, before you can lay mines you must have
some; secondly, you must have the necessary
staff and equipment in order to lay them. I do
not think it very likely that the Albanian Goverr.ment has a direct responsibility in the incidents which took place.

Examinons maintenant la question principale,
qui est de savoir qui est responsable du mouillage du champ de mines. La delegation britannique nous a demande de dire que le champ de
mines avait ete pose par le GouYernement albanais, ou avec sa complicite. PoUr ma part, je ne
puis admettre que la responsabilite du Gouvernement albanais soit etablie sous cette forme. Il
n'est pas"prouve que le champ de mines ait ete
pose par le Gouvernement albanais, ou avec son
aide; jf' ne saurais non plus donner mon assenti1
ment a la these de notre collegue d'Australie
qui dedare que de fortes presomptions existent
de la responsabilite du Gouvernement albanais.
Ex:. effet, deux conditions sont necessaires a cette
presomption: d'abord, pour mouiller des mines,
il faut en avoir; ensuite, il faut disposer du personnel et du materiel necessaires pour les mouiller. Je n'estime pas tl'es vraisemblable que le
Gouvernement albanais ait cette responsabilite
directe dans les incidents qui se sont produits.

On the other hand, it seems to me most unlikely that the mines could have been laid without the .Albanian Governme1].t's knowledge. I
must confess I was struck by the fact that the
Albanian Government made no protest against
the presence of a minefield. The really serious
infringement of the Albanian Govermnent's sovereignty was the laying of the minefield in the
immediate proximity of the Albanian coast and
in the territorial waters of that country, particularly since the existence of the minefield endangered shipping for Albania herself. And yet,
although the Albanian Government has proved
itself to be rightly jealous of its rights over territorial waters, it did not seem to be particularly
indignant at the discovery of the minefield, and
was not very insistent that it should be swept
as soon as possible.

En revanche, il me parrot tres invraisemblable .
que les mines aient pu etre posees sans que le
Gouvemement albanais en ait eu connaissance.
, J'ai ete frappe, je dois !e dire, du fait que le
Gouvernement albanais n'a pas eleve de protestationcontre la presence meme cl'un champ de
mines. L'atteinte verita1;>lement tres grave portee
a la souverainete du Gouvemement albanais a
ete le mouillage d'un champ de mines a proximite immediate des cotes albanaises, et .dans les
eaux territoriales de ce pays, d'autant plus que
l'existence de ce champ de mines compromettait la navigation pour l'Albanie e11e-meme.
D'autre part, alors que le Gouvernement albanais s'est montre legitimement jaloux de ses
droits sur ses eaux territoriales, ilne me paral"t
pas s'etre particulierement indigne de la decouverte du champ de mines, et il n'a pas specialement insiste pour que celui-ci'fUt drague le plus
tot possible.

Quite apart from this general observation, it
is highly unlikely, as I have already stated, that
the mine-laying 'operation in the immediate
vicinity of the coasts could have taken place
without the Albanian Government's knowledge,
since these coasts were guarded by troops, as
other incidents have shown.

Independamment de cette observation d'ordre
general, il me parrot invraisemblable, comme je
I'ai indique, que I'operation meme du mouillage
d'un champ de mines a proximite immediate
des cotes ait pu etre faite sans que le Gouvernement albanais en ait eu connaissance, alors que
les cotes etaient gardees militairement, ainsi que
d'autres incidents l' ant etabli.

One of our colleagues, it is true, pointed out
that during the war mines were laid secretly. But
so far as I have been able to gather from technical advice, this analogy does not apply in this
particular case, since the mines were laid too
close to the shore to allow any room for doubt
that the Albanian authorities noticed them.

Un de nos collegues a fait remarquer, il est
vrai, que, pendant la guerre, des mines avaient
ete posees secretement. Les avis techniques que
j'ai pu recueillir etablissent cependant que cette
analogie ne vaut pas dans ce cas particulier, la
pose des mines ayant ete faite trop pres des cotes
pour queI'on puisse penser qu'elle ait pu echapper aux autorib~S albanaises.

Thus, I reach a. conclusion which closely resembles that voiced by our Colombian colleague
and by the representative of the United States.
I would, however, suggest a modification in the
text of the draft resolution submitted by the
representative of the United Kingdom2 and

J'arrive ainsi a une maniere de voir extremement voisine de celle qu'ontexprimee notre collegue de la Colombie et le representant des EtatsUnis. Je voudrais cependant, en ce qui concerne
le projet de resolution presente par le representant du Royaume-Uni2 et amende par le repre-

. 1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 27, page 549.
I Ibid., No. 27, page 567.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Deuxieme Annee, No 27, page 549.
.
2 Ibid., No 27, page 567.

.$'IIXi18.iiiBlti fill!~_ _",,~.

.

..

amended by the representative of the United
States.1 The text says that the mines were laid
"with the knowledge of the Albanian Government". This formula strikes me as too direct. It
suggests that we have clear proof that the Albanian Government -had knowledge of the minelaying. I should prefer a text which would bring
out more clearly by what steps we, including
myself, and I think several other members of the
Council, have reached this conviction. I propose
L'lat the relevant passage should read as follows:

sentant des Etats-Dnis\ suggerer une modification de redaction. Le texte dit que les mines ant
ete posees "au su du Gouvernement albanais".
Cette formule me semble trop directe. Elle paraitrait indiquer que nous avons une preuve manifeste de la connaissance par le Gouvernement
albanais du mouillage du champ de mines. Je
prefererais une rtSdaction qui marquat un peu
mieux par quel raisonnement la conviction, qui
est la mienne, et qui est celle, je crois, de plusieurs membres du Conseil, a pu se former. Je
souhaiterais que 1'0n illt:

"Fi.tJ.ds that an unnotified minefield was
laid and caused serious injury to ~ Majesty's
ships, with loSs of life and 'injury to members
of their crews, ana that this minefield could
not have been laid without the L'1owledge of
the AlbC!.nian Government."

"Constate qu'un champ de mines non
signale a ete mouille, a cause de graves dammages a. des navires de Sa Majeste et tue ou
blesse des membres de leurs equipages, et que
le mouillage de ce champ d~ mines n'a pu etre
fait a. l'insu du Gouvernement albanais."

There is one last point which I should like
to press; it deals with the general rules of navigation concerning free passage through straits,
including the Corfu Channel.
The !,'rench Government would like the wording adopted by the COlmcil tOI condemn categorically the fact that mines were laid under
these I'::ircumstances in a channel where all ships
have the right of passage. In the general interest
of the application of and respect for the rules of
mternational law, my Government would like
the resolution ultimately to be adopted to be
particularly clear on this point.
.
Sir Alexander CADO~AN (United Kingdom):
It may perhaps assist further discussion of this
question if I i indicate the attitude of my delegation towards the proposed amendments to the
resolution which I had th.e honour to submit to
the Council.
In the first statement which I made on this
subject tc? the Security Council on 18 Fepruary,2
I admitted that I could not call eye-witnesses to
the laying of the mines, and therefore could
hot produce one hundred per cent proof that
the Albanian Government itself had laid them.
I, myself, am convinced that all the evidence.
which I submitted points inevitably to that conclusion. But other members of the Council are
unable to go as far as that. The majority, it
seems to me, cannot resist coming to the conclusion that the mines could not have been laid
. without the knowledge of the Albanian authorities. That seems to me to be beyond question,
and I think it is important to establish this fact.

Il est un dernier point sur lequel je veux insister
et qui a trait aux regles generales de navigation
concernant le liore passage dans les detroits,
notamment dans le detroit de Corfou.
Le Gouvernement fran~ais souhaiterait que la
redaction adoptee par le Conseil portat condamnation tres claire du fait que des mines ont ete
posees, dans les conditions ou elles le furent, dans
un detroit oil tous les navires ant le droit de
passer. n souhaiterait que la resolution qui sera
eventueilement votee fUt particulierement nette
en ce sens, dans l'interet general de l'application
et du respect des regles du droit international.
Sir Alex~nder CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de [Janglais): Il serait peut-etre utile
pour la suite de la discussion que je precise l'attitude de ma delegation en cc qui concerne le"
amendements apportes a. la resolution que j'ai
eu l'honneur de soumettre au Conseil.
Dans le premier expose que j'ai fait sur cette
question au Conseil de securite, le 18 fevrier,
j'ai reconnu que je ne pouvais produire de te~
moins oculaires du mouillage des mines, et que
par consequent je ne pouvais pas prouver de
fa~on irrefutable que le Gouvernemel?-t albanais
les avait mouillees lui-meme. Je suis personnellement convaincu que toutes les preuves que j'ai
soum1ses tendent inevitablement a. cette conclusion. Mais certains autres membres du Conseil
ne peuvent pas me suivre aussi loin. Dne conclusion, cependant, semble s'imposer a. la majorite
des membres du Conseil: les mines n'ont pas pu
etre mouillees a. l'insu des autorites albanaises.
Ce point me semble hors de doute, et j'estime
qu'il est important d'etablir ce fait.
Ma delegation se cont~ntera donc de
l'amelldement apporte par les Etats-Unis au
paragraphe 1, et j'espere que le paragraphe ainsi
amende sera adopte par le Conseil.

Consequently, my delegation would be content with the United States amendment to paragraph 1, and I hope that this paragraph,
amended in that senSe, will be endorsed by the
Council.
As regards the United States amendment -to
paragraph 4, the simpler, abridged form suggested by the United States delegation achieves
all that I wanted it to; namely, it establishl:s
that .what has been done constitutes an offence
against huma~ty. I am quite content wi!h that.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second·
Year, No, 28, page 588.
'
. 2 Ibid., No. 15, page 294.

~~

En ce qui conceme l'amendement apporte au
paragraphe 4, le texte plus simple, condense, que
propose la delegation de... Etats.,Unis dit exactement tout cc que nous voulions dire: il precise
que ce qui a ete fait constitue un crime contre
l'humanite, et cela nous satisfait.
1 Voir lea Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 28, page 588.
2 Ibid., No 15, page 294•

....

opp>g certain phrases ~ased on T~e Hague .<::onventlon of 1907 which appear m the ongmal
draft which I submitted. I recognize that it is
unnecessary to retain them, and I therefore agree
to that amendment, provided, of course, that it
is understood that the dropping of these phrases,
as not being directly relevant to the issue now
before us, cannot possibly detract in any way
from the validity of that Convention.
The representative of France has just suggested a further change of wording. I think it
is no more than a change of wording. It would
give the passage exactly the same sense as that
given to it by the United States amendment
and, therefore, I am quite cOlltent with the
French proposal.

amen ement(If; EtatS~Uni8""sti'pprime certaines phrases, tirt~es de la Convention de La
Haye de 1907 et figurant dans mon texte primitU. Je reconnais qu'il n'est pas necessaire de les'
conserver, et j'accepte donc cet amendement a
condition, naturellement, qu'il soit entendu que
si 1'on supprime ces phrases parce qu'elles n'ont
pas trait directement a cette affaire, on n'a en
aucune fa~on l'intention de porter atteinte a la
validite de cette Convention.
Le representant de la France vient de suggerer
une autre modification mais, je pense qu'il ne
's'agit que d'une modification de redaction. Cette
modification donnerait au passage en question
exactement le m@me s~ns que celui que lui donne
l'amendement des Etats-Unis, et par consequent
je suis pret a accepter la proposition fran~aise.

Mr. HVSNI KApo (Albania) (translated from
French): At the last meeting1 of the Security
Council dealing with the United Kingdom complaint, the representatives of Belgium, Colombia
and. the United States of America.she ;ved themselves favourable to the British accusation by
stating that there was plenty of evidence for
assuming that the alleged miJ;J.es could not have
been laid without Albania's knowledge.- What
evidence is there? Where is this evidence?
During the first part of its study, the Security
Council found no clear, valid argument. It set
up a special fact-finding Sub-Committee, 2 which
held several meetings without being able to establish any facts, as there were none. The President of the Security Council, and indeed evCl. y
member of the Council, is well aware of this.

M. HVSNr KApo (Albanie): Lors de la derr-J.ere seance du Comeil de securite consacree
a la disci.,ssion de la plainte du Royaume-Uni,
les representants de la Belgique, de la Colombie
et des Etats-U nis se sont montres favorables a
l'accusation britannique, en declarant qu'il existait de nombreuses preuves permettant de supposer que les pretend.ues mines n'avaient pu etre
mouillees a l'ins'u de l'Albanie. De quelles
preuves s'agit-il? OU sont ces preuves?
Le Conseil de securite, dans la premiere partie
de SOIl..' examen, n'a decouvert aucun argument
precis et reel. I1 a cree, pour verifier les faits, une
Sous-Commission speciale2 qui a tenu plusieurs
seances sans pouvoir verifier aucun fait puisqu'il
n'en existait pas. Le President du Conseil de
securite le sait, comme d'ailleurs chacun des
membres du Conseil.
Se fender sur des arguments. denues de tout
fondement et en tirer de simples suppositions,
c'est agir contrairement aux principes de la justiel:;;
, . c'est la un procede qui :a'est ID valable, ni
seneux.
J'insiste fermement sur le fait que les documents britanniques ont ete prepares a des fins
pr~"1editees, et ne reposent sur rien. Le Conseil
de .,':curite a entendu deja mes declarations a cet
egard; je desire simplement citeI' quelques
exemples.
Premierement, dans les appendices du rapporta, Sir Alexander Cadogan nie l'existence,
publiquement connue, d'un champ de mines
allemand dans le detroit de Corfou, pres du lieu
de l'incident survenu le 22 octobre. Pourquoi ce
dementi?
.

~fe 6fiiMa mresl!lam~ib:hel1.~ves

To rely on arguments devoid of all foundation, and to draw mere assumptions from them
is to act contrary to the principles of justice, and
is neither a valid nor a serious procedure.
I firmly insist that the British documents were
prepared for premeditated purposes and are
completely unfounded. The Security Council
has already heard my statements on this subject; I merely wish to give a few examples:
First, in the appendices to the report,a Sir
Alexander Cadogan denies the existence of a
German minefield in the Corfu Channel near
the spot where the incident -took place on 22
October, even though this is a matter of common knowledge. What is the reason for this denial?
Secondly, the British representative's statement on the decision of the Central Mine Clearance Board of London is false.
The Sub-Committee· studied the minutes of
the relevant meetings of that Board, which gave
evidence that the sweeping was to have taken
place with the Albanian Government's consent.
The British note of 26 October, 4o which also
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 28.
• Ibid., No. 21, page 432.
• Ibid., Supplement No. 10, Annex 22.
4 Ibid., Annex 15, Exhibit IV.

.....

. Deuxiemement, la declaration du representant
britannique quant a la decision du Bureau central de deminage de Londres est fausse.
La Sous-Commission a etudie les proces-verbaux des seances de ce Bureau, qui prouvent
que le dragage devait avoir lieu avec l'assentiment du Gouvernement albanais.
La note britannique du 26 octobre4o, qui men1 Voir les Prcces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de secu.
rite, Deuxieme Annee, No 28.
• Ibid., No 21, page 432.
• Ibid., Supplement No 10, Annexe 22.
4 Ibid., Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece IV•

.- . . .

mentioned.the London decision, 'was inaccurate
since there was no. such decisio;n (see Minutes
Nos. 31 and 32 of the Central Mines Clearance
Board).
I should add further that the British Government, in its note 'of 10 November 1946/ informed the Albanian Governme.'lt that the
Channel would be swept on 12 November. The
British ships, in battle formation and with intent to provoke and intimidate, cruised in Al. banian waters in me Corfu Channel throughout
the day on 12 November.
As a result of the refusal to set up a mixed
commission, Albania was denied the right to
take part in or supervise the minc-sweepL."lg operations. Hence, she does not know what took
place in the Channel on that day. The British
Command saw fit to conduct further operations
on 13 November. The arrival of British ships,
and in particular of ships other than minesweepers, such as cruisers and torpedo boats,
leads us to suppose that if mines were found on
13 November they could have been laid on 12
November by these same ships.

The Albanian Government has also declared
publicly that foreign ships repeatecily violated
its territorial waters, and that nobody knows exactly what these vessels did during their unlawful incursions.
The Albanian delegation repeats its reque. ~
that the British resolution, and with it the
United States amendments based on the assu~llp­
tions and arguments put forward by the author
of the accusation, should not be taken into con·
sideration and should be rejected.
I should point out that any decisions based on
assumptions and not cn established facts can
be neither fair, nor worthy of the Security Council.
Mr. LAIs:GE (Poland): I had the opportunity
of expressing the views of the Polish delegation2
when I spoke on the report of the Sub-Committee. 8 I do not wish to rep~at myself, and shall
therefore confine my remarks to a few observations .on the resolution and amendments before
us, and explain the attitude of our delegation
with regard to them.

M. LANG:E (Pologne) (traduif de l'anglais):
J'ai deja eu 1'0ccasion d'exprimer les vues de la
delegation polonaise2 lorsque j'ai pris la parole
au sujet du rapport de la Sous-Commissions. Je
ne veux pas me repeter, je me contenterai donc
de faire que1ques remarques sur la resolution et
les amendements dont nous sommes saisis et d'expliquer l'attitude de notre delegation a leur
egard.
.

Before I do so, however, I wish to repeat one
point which, it seems to me, should be the vcry
basis of all our discussions. Any accusation acceptedby this Council must be based on positive
proof. The absence of any proof that the accusation is unfounded is insufficient. You must
have positive evidence that it is true. This is the
principle on which our delegation stands and
will continue to stand. Of course, we agree that
some eviderice, of a circumstantial nature may
be accepted, but only if the situation is such that
no.altemative explanation is possible.

Neanmoins, avant de le faire, je desire repeter
ce qui, a mon avis, devrmt etre la base meme de
toutes nos discussions: le Conseil ne peut accep-:ter qu~une accusation fondee sur une preuve formelle. n ne suffit pas qu'on ne puisse pas prouver
que l'accusation n'est pas justifiee: il fau~ la
preuve formelle que cette accusation est justjfi.ee.
Tel est le principe que notre. delegation defend
et continuera de de£endre. Nous admettons evidemment que l'on peut considerer certaines
pteuves indirectes, mais seulement lorsque aucune autre explicationn'est possible.

1 See. Official 1J.ecords of the Security Council, Second
Year, 'Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit.IV.
• Ibid., Supplement No. 10, Annex 22, Appendix I.
~ Ibid., Annex 22.
,

~

tionnait aussi la decision de :J;.ondres, etait
inexacte pmsqu'il n'y avait pas eu de decision
(voir les proceswverbaux Nos 31 et 32 du Bureau
central de deminage) .
En outre, je veux ajouter que le Gouvemement britannique, dans sa note du 10 novembre
1946\ a informe le Gouvernement albanais que
le dragage du chenal a~rait lieu le 12 novembre.
Les navires britanniques, en formation de combat, et a des fins de provocation et d'intimidation, ont croise dans les eaux albanaises du detroit de Corfou pendant toute la journee du
12 novembre.
.
En refusant de creer une commission mixte,
on privait l'Albanie du droit de participer a ces
operations de deminage pu de les surveiller. Elie
ne sait donc pas ce qui s'est passe dans le detroit
all. cours de cette journee. Le Commandement
britannique a cru utile d'effectuer de nouveau
des operations le 13 novembre. L'arrivee de
navires britanniques et, en particulier, de navires
qui n'etaient pas des dragueurs de mines, notamment des croiseurs et des torpilleurs, nous porte
a croire que, si 1'0n a trouve des mines le 13 novembre, leur mouillage a pu etre effectue le
12 novembre par 'ces memes navires.
D'autre part, le Gouvernement albanais a fait
connaitre publiquement que des navires etrangers avaient viole a plusieurs reprises ses eaux
territoriales, et que personne ne sait au juste ce
que ces navires ont fait pendant leurs incursions
illegales.
La delegation albanaise demande de nouveau
que la resolution britannique et, en consequence,
les amendements des Etats-Unis, fondes sur des
suppositions et des arguments emanant de
l'auteur de l'accusation, ne soient' pas pris en
consideration, et soient rejetes.
Je veux souligner que toute decision, etablie
sur des suppositions, .et non sur des faits veriues, ne peut. etre ni equitable, ni digne du
Conseil de ~curite.

.....",""'-._..•_-.'-....- ..-... _'..

.

. .

~_

...•. ... - -- '.
~_

.

1

Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s6&uritA,

Dc;.uxi~me Anne~, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece IV. ~

IbId., Supplement No 10. Annexe 22, Appendice I.
a Ibid., Annexe '22.

As I have already Etated on an ~arlier occasion, I believe that there is no proo~ that the
mi'llefield, if it existed at all, was laid either by
the Albanian Goverunent or with its connivanra, I shall go further, and say that no posith ilroof whatever has been brought forward
that the minefield, if it existed, was laid with the
knowledge of the Albanian Government.
In discussing this matter before the Council,
we were unable -:-0 find such proof, and we referred the question to the Sub-Committee. The
Sub-Committee was unable to find this proof,
and came back with a report which tnere1y
stated certain questions. Those members of the,
Sub-Committee who expressed a belief that the
minefield was laid with the knowledge of the
Albanian Government evidently dk:. so in their
capacity as representatives, not as members of
the Sub-Committee. They must have believed
that the standard of admissibility of evidence
applied by a represttntative is lower than that
applied in the Sub-Committee, which was unable to reach such a conclusion.

I wish to draw your attention to a news item,
which appeared in the New York Herald Tribune of 13 March 1947, entitled: "V. S. vessel
blown up by mine off Italy, abandoned by
crew." This item reads in part:

Comm~ je l'ai deja indique auparaw.:mt, j'estime qu'iI n'y a aucune preuve que le ch8.J.-np de
mines, s'il a j~ais existe, ait ete mouilIe, soit
par le' Gouvernement albanais, soit de connivence avec lui. J'irai meme jusqu'a dire qu'on
ne nous a soumis aucune preJ..~ve formelle que le
champ de mines, s'il a jamais existe, ait ete pose
au su du Gouvernement albanais.
Nom' avons discute la question dev'ant le
Conseil sans pouvoir faire ressortir de preuve et
nous aVClllS renvoye la question a la Sous-Commission. La Sous-Commission a son tow' a ete
incapable de trouver cette preuve et est tevenue
de"'ant le Conseil avec un rapport dans lequel
on se borne a poser certainet questions. Ceux des
nlembres de la Sous-Commission qui Gnt exprime
l'opinion que le champ de mines a ete mouille
de connivence avec le Gouvernement albanais
l'ont fait evidemment en leur quaiite de representants, mais non en leur qualite de membres
de la Sous-Commission. Ils ont 'evidemment dft
juger qu'un representant peut se contenter de
preuves mains solides que la Sous-Commission.
.Cette derniere, en effet, a ete incapable d'aboutir
a une telle conclusion.
Je voudrais attirer votre attention sur un
article qui a paru dans le New York Herald
Tribune du 13 mars 1947, sous le titre: "Vn
navrre americain saute sur une mine au large de
l'Italie, et est abandonne par son equipage." En
void lin extrait:

"The 6,597-ton American Export Lin.e.s
freighter, Exanthia, was blown up by a m:."1e
between Italy and the Island of Corsic~ and
has been abandoned by her crew of fortyfour . . . The mine was struck near the island
of Pianosa, which lies off the sm.... of the Italian boot, and in the straits connecting the
Ligurian and Tyrrhenian Seas . . . The accident scene was far removed from the Greek
island of Corfu, located five hundred arr-line
miles to the southeast, and under the heel of
the Italian peninsula, where two British destroyers were· damaged by mmes iast October
with a loss of forty-four lives."

"Le cargo Exanthia de 6.597 tonnes, appar:.
tenant aux American Export Lines, a saute
sar une mine entre l'Italie et la Corse et a cte
abandonne par son equipage de quarante-quatre membres . . . Le cargo a heurte une
mine pres de l'ue de Pianosa, au large du tibia
de la botte italienne, dans le detroit qui relie
le golfe de Genes a la mer TyrrhCnienne . . .
L'accident s'est produit tres loin de l'lle
grecque de Corfou, situee a 500 milles au sud,
a vol d'oiseau, sous le talon de la peninsuleitalieIl..ne, ou deux cuirasses 1;>ritanniques ant
ete endommages par des mines en octobre
dernier, et ou quarante-quatre personnes ont
peri."

On the basis of such facts-and I could actually quote such facts in large numbers-shall we
accuse the Government of Italy, for instance, of
having laid the mines, or declare that the mines
were laid there with the knowledge of the Italian Government? I think the absurdity of such
an accusation would be quite plain.

Sur la foi de faits de ce genre - et je pourrais
effectivement citer un grand ncimbre de faits
semblables - allons-nous accuser, p¥ exemple,
le Gouvernement italien d'avoir mouille des
mines? AlIons-nous pteter:.drc que les mines ant
ete posees a cet endroit au su du Gouvernement
italien? L'absurdite de cette allegation me
parait evidente. .
Pourquoi donc accusons-nous le Gouvernement albanais et non pas le Gouvernement italien? La simple raison, a mon avis, est que le
c1imat politique est different; il me semble que
la regrettable tension et les regrettables malentenduspolitiques qui exis·tent entre le RoyaunieVni et l'Albanie sont cause que toute cette
affaire a ete portee devant le Conseil de securite.
Sans ce malentendu et cette mefiancede caractere politique, la questio):l n'aurait pas ete portee
devant le Conseil, pas plus que ne l'a ete l'incident survenu au voisinage de l'lle italienne de
Pianosa.

Why do· we accuse the Government of Albania, but not the Government of Italy? 'rhe simple reason, it appears to me, is a different· political atmosphere. It See!!IS to me .that the
regrettable political tensior and misunderstandings which exist hJtween the Vnited Kingdom
and Albania have led to the whole matter being
brought up in the·· Security Council: Without
this political misunderstanding and mistrust, the
matter 'Would no more have been brought to this
Council than was the incident near the Italian
island of Pianosa.

•

--

In the circumstances, we <:annot adopt the
resolution presented to us by the representative
of the United Kingdom, or any of the amendments to it. As I have already explained, we
think that, on the basis of the evidence before us,
the case should simply be dismissed. But in view
of the high regard we have for the United Kingdom, and in vi~w of the fact that we consider
both the United Kingdom and Albania as our
friends and allies, we believe that further efforts
towards conciliation should be made. Therefore, we propose that both parties should be instructed by the Council to settle their dispute
according to the methods provided by ~..rticle
33 of the Charter. To this end, I 'wish to present
to the Council a resolution, the text of which
follows:

"Whereas there has been brought to the attention of the Security Council a disp':lte between
the Government of the United Kingdom and.
the Government of the People's Republic of
Albania arising from an incident in which two
British warships were damaged by mines in the
Corfu Channel on 22 October 1946;
"And whereas there has been presented to the
Security Council an exchange of notes between
the aforesaid Governments concerning the same
dispute and oral statements of their respective
representatives;
cCAnd taking into consideration that the parties to the dispute did not exhaust the means of
peaceful settlement before bringing their case to
the Security Council;
"The Security Council resolves, pursuant to
Article 33 of the Charter, to call upon the parties to the dispute to settle their dispute by any
of the means of peaceful settlement of disputes
provided for in the above-mentioned article of
the Charter, subject to their own agreed choice."
Mr. Quo Tai-chi (China) : I think that I am
the only person at this table, with the exception
of yourself, Mr. President, who has not spoken
thus far on the substance of this question. However, although I have not spoken on the substance of the case before the Council, I have
listened with close attention to all the observations made by the various members of the Council, and I have studied, objectively the statements made by the United Kingdom and Albanian representatives, together with the relevant
evidence, available or deductible, which they
have submitted to this Council.
In particular, I have carefully studied the
report of the Sub-Committee and the supplementary statements of its members. I have kept
silence so far, in order to examine all the available material and evidence and to enable me to
come to a fair and impartial conclusion on the
dispute. I have now conscientio""ly come- to my
conclusion. That conclusion is essentially in acGord with the one reached by a great majority
of the members of this Council. Briefly, it is
this. In view of the very great and zealous care
and strict vigilanc,e with which the Allanian
Government has guarded its sovereignty over its
territorial waters, and in view of the close proximity to the shore of the mines, the existence of

Dans ces circonstances, nous ne pouvons ae~
cepter la resolution soumise par le representant
du Royaume-Uni, ni davantage aueun des
amendements apportes a cette resolution.
Comme je l'ai deja explique auparavant, nous
estimons, en nous fondant sur les preuves qui
no'~s ont ete soumises, que l'affaire devrait
simplement etre classee. Mais en raison de la
haute consideration que nous aVOIlB pOl?I le
Royaume-Uni et etant donne que nous considerons le Royaume-Uni et l'Albanie comme des
amis et allies, nous pensons qu'il faut faire de
nouveaux efforts de conciliation. Nous proposons
donc que le Conseil recommande aux deux parties de regler leur difIerend conformement aux
methodes prevues par l'Article 33 de la Charte,
et je desire soumettre au Conseil une resolution
dans ce sens. Voici le texte de cette resolution:
"Considemnt qu'a la suite d'un incident au
cours duquel deux navires de guerre britanniques
ont ete endommages par des mines dans le detrait de Corfou, le 22 octobre 1946, un differend
entre le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni et le
Gouvernement de la Republique populaire d'Albanie a ete porte devant le Conseil de securite;
"Et considerant que le Conseil de securite a
examine les notes echangees entre les dits Gouvernements a propos de ce clifferend, et a entendu les exposes oraux faits par leurs representants respectifs;
"Tenant compte du fait que les parties au
difIerend n'o71t pas epuise les moyens de reglement pacifique a leur disposition avant de porter
leur afIaire devant le Conseil de securite;
,'cLe Conseil de secufite decide, conformement
a I'Artide 33 de la Charte, d'inviter les parties
au difIerend a proceder au reglement de leur
differend par l'un des moyens de reglement pacifique prevus a l'Article mentionne ci-dessus, sous
reserve de leur accord prealable."
M. Quo Tai-chi (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais): Je suis, .avec vous, je crois, Monsieur le
President, la seule personne presente qui n'ait
pas encore pris la parole sur le fond de la question. Je n'en ai pas moins ecoute avec attention
toutes les observations presentees par les divers
membres du Conseil, et j'ai etudie d'une
maniere objective les exposes faits par les representants du Royaume-Uni et de I'Albanie, ainsi
que les preuves directes ou indirectes qu'ils ont
sourrllses au Conseil.

J'ai notamment etudie avec soin !e rapport de
la Sous-Commission et les exposes complementaires de ses membres. J'ai garde le silence jusqu'ici afin d'examiner tous les documents et
toutes les preuves disponibles et afin de pouvoir
aboutir a une conclusion juste et impartiale sur
ce difIerend. E.t voici, en toute conscience, ce
que j'ai conclu. Je me trouve essentiellement
d'accord avec la grande majorite des membres
du Conseil. En brei, ma conclusion est la suivante: etant donne le soin attentif et la stricte
vigilance avec lesque1s le Gouvernement albanais
a protc~ge sa souverainete sur ses eaux territodales, et etant donne que les mines qui ont fait
sauter Ies vaisseaux de guerre britanniques se

which resulted in the blowing up of the British
warships, I also have come to the cf'nclusion
that it is impossible for the mines to have been
laid without the knowledge of the Albanian
Government.
I would say at the same time that I should
find it difficult to endorse the British draft resolution put before us in its original form, because
I could not go quite as far as to accept its original wording. But I a:'ll happy to note that Sir
Alexander Cadogan has· accepted the amendment offered by the United States representative
and further amended by Mr. Parodi.
May I be permitted to digress for just one
moment? As the representative of China which,
like Albania, was a victim of early fascist aggression, I naturally have sympathy for Albania, but
I have not allowed that sympathy to influence
my conclusion: likewise, I regard all political
references to the relations between the United
Kingdom and Albania to be irrelevant to the
case under consideration.
The point to be noted in the British draft
resolution is that its purpose is to enable the parties to the dispute to make a fresh effort to
settle their difference. That is the function of
this Council, and that, I am sure, must be the
desire of all its members. We hope, in accordance with this resolution, once it has been
adopted, that the two parties will be able to
get together and settle their difference in an
amicable and equitable manner. I shall vote for
the British draft resolution, as a.-nended by the
United States delegation and further amended
by the French representative.
Mr. HAs LUCK (Australia): When I asked to
be recognized, I simply intended to indicate the
views of the Australian delegation regarding the
United States amendment, which has been introduced since I last spoke. But, if I may, I
should like to take the earliest possible opportunity of referring to one remark which was
made by the representative of Poland.
In illustrating a point he was making, the
representative of Poland drew· attention to the
fact that, whereas the delegations of Colombia
and Australia had not expressed any opinion on
the evidence as members of the Sub-Committee,
they had expressed opinions on the evidence at
this Council table. The representative of Poland
then went on to say that this seemed to him to
mean that the standard of evidence applied by
the representatives at the Council table was admittedly lower than that applied by a representative when a member of the Sub-Committee.
I wish to say, as clearly as it can be said, that
the reason why the representative of Australia
-and I assume the representative of Colombia
also-refrained from expressing an opinion on
the evidence as members of the Sub-Committee
arose solely from the view they took concerning
the functions of this Sub-Committee. The views
which the representative of Colombia took as
regards tIns matter were clearly set forth at the
hundred and twentieth meeting of this Council.
He said:
cc, •• the Sub-Committee (;on,sid~red that its

trouvaient a proximite de la cote, il est impossible, et c'est la ma conclusion, que les mines
aient ete mouillees a l'insu du Gouvernement
albanais.
Je voudrais dire aussi qu'a mon avis il est
difficile d'adopter le projet de resolution britannique dans sa forme primitive; je ne puis en
effet me resoudre a accepter If' texte original.
Mais je suis heureux de noter que Sir Alexander
Cadogan a accepte l'amendement propose par
le representant des Etdts-Unis et modifie ensuite
par M. Parodi.
Permettez-moi de faire une courte digression.
La Chine, comme l'Albanie, a ete l'une des premieres victimes de l'agressioll fasciste. J'eprouve
done tout naturellement, en ma qualite de representant de la Chine, de la sympathie pour l'Albanie; mais je n)ai pas lais8e cette sympathie influencer man jugement final; de meme, je
considere toutes les allusions politiques aux relations entre le Royaume-Uni et l'Albanie comme
etrangeres a cette affaire.
Le porot a noter dans le projet de resolution
britannique est qu'il a pour objet de permettre
aux parties de faire un nouvel effort pour regler
leur differend. Telle est la fonction du Conseil,
et, j'en suis convaincu, te1 doit etre le desir de
tous ses membres. Nous esperons que, lorsque
cette resolution aura ete adoptee, les deux parties
pouITont prendre contact et regler leur differend
d'une maniere amicale et equitable. Je voterai
en favenr ~u projet de resolution britannique,
tel qu'i! a ete amende par la delegation des
Etats-Unis et modifie de nouveau par le representant de la France.
M. HAs LUCK (Australie) (traduit de ['anglais): Lorsque j'ai demande la parole, j'avais
simplement l'intention d'exposer le point de vue
de la delegation australienne au sujet de
l'amendement propose par la delegation des
Etats-Unis depuis ma derniere intervention. Mais,
si vous le permettez, j'aimerais relever d'abord
une remarque faite par le representant de la
Pologne.
. En deve10ppant un de ses arguments, le representant de la Pologne a dit que, si les delegations
de la Colombie et de l'Australie n'avaient, en
tant que membres de la Sous-Commission, exprime aucune opinion au sujet des preuves fournies, elles avaient exprime cependant kurs vues
a la table du Conseil. Et le representant de la
Pologne a poursuivi en disant que ces representants semblaient, ala table du Conseil, se contenter de preuves moins solides que celles qu'ils
demandaient en tant que membres de la SousCommission.
Je veux id declarer, le plus clairement possible,
que si le representant de l'Australie - et, j'imagine, le representant de la Colombie egalement
- se sont abstenus d'exprimer, en tant que
membres de la Sous-Commission, une opinion
au sujet des preuves fournies, c'est uniquement
parce qu'ils avaient une conception bien definie
du mandat de cette Sous-Commission. Le point
de vue du representant de la Colombie a ce
propos, a. ete nettement exprime a la cent-ving.
tieme seance du Conseil. Void ce qu'i! a dit:
" , . . IS
"
. , que son,
a ous-.C
QmmlSSlon
a, estltn,e

primary duty was to clear the Council's field
of study~ making the necessary distinction between what is essential and what is secondary,
between preliminary and fundamental questions on the one hand, and on the other, those
for possible later (~onsideration, with a view to
concentrating the Council's attention on the
former and also, to show the Council exactly
what evidence is so far available for determining whether, in fact, a minefield existed
. . . But although for the reasons given, the
Sub-Committee's work stopped at this point,
each of its three members naturally reserved
the right to state his opinion. »1
The Australian delegation completely concurred in that view of the functions of the SubCommittee, and is on record at the hundred and
twentieth meeting as having so concurred. 2 It is
quite true that, during the work of the SubCommittee, the Polish delegation took a different view of the functions of the Sub-Committee.
The Polish delegation-I think it not inappropriate to recall-thought that such a committee
would be useless, and said so publicly. The Polish delegation, which did not vote in favour of
the formation of the Committee, took a view
of the functions of that Committee, when it was
actually at work, which differed from that taken
by the representatives of Australia and Colombia. Indeed, the Polish delegation expressed its
view to the point where the Polish representative, exercising what was undoubtedly his right,
presented an additional report on his own responsibility.
In view of that historical background, I think
it is rather unfair to charge either the Australian
delegation or the Colombian delegation with
having applied one standard of evidence in the
Committee and another standard of evidence in
the Council. The fact is that we delibera~ely
refrained from taking any position or from
reaching any conclusion whatever in the Committee, because of the view we took of its functions. It was only after returning to this Council and resuming our functions as members
rather than as servants of the Council, that we,
on behalf of our delegations, expressed our views
on the evidence.
The position of the Australian delegation, as
previously expressed, is in concurrence with that
expressed by the representative of Colombia.
There does appear to have been a slight misunderstanding in certain remarks made by the
representative of France. According to the English interpretation, as I heard it, the representative of France could not share the views of Australia that there was a strong presumption that
the Albanian Government laid the mines. That
is not quite the Australian position. The position
which we described at the hundred and twentieth meeth"1g was as follows:
1 The official translation of the remarks of the representative of Colombia win be found in the Official Records
of the Security Council, Second Year, No. 27, page 544..

• Ibid., No. 27, page 551.

a

role consistait, en premier lieu, d6blayer le
champ d'etude du Conseil en faisant la distinction qui convient entre l'essentiel et le secondaire, entre les quesuons prealables et
fondamentales et les questions qui pourraient
etre examinees par la suite, afin de concentrer
l'attention du Conseil sur les premieres, et de
lui indiquer, d'autre part, quels sont exactement les elements d'appreciation dont on dispose jusqu'a present pour decider si, en fait, il
existait un champ de mines . . . Toutefois, si,
pour les raisons deja exposees, le travail de la
Sous-Commission s'est limite a cela, il est evident qu'en revanche, chacun de ses trois membres s'est reserve le droit d'exprimer son
opinion1 . "
La delegation australienne a adopte exactement la meme position en ce qui concerne les
attributions de la Sous-Commission, et le procesverbal de la cent-vingtieme seance en fait foill •
Il est parfaitement exact que la delegation polonaise a, au cours des travamc de la Sous-Commission, envisage les fonctions de la Sous-Commission d'une maniere differente. La delegation
polonaise - il n'est pas, je pense, inopportun de le rappeler - estimait qu'une telle Sous"Commission serait inutlle et l'a declare publiquement.
Le representant de la Pologne n'a pas vote en
faveur de la constitution de cette Sous-Commission. Lorsque cette Sous-Commission s'est mise
au travail, il ne lui a pas reconnu les memes attributions que les Tepresentants de l'Australie et
de la Colombie. En fait, la delegation polonaise
en est venue, et c'etait incontestablement son
droit, jusqu'a presenter sous sa propre responsabilite un rapport supplementaire.
Tels sont les faits, et j'estime qu'il est assez
injuste d'accuser, soit la delegation australienne,
soit la delegation colombienne, d'avoir admis,
pour peser les preuves a la Sous-Commission et
a u Conseil, deux poids et deux mesures. En realite, nous nous sommes deliberement abstenus
d'adopter un point de vue ou une conclusion
quelconque au sein de la Sous-Commission en
raison de notre conception d~ ses attributions.
C'est seulement apres etre retournes au Conseil
et apres avoir repris nos fonctions en tant que
membres du Conseil plutot qu'au nom du
Conseil, que nous avons, au nom de nos delegations respectives, exprime notre opinion sur ces
preuves.
Le point de vue de la delegation australienne,
tel qu'il a ete precedemment expose, concorde
avec celui du representant de la Colombie. n me
semble toutefois, d'apres les remarques faites par
le representant de la France, qu'il y a eu un
leger maleni:endu. Si j'en crois l'interpretation
anglaise de sa declaration, le representant de la
France a dit qu'il ne pouvait partager le point de
vue de l'Australie; il ne pouvait admettre qu'il
existat une forte presomption que les mines eussent ete posees par le Gouvernement albanais.
Or, ce n'est pas exactement le point de vue de
l'Australie. Voici ce que nous avons dit a la centvingtieme seance:
1 On trouvera le texte' officie1 de l'intervention du
representant de la Colombie dans les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 27,
page 544.
"Ibid., No 27, page 551.

cc. • • while there is no direct evidence as to
who laid the mines, yet, in the absence of any
other reasonable explanation, and having regard to the detailed evidence regarding the
conditions of the mines, the nature of the
mine-laying operations and the places in
which the mines were found, we think the
Council is justified in finding that the mines
must have been laid with the knowledge of
Albania, while there is a strong probability
that they were also laid with the connivance
of Albania. m
It is not the intention of our delegation to ask
the Council to make a decision based on probabilities. The finding which we think the Council
is justified in making is simply that the mines
must have been laid with the knowledge of Albania. We think that that finding is a reasonable
one, because of the accumulation of evidence
leading to that conclusion, and particularly in
the absence of any other reasonable eX,'Jlanation
or plausible or practical theory as to how the
mines got into the water at that particular place.

Because we take that view, it seems to us that
the amendment proposed by the United States
representative, and further amended by the representative of France, expresses clearly and exactly the conclusions reached by our delegation
from a study of the evidence.
Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): It is generally
known that any sovereign State is supposed to
have the means, the ability, and the duty of protecting its territorial waters from any injury
which may be done, as in this case. If the mines
had been laid on the high seas, nobody could
have been held responsible for them except the
State or the persons who had laid them. But if
mines are found in the territorial waters of any
State, that State may be held responsible for not
protecting its territorial waters, which it is
obliged to protect just as it is obliged to protect
and maintain the safety of any passage in its
land territory.
.
In the case before us, we must make a distinction as to whether the mines were laid during the war, or in peace-time. We know that Albania, during the war, was not in possession of
its territories and sovereignty. Its territories were
occupied by Axis forces, and its seas, which were
in the hands of Axis forces, were to some extent
mined. AlbaI!ia cannot be held responsible for
such mining during the war. If the mines were
laid during peace-time, when Albania enjoyed
its sovereignty and could exercise its full power
in protecting its territories and territorial waters,
Albania might be held responsible.

In fact, Albania now denies having had any
cognizance of the laying of the mines or of having laid them itself. I should not like to consider
1 The official text of the remarks of the representative
of Australia will be found in the Official Records of the
Security Council, Second Year, No. 27, page 551,

1\ .. s'il n'existe pas de preuve directe permettant d'etablir qui a pose ces mines, toutefois, faute d'une autre explication logique, et
etantdonp.e les preuves detaillees que l'on
possecle sur retat des mines, la nature des operations de mouillage et l'emplacement OU elles
ont ete decouvertes, je pense que le Conseil
est autorise a declarer que le Gouvernement
albanais a dO. avoir connaissance de l'existence de ces mines, et qu'il est meme probable
que ces mines ont ete posees de connivence
avec lui1 . "
Notre dcIeration n,a pas l'intention de demander au Couseil de prendre une decision fondee sur des probabilites. Mais il me semble que
le Conseil peut a juste titre declarer que le Gouvernement albanais a dO. avoir connaissance du
m~uillage de ces mines. Nous estimons que cette
conclusion est raisonnable, etant donne l'accumulation des preuves qui conduisent a cette
conclusion, et, en particulier, parce qu'il n'y a
pas d,autre explication raisonnable, ou plausible,
ou d'hypothest: logique qui permette d'expliquer
comment les mines ont penetre dans ces eaux et
precisement a cet endroit.
Tel est done notr~ point de vue, et il nous
semble que I'amendement propose par le representant des Etats-Unis, et modifie par le representant de la France, exprime avec clarte et precision les conclusions auxquelles I'examen des
preuves aamene notre delegation.
M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Il est notoire que tout Etat souverain est cense
avoir les moyens, la capacite et le devoir de proteger ses eaux territoriales et d'eviter les accidents
du genre de celui qui nous occupe ici. Si les
mines avaient ete posees en haute mer, il n'y
. aurait d'autres responsables que I'Etat ou les
personnes qui les auraientposees. Mais si on les
trouve dans les eaux territoriales d'un Etat, cet
Etat peut etre rendu ~esponsable de n'avoir pas
protege ses eaux territoriales, car il est tenu de
le faire, de meme qu'il est tenu de proteger les
voies de communications sur sun territoire et
d'en assurer la securite.
Dans le cas qui nous est soumis, il y a une
distinction a faire: les mines cnt-elles ete posees
en temps de guerre ou en temps de paix? Nous
savons que, pendant la guerre, I'Albanie n'etait
maitresse ni de son terdtoire, ni de sa souverainete. Son territoire etait occupe par les forces de
l'Axe et ses caux territoriales, qui etaient sous la
domination des memes forces, etaient plus ou
moins minces. L'Albanie ne saurait donc etre
tenue responsable de la pose de ces mines en
temps de guerre. Mais si les mines ont ete posees
en temps .le paix, alors que I'Albanie jouissait
de sa souverainete et pouvait l'exercer pleinement pour proteger son territoire et ses eaux territoriales, l'Albanie pourra etre tenue respons~ lJle.
En fait, le Gouvernement albanais nie maintenant avoir eu connaissance de la pose de ces
mines ou les avoir posees lui-meme. J'hesite a
, On trcuvera la traduction officielle de l'intervention du
representant de l'Australie dans les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, No 27,
page 551.

----.......

.....•

that this declaration, solemnly made by an independent State, is not correct. What Albania
has stated may be so, namely, thnt· it had no
cognizance of and did not place the mines. But
the fact remains that the Albnnian Government
is responsible for the presence, for the existence
of mines in its territorial waters, without having
taken measures to prevent mines from being laid,
to protest against their being laid, or to sweep
the Channel. The fact has not been made clear
whether the mines were laid during war-time or
peace-time. This is a very important point which
we should clarify before formulating any opinion
on the matter.
I have placed certain questions before the
Sub-Committee in order to clarify that point,
but have failed to obtain any satisfactory answer.
The qu!::.stions which I put were intended to determine whether the Channel had been swept.
In the first place, the British Government told us
that the Channel had been swept three times:
first, by the Germans; secondly, by the Allies in
October 1944; thirdly, by the Allies in November 1946. With regard to the first sweeping of
the Channel by the Germans, we cannot expect
the parties to give us exact dates and details,
because the Albanian Government stated that it
had found out about the sweeping from papers
and documents left by the Germans which referred to such a sweeping. However, with respect to the second sweeping, which is alleged
to have taken place in October 1944, that is,
two years before the disastrous accident which
took place in CI-LQber 1946, we are told that
there existed at that time an International
Board, composer.! of the Mediterranean and
other Allied Pc/wers, which was charged with
sweeping the seas. Nevertheless, unfortunately,
despite the inquiries which I made and my insistence on having some detailed information
about this Board, we have not received such details. As I understand it, when a sweeping of
any part of the seas is to take place, the Board
decides and there must be a written decision to
that effect in the minutes of that Board. When a
sweeping has been completed, a report is supposed to be presented to the Board with regard
to this sweeping,. the dates when it was carried
out, and what was found. The decision of the'
Board should contain the names of forces and
Powers charged with that sweeping.
In this case, we have heard of the existence
of this Board, but have not received any of these
documents, which I requested. The only thing
we have before us is the declaration of the plaintiff, the British Government through the British
representative on the Security Council, that the
sweeping took place and was done by British
forces only. The only person present not connected with the British forces was a certain
Captain MeEtre of the French Navy. His pres- .
ence was contested by the defendant and by
some members of the Security Council, on the
ground that he had not been nominated to testify, either by his Government or by the Board.
We asked the reason for this, and I think that
the Sub-Committee tried to determine on what
documentary authority the presence of this
French officer was based. He was an observer;

considerer comme inexacte cette declaration solennelle d'un Etat independant. n est possible
que l'Albanie, ainsi qu'elle l'a decla\'e, n'ait pas
eu connaissance de la pose de ces mines et ne les
ait pas pcsees elle-meme. Mais il n'en reste pas
moins que le Gouvernenlent albanais est responsable de la presence et de l'existence de mines
dans ses eaux territoriales. Il n'a pas pris les
mesures necessaires pour empechcr leur pose,
pour protester contre cette pose, ou pour draguer
le detroit. On n'a pas etabli si les mines ont cte
mouillees en temps de guerre ou en temps de
paix. C'est la un point important qu'il nous imparte d'eclaircir avant de nous prononcer.
I'm pose certaines questions a la Sous-Commission afin d'eclaircir ce point, mais je n'ai pas
obtenu de reponse satisfaisante. Mes questions
tendaient a determiner si le detroit avait ete
dragu6. En premier lieu, le Gouvernement britanIiique a declare que le detroit avait ete drague
trois fois: d'abord par les Allemands, ensuite par
les Allies, en octobre 1944, et en troisieme lieu,
par les Allies, en novembre 1946. En ce qui
concerne le premier dragage effectue par les
Allemands, nous ne pouvons pas esperer que les
parties interessees nous donnent des renseignements et des details exacts, car le Gouvernement
albanais a declare qu'il avait eu connaissance du
dragage gy'ace a des documents laisses par les
Allemands, ou 1'0n faisait allusion a ce fait.
Toutefois, en ce qui concerne le second dragage,
qui est cense avoir eu lieu en octobre 1944,
c'est-a-dire deux ans avant l'accident desastreux
survenu en octobre 1946, nous apprenons qu'a
cette epoque il existait un Bureau international
charge du dragage des mers, compose des Puissances mediterraneennes et autres Puissances
alliees. Malheureusement, malgre roes recherches
et mon insistance pour obtenir des renseignements detailles sur ce Bureau, nous n'avons rien
appris. Je crois comprf"'ndre qu'avant qu'on ne
procede au dragage C'u\ le partie quelconque des
mers, il faut une decision du Bureau, et que cette
decision est consignee dans les proces-verbaux.
Lorsque le dragage est acheve, un rapport doit
etre presente au Bureau indiquant les dates auxquelles ce dragage a ete effectue et les resultats
obtenus. Les decisions du Bureau doivent contenil' les noms des navires et des Puissances charges
du dragage.
On nous a bien parM ici de l'existence de ce
Bureau, mais nous n'avons re~u aucun des documents que j'ai demandes. La seuIe chose que
nous ayons en notre possession est la declaration
du plaignant, c'est-a-dire du Gouvernement britannique ou du representant du Gouvernement
britannique au Conseil de seturite. Il y est dit
que le dragage a eu lieu et qu'il a ete effectue
par la seule marine britannique. La seule personne presente qui £Ut etrangere a la marine britannique est un certain capitaine de fregate
Mestre, de la marine fran~aise. Sa presence est
contestee par l'accuse et par certains membres
du Conseil de securite, du fait qu'il n'a ete
designe comme temoin ni par son Gouvernement, ni par le Bureau de deminage. Nous avons
demande des explications sur ce point et je pense
que la Sous-Commission a cherchC a determiner

-~_... ~~

OU.:> .....

he made a report. But was he nominated by the
International Board or not? That is a question
to which we do not have the answer. He might
have been so nominated, but we do not have
the decision -of the Board with regard to this
operation; we have only the declaration of the
British representative on the Security Council.
If we had established that the sweeping of
the Channel was done officially, with a report
proving that the Channel was clear in October
1944 and all the time thereafter, we might conclude that the laying of the mines took place
subsequently, in peace-time, during the period
when Albania was exercising its sovereignty as
a sovereign State and could have been held responsible for the existence of the mines there, .
whether the Albanian Government laid them, or
whether the mines were laid with or without its
knowledge. A sovereign State is responsible for
that.
Unfortunately, however, these facts are lacking. We cannot obtain them now: According to
a genera'! principle of law, no penalty, responsibility, or conviction can be established on possibility or probability. There must be certainty in
the matters. We adhere to another principle,
that the slightest doubt eliminates penalty. If
there is doubt, we should not apply penalty nor
establish responsibility.
There is doubt, in my opinion, that there is a
possibility that the mines were laid previously.
In fact, according to what we have seen and the
facts established by the Sub-Committee, there is
great probability that the mines were laid afterwards, in peace-time. But this is only a probability, not a certainty. The certainty should be
established before any decision is reached.
In this instance, I consider that the United
King-d om justly presented this case to tlle Security Council, because it believed that its rights
had been encroached upon; instead of trying to
restore its position by force, the United Kingdom- came to the Security Council under the
provisions of the Charter. However, the United
Kingdom Government could have collected certain evidence or facts before. coming to the
Security Council, in order to facilitate the solution of such a problem. The Security Council is
not able to collect and investigate all this evidence. Had the British Government taken steps
under Article 33 of the Charter before coming
to the Security Council, it would have been able,
perhaps, to collect certain evidence to eliminate
all the doubts and ambiguities which exist in the
matter.
I do not see how I can participate in accusing
an independent soveJ.:.eign State, contrary to its
declaration of faith. I should prefer that the
matter be studied further, and that the parties
to the dispute try _some other means, such as
mediation, for instance, as mentioned in Article
33 of the Charter. This would give them another chance and would keep the dispute on the

la raisoD officiel1e de la presence de cet officier
Il agissait en qualite d'observateur et
il a redige un rapport; mais avait-il ete dcsigne
par le Bureau international? C'est ce que nous
ignorons. Il en est peut-etre ainsi, mais nous ne
possedons pas les decisions du Bureau relatives
a cette operation; nous n'avons que la declaration du representant pritannique au Conseil de
securite.
Si nous avions etabli que le dragage du detroit
a ete effectue officiel1ement, et si nous avions un
rapport prouvant que le detroit avait ete nettoye
de fa~on reguliere depuis octobre 1944; nous
pourrions conclure que la pose des mines a eu
lieu en temps de paix, a un moment ou l'Albanie
exer~ait son droit d'Etat souverain et pouvait
etre tenue responsable de l'existence des mines,
soit que le Gouvernement albanais les ait posees
lui-meme, soit que les mines aient ete posees a sa
connaiss~nce ou a son insu. Il s'agit la de responsabilites qui incombent a un Etat souverain.

fran~ais.

Malheureusement, ces faits manquent. Nous
ne pouvons les etablir maintenant. D'apres un
principe juridique d'ordre general, on ne peut
imposer aucune peine, aucune responsabilite,
aucune condamnr~tion en se fondant sur des possibilitt~s ou des probabilites. Il faut qu'il y ait
certitude. n existe un autre principe selon lequel
le moindre doute empeche la condamnation. Si
ce doute existe, nous ne pouvons infliger aucune
peine, ni etablir aucune responsabilite.
A mon avis, dans le cas present, il semble
douteux que les mines aient pu etre posees auparavant. Certes, d'apres nos constatations et les
faits etablis par la Sous-Commission, il est fort
proba.ble que les mines ont ete posees par la
suite, en temps de paix. Mais ce n'est qu'une
probabilite et non une certitude. Il faut que
cette certitude soit etablie avant qu'une decision
puisse etre prise.
Dans le cas qui nous occupe, festime que le
Royaume-Uni a eu raison de soumettre la question au Conseil de securite, car il a juge que ses
droits etaient leses; au lieu de chercher a defendre sa cause par la force, le Royaume-Uni est
venu, en vertu des dispositions de la Charte,
devant le Conseil de securite. Toutefois, afin de
faciliter la solution de ce probleme, le Gouvernement du Roya.ume-Uni aurait pu reunir certaines preuves ou certains faits avant de se presenter devant le Conseil de securite. Le Conseil
de securite n'est pas a meme de recueillir toutes
ces preuves et. de proceder a une enquete a leur
suje Si le Gouvernement britannique avait,
aVaI1L de soumettre le cas au Conseil de securite,
pris les mesures prevues a I'Article 33 de la
Charte, il aurait peut-etre pu reunir certaines
preuves permettant de supprimer les doutes et
ambiguites qui existent en cette atfaire.
I1 nous est impossible, devant sesdeclarations
de bonne foi, de souscrire a une accusation portee contre un Etat souverain et independant. Je
crois que la questioD; devrait faire l'objet d'un
examen plus approfondi et que les parties en
cause devraient rechercher d'autres moyens de
reglement tels que, par exemple, la mediations
qui est prevue a l'Article 33 de la Charte. Ce1a

•

"-

agenda of the Security Council for further ref~
erence in case these new endeavours failed to
reach a conciliatory solution.

leur permettra de tenter une fois encore d'arriver
a un accord. Pendanf ce temps, le problem~ res~
tera a 1'0rdre du jour du Conseil de securite et
sera repris au cas ou ces nouveaux efforts
ll'aboutiraient pas a une solution. conciliatoire.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
When I asked for recognition, I had intended
to speak on the Polish resolution; but. on reflection, I really think that the proper procedure
would be to take up and vote upon, first of
all, the resolution which I had the honour to
'submit. Therefore, for the moment, I shall reserve my right to speak later, if necessary; on the
Polish resolution.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Lorsque j'ai demande la
parole, je me proposais de faire quelques remarques sur la resolution de la Pologne; mais, reflexion faite, il me semble bien que la meilleure
methode consiste d'abord a mettre aux voix la
resolution que j'ai eu I'honneur de soumettre au
Conseil. Je me reserve done pour le moment le
droit de commenter ulterieurement, s'il en est
besoin, la resolution presentee par le representant
de la Pologne.
Mais comme ce dernier a formule certaines
observations sur la question qui nous occupe, je
voudrais simplement reprendre un point particulier de son expose. Il nous a donne lecture
d'un article du New York Herald Tribune dans
lequel il etait question d'un navire americain
qui a saute sur une mine en Mediterranee. C'est
la un bon exemple du genre d'arguments que
1'on nom;; presente. Or, ce navire ne se trouvait
pas dans .un chenal officie1lement demine. Par
consequent, ce cas n'a aucun rapport avec celui
qui nous occupe. Cet incident n'a absolument
rien de commun avec l'affaire soumise au
Conseil et clans laquelle nous voyons que 1'0n
reIeve vingt-deux mines dans un chenal qui a
deja ete demine; mines qui, de toute evidence,
ont ete recemment mouillees. On ne saurait done
etablir queIque analogie que ce soit entre ces
deux incidents.
J'aimel'ais egalement relever une ou deux remarques faites par le representant de la Syrie
qui, lui aussi, a examine le probleme d'un point
de vue general. Il a pose, dit-il - ou il declare
avoir pose - plusieurs questions a la Sous-Commission, sans avoir pu obtenir de reponse satisfaisante. n a d'abord voulu, je crois, verifier les
faits et, pour cela, il a demande a la Sous-Commission un rapport detaille sur le premier deminage effectue dans le detroit en octobre 1944.
Pour eviter tout malentendu, si tant est qu'il en
existe, je dirai que le Bureau de deminage n'existait, evidemment, pas encore. La guerre n'etait
pas terminee et ce Bureau ne fut cree qu'en
novembre 1945.
Le deminage de 1944 a ete effectue par les
Allies. C'etait au cours des hostilites; a cette
epoque, aucun rapport detaille n'etait communique. Toutefois, les Gouvernements allies etaient
avises de temps a autre. Les operations de deminage etaient periodiques. I,.es Gouver1.1ements
allies ont ete avises de temps a autre que le
detroit semblait libre. Il est apparemment reste
libre jusqu'en octabre 1946, puisque aucune
mine n'a explose dans le detroit avant l'explosion
dont nos navires furent victimes le 22 octobre.
C'est apres cctte date qu'on a entrepris le troisieme deJ;llinage, qui a revele la presence d'au
moins vingt-deux mines recemment mouillees.
Le representant de la Syrie a egalement fait
allusion a la deposition du capitaine de fregate
Mestre et a mis en question le mandat de cet
officier. Le fait est que le commandant en chef

Since the Polish representative, however,
made certain observations on the question which
is before us, I should like to mention just one
point. He quoted a report from the New York
H eraId Tribttne of the mining of an American
ship in the Mediterranean. That is a good instance of the kind of argument which has been
presented to us. That ship was not in a recognized, swept channel, and, therefore, there is no
analogy whatever. That incident is totally and
wholly irrc::levant. It is quite unlike the case
which is before the Council, in which you have
at least. twenty-two moored mines swept up in
an already swept channel, mines which were evidently laid there recently. Therefore, there is no
analogy whatever between the two cases.

I might perhaps refer to one or two things
said by the representative of Syria, who also
dealt with the general question. He referred to
the fact-or, at least, he alleged-that he had
submitted several questions to the Sub-Committee to which he had not been able to obtain satisfactory answers. I think his first point was that
he had tried to ascertain the exact circumstances, and called for detailed reports of the
first sweeping of the channel in October 1944.
To correct any misunderstanding, if such exists,
I would explain that at that date, of course, the.
Mine Clearance Board was not in existence. The
war was still on, and the Mine Clearance Board
was not set up until November 1945.
The 1944 sweeping was done by the Allies.
It was done in war-time; no detailed reports
were circulated, but Allied Governments were
notified from time to time. There were periodic
sweeps. The Allied Governments were notified
from time to time that the channel appeared to
be free, and so it remained. It remained so, apparently, until October 1946, because no mine
ever exploded in that channel until our ships
were blown up on 22 October. Mter this date
the third sweeping was undertaken, and it revealed the presence of at least twenty-two newly
moored mines.
The Syrian representative also referred to the
testimony of Captain Mestre, and questioned his
status. As a matter of fact, the Naval Allied
Commander-in-Chief asked the President of the

.L....

-

•. QCL

Mine Clearance Board to appoint representatives, and nominated Captain Mestre, who later
made his report to die President. That was his
status.
Finally, the representative of Syria today, and
the representative of Poland the other day, posed
the principle that if you brought an accusation
against anyone, you must be able to prove it
completely. While I agree that that is a very
good principle in deed, I doubt whether it can
be pushed to the point-it certainly cannot in
my country-of claiming that you must produce
eyewitness evidence. If that were the case, no
murderer would ever be hanged in my country,
unless someone had seen him commit the crime.
That is not the case; I can speak only for my
country. Therefore, I suggest, that although, as
I have said several times, I cannot produce eyewitnesses, the evidence I have given creates such
a clear presumption that I think nobody need
do violence to his conscience in adopting the
resolution which I have submitted.

00'

des forces navales alliees avait demande au
President du Bureau de deminage de nornrner
des representants. Le capitaine de Fregate Mestre fut designe et fit ensuite un rapport au President. Voila quel etait son mandat.
En dernier lieu, le representant de la Syrie et
le representant de la Pologne ont pose en principe, le premier aujourd'hui et le second il y a
quelques jours, que si 1'0n porte une accusation
contre quelqu'un, on doit pouvoir en prouver
completement le bien-fonde. Je reconnais l'exce11ence de ce principe. Toutefois, je doute qu'on
puisse aller jusqu'a exiger que le plaignant fournisse des temoins oculaires. Ce n',est pas, en tout
cas, la loi de man pays. Car on ne pourrait plus
alors, dans mon pays, pendre un assassin que si
on l'a vu conu::nettre son crime. Or tel n'est pas
le cas (je parle toujours de mon pays). Par
consequent, bien que je ne puisse, comme je l'ai
declare a plusieurs reprises, produire de temoins
oculaires, je pense que les preuves fournies par
moi constituent une tres forte presomption. Personne n'a besoin, je crois, de faire violence a sa
conscience _pour adopter la resolution que j'ai
presentee.

Mr. JOHNSON (United States of America):
I wish to speak merely to indicate that the
United States delegation accepts the amendment
submitted by the representative of France, which
is an amendment to the text suggested by the
United States and has been previously accepted
by the representative of the United Kingdom.

M. JOHNSON (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Je veux simplement indiquer
que la. delegation des Etats-Vnis accepte
l'amendement que le representant de la Frailce
a apporte au texte propose par les Etats-Unis et
qui a ete deja accepte par le representant du
Royaume-:Uni.

The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the declaration of the representative of the United
States, paragraph 2 of our draft resolution will
be deleted, and the French amendment will be
substituted.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Conformement a la declaration du representant des
Etats-Unis, nous allons supprimer le paragraphe
2 de notre projet de resolution pour le remplacer
par l'amendement de la France.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I consider that the new version of the resolution, with
the inclusion of the United States amendments,
is also ill-founQ.ed. The USSR delegation has
already explained the reasons why it considers
the United Kingdom proposals ill-founded. I
shall, therefore, not repeat myself.
I cannot support either the United Kingdom
proposal in its original form, or after taking account of the United States amendments. In a
certain sense, the United States amendments
make the draft resolution even worse. They
make it worse because, whereas in the United
Kingdom proposal only Albania is blamed, the
United States amendments attach blame not
only to Alba.'lia but also to some unknown, third
country. Allusions are made to some other country. The United States representative has not
made it clear to us to which country he is alluding.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit 'du russe): A mon
avis, le nouveau texte de la resolution redige en
tenant compte des amendements des Etats-Unis
n'est pas davantage justifie. La delegation de
l'URSS a deja expose les raisons pour lesquelles
elle trouve la proposition britannique injustifiee.
Il est done inutile que je me repete.
Je ne puis appuyer la proposition britannique
ni dans sa forme premiere, ni dans la version
qui tient compte des amendements des EtatsUnis. Dans un certain sens, ces amendements
rendent pire encore ce projet de resolution. En
effet, si dans la proposition britannique l' Albanie
seule est accusee, les amendements des EtatsUnis blament, en plus de l'Albanie, un troisieme
pays qui, d'ailleurs, n'est pas nomme. On y fC}.it
allusion a un autre pays. Le representant des
Etats-Unis n'a pas precise lequel.

The PRESIDENT: If no other representatives
wish to speak, we shall vote first on the United
Kingdom draft resol\ltion as amended by the
United States and France.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Si aucun
autre representant ne desire prendre la parole,
nous alIons d'abord mettre aux voix le projet de
resolution du Royaume-Uni te1 qu'il a ete
amende par les Etats-Unis et la France.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) ( translated from Russian): Are
there no amendments? Are they to be put to the

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Il n'y au··
rait donc pas d'amendements? Ou alors les met-

•

vote separately or together? Are we to vote on
b'1e new, amended text? Have I understood this
rightly?

trons-nous aux voix separement ou en bloc?
Voterons-nous sur le nouveau texte, c'est-a-dire
sur le texte amende? Est-ce bien ainsi que se
presente la situation?

The PRESIDENT: I am at fault because, as I
explained before the representative of the USSR
spoke, the new draft would be changed, since
the United States representative agreed to have
the French amendment inserted in place of his
second amendment. If the Council thinks it
better to read the draft, I shall do so.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ['anglais): Je reconnais que je suis en faute. Avant que le representant de rURSS prenne la parole, j'ai indiqu6
que le nouveau texte serait modifie, puisque le
representant des Etats-Unis a accepte de voir
le second amendement qu'il presentait remplace
par I'amendement fran~ais. Si le Conseil desire
que je lise le projet de resolution, je le ferai
volontiers.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics): I shall not ask to have it read if
other members of the Council do not request it.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit de ['anglais): Je ne
demanderai pas qu'on lise le projet, si d'autres
memb{es du Conseil ne le demandent pas.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): The text before us no longer represents exactly the first British proposal as
amended. The paragraph amended by the
American proposal, to which I myself have introduced an amendment which has been. accepted, appeared as paragraph' 1 and now appears as paragraph .2. I must say that I should
prefer this paragraph to remain paragraph 1, and
that at the end, as in the original British text,
a general dentmciation of mine-laying should be
retained. In this respect, as regards the last part,
the first British text seems to be preferable to the
amendment proposed by the United States delegation. I do not see why the first British text
was amended since I think it was better.
In summarizing, I am making two points:
I should prefer paragraph 1 of the original text,
as amended, to stand, and I should like the paragraph declarin.g that the laying of mines is an
offence against huma.JP.ty to appear at the end
of the proposal in the original wording drafted
by the British delegation.

M. PARODI (France) : Le texte que :lOUS avons
sous les yeux ne represente plus exactement la
premiere proposition britannique amendee. Le
paragraphe modifie par la proposition des EtatsUnis, a laquelle j'ai apporte moi-meme un
amendement qui a ete accepte, figurait sous le
numero 1 et figure maintenant sous le numero 2.
Je prefererais, je dois le dire, que cc paragraphe
conservat le numero 1 et que I'on maintillt, a la
fin, comme dans le premier texte britannique,
une condamnation d'ensemble visant la pose des
mines en general. A cet egard, pour la partie
firlale, le premier texte britannique me parmt
preferable a I'amendement propose par la delegation des Etats-Unis. Je ne vois pas pourquoi
la pr.emiere redaction britannique a ete modifiee;
elle me parmt meilleure.
En resume, je formule deux observations: je
pre£ererais que I'on maintillt le paragraphe 1 du
texte primitif amende, et qq,e le paragraphe constatant que le mouillage de mines est un acte
contre l'humanite fUt reporte' a la fin de la
proposition dans la redaction initiale que lui
avait donnee la deU~gation britannique.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The President ~ unable to change the wording
submitted to you, for the British proposal has
been entirely modified as a result of the adoption
of the amendments of the French and the
United States delegations.
I cannot, therefore~ act on the suggestion of
the French representative. In accordance with
the rules governing our debates, we shall proceed with our work on the basis of the text
drafted by the Secretariat. (The President continued in English.) I think one of my prerogatives is to speak in more than one language. I
dia not want to read the complete draft in English, but, because of the doubts created by some
of the representatives, I shall read the text in
English:
"The Security Council,
"Having considered statements of representatives of the United Kingdom and of Albania,
concerning a dispute between the United Kingdom and Albania arising out of an incident on
22 October 1946 in the Strait of Corfu, in
which two British ships were damaged by mines,
with resulting loss of life and injury to their
crews;

Le PRESIDENT: Il est impossible a la presidence de changeI' la redaction qui vous est soumise, car la proposition britannique a ete completement modifiee apres I'adoption de:s amendements des deU:gations de la France et des EtatsUnis.
Je ne peux done pas retenir la suggestion du
representant de la France, et nous continuerons
nos travaux en nous fondant sur le texte elabore
par le Secretariat, conformement aux T~gles qui
doivent regir nos deliberations. (Le President
poursuit en anglais.) Je crois avoir, entre autres
prerogatives, celle de m'exprimer en plus d'une
langue. Jen'avais pas l'intention de lire le projet
complet en anglais. Toutefois, en raison des
doutes que viennent d'emettre certains representants, je vais vous lire le texte en anglais:
"Le Conseil de'securite,
"Ayant etudie les exposes des representants du
Royaume-Uni et de I'Albanie, au sujet du differend qui a surgi entre ces deux pays a la suite
d'un incident survenu le 22 octobre 1946, dans
le detroit de Corfou, au cours duque1 deux
navires britalliliques furent endommages par des
mines et des membresde leur equipage tues DU
blesses;

--"".---------~.

__.-..-_..

~~-~-~~--

"1. Considers that the laying of mines in
peace-time without notification is unjustified·
and an offence against humanity;

"1. Estime que le mouillage de mines en
temps de paix sans avertissement prealable ne se
justifie pas et constitue un crime contre l'humanite;

"2. Finds that an unnotified minefield was
laid in the immediate vicinity of the Albanian
coast, resulting in serious injury to two of His
Majesty's ships with loss of life and injury to
their crews; that this minefield could not have
been laid without the kpowledge of the Albanian authorities;

"2. Constate qu'un champ de mines a ete
mouille, sans avertissement prealable, au voisinage immediat de la cote albanaise, qu'il a cause
de graves degats a deux navires de Sa Majeste
et tue ou blesse plusieurs membres de l'equipage;
que ce champ de mines n'a pu etre mouille
l'insu des autorites albanaises;

"3. Recommends that the United Kingdom
and Albanian Governments. should settle the dispute on the basis of the Council's finding in paragraph 2 above, and that in the event of failure
to settle, either party may apply to the Council
for further consideration of the matter;

"3. Recommande que les Gouvernements du
Royaume-Uni et de l'Albanie reglent le differend
qui les oppose en prenant pour base de leurs
negociations les conclusions du Conseil exposees
au paragraphe 2 ci-dessus, et qu'au cas OU les
deux parties n'arriveraient pas a se mettre d'accord, l'une ou l'autre puisse demander au Conseil
depoursuivre l'examen de la question;

"4. Resolves to retain this dispute on its
agenda until both parties certify that it has been
settled to Jheir satisfaction."

"4. Decide de maintenir ce differend a son
ordre du jour jusqu'a ce que les deux parties
dec1arent que le differend a ete regIe a leur satisfaction mutuelle."
Le vote a lieu main leveeJ avec les resultats
suivants:
V otent pour:
Australie
Belgique
Bresil
Chine
Colombie
Etats-Unis d'Amerique
France
V otent contre:
Pologne
Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques
SJabstient:
Syrie

A vote was taken by show of handsJ with the
following result:
Votes for:
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
China
Colombia
France
United States of America.
Votes against:
Poland
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstention:
Syria

a

a

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
There is only one abstention. I am not voting.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaum~-Uni)
(tmduit de l'anglais): n n'y a qu'une seule abstention, car je ne participe pas au vote.

The PRESIDENT: The res~lution has failed to
oQtain the affirmative vote of one of the five
permanent members,' and therefore is not

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de lJanglais) : La resolution n'a pas obtenu le vote affirmatif de l'un
des cinq membres permanents. Elle n'est done
pas adoptee.

adopt~d.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, in view of the late hour, I assume that you will wish to adjourn the Council.
I shall have certain observations, and even suggestions, to make in the light of the situation in
which we now find ourselves. Presumably, we
shall have also the alternative of discussing the
Polish proposal.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Monsieur le President,
vous desirez sans doute, en raison de l'heure
tardive, lever la seance. J'aurai encore a presenter certaines observations, voire certaines suggestions, que m'a inspirees la situation OU nons
nous trouvons a present. N ous aurons probablement aussi a discuter la proposition de la
Pologne.

Mr. LANGE (Poland): Mr. President, considering the fact that the views of all the members
of the Council have already been registered, I
do not think that my'resolution would serve any
useful purpose now. Consequently, I withdraw
it.

M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Monsieur le President, etant donne que tous les
membres du Conseil ont exprime leurs vues, je
ne pense pas que ma resolution soit inaintenanf
utile, et, par consequent, je la retire..

The PRESIDENT: I suggest that we adjourn.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je propose done de lever la seance.

...

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President, I wish to detain members of the Security Council for literally two minutes in order
to draw their attention to a matter which is not
on the agenda but which is worthy of attention.
I am not proposing that we discuss this matter;
I am only drawing the attention of the Security
Council to it.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodacialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Monsieur le President, je n'ai reellement que deux
minutes a demander aux membres du Conseil.
Je voudrais leur sitiIlaler une question qui ne
figure pas a l'ordre du jour, mais qui merite
neanmoins notre attention. Je ne propose pas que
nous la discutions. Je me contente d'attirer sur
elle l'attention du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: The Chair will allow the
representative of the USSR to speak, in conformity with the liberal interpretation of rules
always observed by tlus Council, before we consider the adjournment suggested by the representative of the United Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de I'anglais): Conformement au principe d'interpretation liberale du
reglement que ce Conseil a toujours suivi, j'autorise le representant de l'URSS a se faire entendre, avant que nous ne decidions s'il convient
de lever la seance comme l'a suggere le representant du Royaume-Uni.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I wish
to draw the attention of the Security Council to
the following experience during the work of the
Commission of Investigation of incidents on the
Greek frontiers. This experience proves that the
Greek authorities are by no means ensuring
suitable conditions for members of the Commission and ,their representatives in the pursuit of
their work. I want to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the following fact.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je veux
attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite sur le
fait suivant: at' cours de ses travaux, la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a. la
frontiere grecque a fait une experience qui demontre que les autorites grecques sont loin d'assurer aux membres de la Commission et a leurs
representants les conditions necessaires a. la
bonne marche de leurs travaux. Je voudrais attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite sur le fait
suivant.
Il y a que1ques jours, M. Grauer, expert et
conseiller du representant de l'URSS a la Commission, accompagne des representants de la
Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie, est
rentre a Trikkala, en Grece centrale, apres avoir
rencontre le celebre general qui commande les
guerill~s grecques. Ees autorites grecques ont
alors declare qu'elles ne pouvaient pas assurer la
securite du representant de l'URSS et du groupe
qui l'accompagnait. Il est evident que le representant de l'URSS n'a eu d'autre recours que de
s'adresser a. la Legation de l'Union sovietique a
Athenes. Il a fallu que le Ministre sovietique
intervint specialement et qu'il entrat en negociations avec le Ministre grec Maximos pour qu'on
prit les mesures necessaires. On a pu alors !le
rendre compte que les dedarations des autorites
grecques, se10n lesquelles il etait impossible d'assurer la securite du representant de l'URSS pendant son voyage a Salonique, ne correspondaient
pas a la realite, puisque 'par la suite les autorites
grecques ont declare pouvoir garantir la securite
du representant de l'URSS et qu'elles l'ont effectivement assuree.
.
Il va sans dire que si les autorites grecques ne
peuvent assurer la securite des representants, du
moins de certains representants, a la Commission, ce1a signifie simplement que le Gouvernement grec n'agit pas conformement a la resolution du Conseil de securite qui invite les Gouvernements interesses a collaborer avec la Commission. Ce!a signifie meme que les actes du
Gouvernement grec sont contraires a. cette resolution.
Cette situation est absolument inadmissible et
je voulais attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite sur ce point, clans l'espoir que les mesures
necessaires seront prises pour que de tels incidents ne se reproduisent plus. J'ai fait une demarche dans ce sens aupres du Secretaire general

When Mr. Grauer, an expert and adviser to
the USSR representative on that Commission,
returned several days ago to the town of Trikkala
in Central Greece with the representatives of
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, following a
meeting with a well-known ,partisan general in
Greece, the Greek authorities declared that they
were unable to ensure and guarantee the safety
of the USSR representative and the group accompanying him. Naturally, the only course
open to the USSR representative was to address
himself to the USSR Embassy in Athens. The
special intervention of the Soviet Ambassador
was required, as well as discussions with the
Greek Minister, Maximos, in order that the necessary steps might be taken. Of course, it was
discovered that the statements of Greek authorities on the alleged impossibility of ensuring the
safety of the USSR representative during his
journey to the town of Salonika were not in accordance with the facts; for the Greek authorities subsequently stated that they were in a position to ensure and guarantee the safety of the
USSR representative, and they eventually did so.
It goes without saying that if the Greek authorities are unable to ensure the safety of representatives-at least that of certain representatives working on the Commission-this naturally
shows that the Greek Government is not acting
in accordance with the Security Council resolution calling for co-operation with the Commission on the part of the Govermilent concerned,
but is indeed acting in a manner contrary to
that resolution.
This situation is absolutely inadmissable. I
wish to draw the attention of the Security Council to it, in the hope that suitable measures will
be taken to ensure that similar incidents will not
be repeated~ I have also made the necessary
representations to the Secretary-General, who

.......

~

• ~ill,

a .......

I hope, take all
~easures at his dis~
posal to prevent such a situation from recurring.

et j'espere qu'il fera tout son possible pour que
cette situatiOiL.i. ne se presente plus.

The PRESIDENT: I take note of what we have
just heard from the representative of the USSR.
A meeting of the Council will be called to consider that matter.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je
prends acte de la declaration du representant de
I'Union sovietique. Le Conseil sera convoque en
seance pour s'occuper de cette question.

The Secretary has informed me that two other
Councils of the United Nations will meet on
Wednesday and Thursday. It will be inconvenient to hold a meeting of the Security Council on either of those days. We could meet on
Friday morning to take up the matter of the
former Japanese mandated islands. I am afraid,
however, that our meeting on this subject will be
a long one. For $at reason, I have consulted
with the Chairman of the Commission on Conventional Armaments, and he has agreed that
the Commission on Conventional Armaments
would meet on Friday morning, so that the
Council might meet on Friday at 3 p.m. Do we
agree on that?

Le Secretariat vient de m'informer que deux
autres Conseils de I'Organisation des Nations
Unies se reuniront mercredi et jeudi. 11 ne serait
done pas commode de convoquer ces jours-Ia le
Conseil de securite. Nous pourrions nous reunir
vendredi matin pour reprendre la question des
lies anterieurement placees sous mandat japonais. Mais je crains que la seauce consacree a
cette question ne soit longue. J'ai consulte le
President de la Commission des armements de
type classique. 11 a 2.ccepte que la Commission
se reunisse vendredi matin, de fa~on que le
Conseil puisse tenir seance vendredi a 15 heures.
So:nmes-nous d'accord sur ce point?

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President, I should like to have specified what
question will be dealt with at the 'meeting on
Friday. I should also like an explanation of your
statement that our meeting on that question
would be too long. I cannot understand to what
question you are referring.
.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Monsieur
le President, j'aimerais qu'il fUt precise quelle
question sera discutee a la seance de veIldredi.
J'aimerais avoir egalement one explication de
votre declaration seion laquelle la seance que
nous consacrerions a la discussion de cette question risquerait d'etre longue. Je ne comprends
pas a quelle question vaus faites allusion.

The PRESIDENT: I am referring to t.lte question of the former Japanese mandated islands,
as I declared in my statement.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): n
s'agira, comme je l'ai dit, de la question des lies
anterieurement placees sous mandat japonais.

ili;

Do we agree to adjourn?

Sommes-nous d'accord pour lever la 'seance?

Mr. EL-KlioURI (Syria): Mr. President, a
point of order. I should like to know what happened to the case which was before us today.
In other words, since the United Kingdom draft
resolution has not been accepted, is this case to
be dismissed altogether or is it to remain on the
agenda until we find some other proposal or
draft resolution which may please the permanent
members of the Security Council?

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Un point d'ordre, Monsieur le President. Je
desirerais savoir ce qu'il t:st advenu de la question dont nous avons eu a connaitre aujourd'hui. En d'autres termes, le projet de resolution
du Royaume-Uni n'ayant pas ete accepte, cette
question doit-elle etre classee ou doit-elle rester
a 1'0rdre du jour jusqu'a ce nous trouvions une
proposition ou un projet de resolution qui puisse
satisfaire les membres permanents du Conseil de
securite?

The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative of Syria, I wish to state that the matter will
remain on the agenda. I have ruled only on the
request of the United Kingdom representative
that we adjourn now.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Pour
repondre au representant de la Syrie, je tiens a
dire que la question restera a 1'0rdre du jour. Sur
la demande du representant du Royaume-Uni,
j'ai simplement decide d'ajourner la seance.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I do
not think that the request of the United Kingdom representative constitutes sufficient grounds
for concluding ,that this question should remain
on the agenda. Such a conclusion would be incorrect. The Security Council has not been able
to reach a decision on this question. I therefore
see no reason to retain this question on the
agenda. The Security Council has discusse<;l certain questions in the past on which it has been
unable to reach positive decisions, and these
questions fell into abeyance and ceased to be
listed on the agenda of the Security Council or,
as we say officially, on the list of questions with

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sociacialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : A mon
avis, il ne suffit pas que -le representant du
Royaume-Uni fasse une demande pour que nous
en inferions qu'il va de soi que cette question
demeure a 1'0rdre du jour. Vne' telle conclusion
serait inexacte. Le Conseil de securite n'a pu se
decider sur cettequestion; c'est pourquoi j'estime
qu'il n'y a aucune raison de la maintenir a 1'01"dre du jour. 11 est arrive clans le passe que le
Conseil ait examine certaines questions sans pouvoir aboutir a une decision positive. L'examen de
ces questions a ete des lors suspendu et 1'0n a
cesse de les considerer comme figurant a l'ordre
du jour du Conseil de. securite ou, selon l'expres-

which the Security Council'was seized. I do not
think, therefore, that there is any reason to consider that tills question is on the agenda of the
Security Council.
.

sion officielle, comme mscrites sur la liste des
~aires soumises au Conseil. C'est pourquoi j'estime qu'il n'y a aucune raison de considerer que
cette question figure encore a l'ordre du jour du
Conseil de securite.

The PRESIDENT: Rule 10 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council reads
as follows:

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): L'article
10 du reglement interieur provisoire du Conseil
de securite est ainsi con~u :

"Any itein of the agenda of a meeting of
the Security Council, consideration of which
has not been completed at that meeting, shall,
unless the Security Council otherwise decides,
automatically be included in the agenda of the
next meeting:'

"Toute question figurant a l'ordre du jour
d'une seance du Conseil de securite et dont
l'examen n'est pas acheve au cours de ladite
seance est portee automatiquement a l'ordre
du jour de la seance suivante a moins que le
Conseil de securite n'en decide autrement."

My decision was based solely on the fact that
the United Kingdom representative asked for
adjournment. My duty was to consider the adjournment immediately, in accordance with our
provisional rules of procedure; but by a liberal
interpretation, I allowed the Polish representrttive to speak. The Polish representat~ve suggested
that the amendments be withdrawn. The Council had not reached any decision on all these
questions, when the USSR representative requested to speak on other matters. In these circumstances, the Chair could not reply to the
representative of Syria ill any way other than by
saying that the matter would be kept on the
agenda for the next meeting. But if the Council at tllis time wants to continue its discussion,
it is not up to the Chair to stop the Council;
the Chair must stay here until an questions have
been settled in accordance with the wishes of the
majority.

Ma decision est simplement fondee sur le fait
que le representant du Royaume-Uni a demande
l'ajournement. Conformement a notre reglement
interieur provisoire, il etait de mon devoir d'envisageI' l'ajournement immediat, mais, interpretant ce reglement d'une fa~on liberale, j'ai autorise le representant de la Pologne a prendre la
parole. Le representant de la Pologne a propose
qu'on retirat les amendements. Le Conseil
n'avait encore pris aucune decif:on a Cf" sujet
lorsque le representant de l'URSS a demande
a presenter des observations SUI d'autrc3 questions. Dans ces conditions, le President ne ponvait repondre au representant de la Syrie qu't:n
l'assurant que ia question serait maintenue a
l'ordre du jour de la prochaine seance. Mais,
si le Conseil tient a poursuivre des debats, il
n'appartient pas au President de l'en empecher:
le President doit rester ici jusqu'a ce que toutes
les questions aient ete reglees conformement au
desir de la majorite.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): I do not
consider that this question is still on the agenda,
in view of the fact that the Council has not been
able to reach a positive decision on this question.
I shall not consider that it is on our agenda until the Security Council decides that it is necessary to retain this item on its agenda.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je ne
considere pas que cette question se trouve encore
a l'ordre du jour, puisque le Conseil de securite
n'a pu se prononcer d'une fa~on positive sur elle.
Je ne considere pas qu'elle figure a l'ordre du
jour tant que le Conseil de securite n'aura pas
decide qu'il est necessaire de l'y maintenir.

The PRESIDENT: When I explained why I, as
President, was compelled to keep this matter on
the agenda, I forgot to state that the United
xmgdom representative, when he suggested adjournment, said L~at he would make some comments and declarations on our decision, and he
asked to do so at the next meeting. I do not
think that it would be a liberal attitude for the
Chair not to allow the United Kingdom representative or any other representative to make
comments about the decisio'l of the Council.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Quand
j'ai explique pourquoi j'etais tenu, en tant que
President, a maintenir cette question a l'ordre
du jour, j'ai oublie de dire que le representant
du Royaume-Uni, .en proposant l'ajournement,
avait anrionce qu'il ferait, a la prochaine seance,
quelques commentaires et declarations sur notre
decision. Je ne pense pas que le President se
montrerait liberal s'il n'autorisait pas le representant du Royaume-Uni ou tout autre representant a faire des commentaires sur la decision
du Conseil.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Besides saying that I had some comments to
make on what has happened, I said I had some
suggestions, and by that I meant suggestions for
alternative procedures which had also been
hinted at by other speakers. The matter is not
at an end. However, let us not make any more
speeches about it now. If there is any doubt as

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Je n'ai pas dit seulement
que .j'avais des commentaires a faire, j'ai annonce aussi que j'avais des propositions a presenter, et je veux dire par la des propositions

•...

''"'"~''.'''''''

quant aux difIerentes procedures entre lesquelles j'
.
nous pourrions choisir. D'autres orateurs ont
d'ailleurs fait des allusions a ce sujet. La ques-

' ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

I.,.

-

to whether the question remains on our agenda,
let the Council vote on the matter.

tion n'est pas regIee. Mais abstenons-nous d'en
parler plus longuement aujourd'hui. Si quelque
doute demeure sur le fait de savoir si la question
reste a l' ··dre du jour, procedons a un vote sur
ce point.

Mr. HASLUCK (Australia): It seems to our
delegation that there is only one short way out
of this difficulty. As we understand the position,
you have ruled in accordance with rule 10 that
this item is on our agenda and remains on our
agenda. If any delegation disagrees with your
ruling, the provisional rules of procedure also
provide that it shall move to disagree with it. If
no delegation moves to disagree with your ruling, I submit that your ruling stands.

M. HAs LUCK (Australie) (traduit de l'anglais): NC"'!': pensons qu'il n'y a qu'un moyen
de resoudre .apidement ceUe difficulte. Si je ne
me trompe, vous avez, conformement a l'article
10, decide que la question reste a l'ordre du
jour. Si une delegation s'oppose a votre decision,
elle doit, aux termes du reglement interieur provisoire, soumettre une proposition dans ce sens.
Si aucune delegation ne le fait, j'estime que votre
decision reste valable.

Mr. EL-KHOURI (Syria): I consider that the
Security Council is expected to find a solution
or take a final decision on any subject or accusation presented to it. If the Security Council
fails today to arrive at a final solution acceptable
to all the members, especially the permanent
members of the Security Council, that does not
mean that the Security Council would fail tomorrow or some other time. The Security Council cannot consider anything as finally decided
upon, unless a decision is taken for the dismissal
of the question, or unless a decision is made
which would be effective, according to the subject which is before it.

M. EL-KHOURI (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
J'estime que le Conseil de securite dolt trouver
une solution ou prendre une decision definitive
sur tout sujet ou toute accusation dont il est
saisi. Si le Conseil de securite ne parvient pas
aujourd'hui a trouver une solution definitive qui
soit acceptable a tous ses membres, et notamment aux membres permanents du Conseil de
securite, cela ne signifie pas qu'il echouera de~
main, ou plus tard. Le Conseil de securite ne
peut pas considerer une question comme definitivement reglee a moins qu'il ne decide de dasser
l'affaire, ou qu'il ne prenne une decision effective en ce qui concerne la question qui lui est
soumise.

I therefore consider that it is natural and
goes without saying that, as long as the matter
is not dismissed by the Security Council, it remains on the agenda. We do not expect that
this subject, which has not been decided upon
today, cannot be settled tomorrow or that some
other solution cannot be found in the future. I,
therefore, consider that it remains on the agenda.

C'est pourquoi je pense que, tant que la question ne sera pas dassee par le Conseil de secunte,
elIe restera evidennnent et naturell€ment a
l'ordre du jour. Nous ne redoutans pas que cette
question, qui n'est pas regIee aujourd'hui, ne
puisse l'etre demam, ou quequelque autre solution ne lui soit trouvee clans l'avenir. A mon avis,
la question reste done a l'ordre du jour.

Mr. LOPEZ (Colombia): According to rule
33 of our provisional rules of procedure, any
motion simply for the adjournment of the meeting shall be decided without debate. I should
like to make certain whether or not the representative of the United Kingdom made any motion for the adjournment of the meeting because, if he did, I take it for granted that the
adjournment should be decided upon without
debate according to our rules.

M. LOPEZ (Colombie) (traduit de l'anglais) :
Aux termes de l'artide 33 de notre reglcment
interieur provisoire, il doit etre statue sans debat
sur toute proposition t~ndant simplement a
ajourner la seance. J'aimerais done savoir si le
representant du Royaume-Uni a fait ou non une
proposition tendant a ajourner la seance. S'ill'a
faite, je suis persuade, suivant notre reglement,
que l'ajournement doit etre decide sans debat.

The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the suggestion of the representative of Colombia, I
think we must adjourn without debate, according to our rules. If you agree, the Council <;tands
adjourned.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): CorJor=
mement a la suggestion du representant de la
Colombie, je pense que nous devons, aux termes
de notre reglement, ajourner la seance sans dehat, et je vous demande si vous etes d'accord sur
ce point. S'il en est ainsi, la seance est levee.

The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

La seance est levee a 14 h. 10.

UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
PUBLICATIONS DES NATiONS UNIES
Security Council Publications
Publications du Conseil de s&curite

\

Journal of the Security Council (18 January - 11
July 1946), bilingual: English-French, 42 issues,
868 pages, the set
$4.20

Journal du Conseil de securite (18 i~nvie~-11
iuillet 1946), bilingue: anglais-frant;ais, 42 numeros,
868 pages, la serie
~
$4,20

The Journal of the Secu1'ity Council, issues 1-42,
contains the records of the first 49 meetings of the
Security Council in their provisional form. These
records are now being re-edited and will later appear
as Securi~y Council Official Records, First Year, Fir#
Series. Publication of the. Journal of the Security
Council was discontinued on 11 July '1946.

Les numeros 1 cl 42 du Journal du Conseil de securite contiennent sous forme provisoire, les prod~s­
verbaux des 49 premieres seances du Conseil de securite. Ces proces-verbaux sont actuelle~ent reedites
et paraitront ulterieurement sous le titre: Procesverbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, Premiere
Annee, Premiere Serie. La publication du Journal
du Conseil de securite a ete interrompue le 11 juillet
1946.

Official Records of the Security Council, First Year,
Second Series, bilingual: English-French.

Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite,
Premiere Annee,Seconde Serie, bilingue: anglais-fran~ais.
/'

Official RecordS Nos. 1 to 29. fiftieth meeting to eighty.
$4.90
eighth meeting. 702 pages. the set

Proces-verbaux officie1s Nos 1 a 29. cinquantieme seance a
quatre·vingt-huitieme seance. 7~2 pages. la serie
$4.90

Supplements to the Security Council Offic!~d Records,
First Year, Second Series, bilingual: English-French.

Supplements aux proces-verbaux officiels du Consal; de securite, Premiere Annee, Seconde Serie,
bilingiie: anglais-frant;ais.

Supplements Nos. I to 10. 190 pages. the set

Supplements Nos 1 a 10, 190 pages. la serie

$1.95

$1,95

Special Supplement: Report of the Sub-Committee on the
Spanish Question, 104 pages. English edition
$ .90

. Supplement special: Rapport du Sous-Comite charge de
la question espagno1e, 104 pages, edition fraDl;aise..........$0,90

The Official Records of the Security Council,
Second Year, and Supplements are now being pub.
lished. For a list of those which are available, please
apply to the sales agents.

Les Proces-verbaux oHiciels du Conseil de securite,
De,uxieme Annee, ainsi que les Supplements, sont en
cours de publication. Uue liste de ceux qui .'lont deja
livrables peut etre obtenue sur demande adressee
aux agents de vente.

Provisional Rulei. of Procedure of the Security
$ .20
Council, English edition

Reglement interieur provisoire du Consen de s.curile; .
edition frant;aise................
..
$0,20

•

25

SALES AGENTS OF VNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
•

I

DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE'
Editorial Sudamericana
S.A.
Calle Alsina 500
Buenos Airea

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

REPUBLIQUE
DOMINICAINE
Libreri~ Dominicana
Calle M~rcedel!l No. 49
Apartado 656
AUSTRALIA-AUSTRALIE
C~~dad Trujillo
H. A. Goddard Piy. Ltd.
.. ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
255a George Street
Muiioz Hermano.8 y Cia.
Sy~ey
,
Nueve de Octubre 703
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE·
Caeilla 10-24
Agence et Message:ries de la
Guayaquil
Presse
FfNL.ANI}-FINLANDE
i4-22 rue du Persil
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
Bruxelles
.2, Keskauskatu
Helsinki
BOLIVIA-BOLIVIE.
Lihreria Cientifica y
FRANCE-FRANCE
Literaria
Editions A. Pedone
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
13, rue SoufHot
Casilla 972
.
Paris Ve
LaPaz
GREECE-GRECE
CANADA-CANADA
"Eleftheroudakis'i
The RyersQn Pree:}
Lihrairie internationale
299. Queen Street West
Place de la Con.stitution .
Toronto
Athtmes
GUATEMALA

CIlILE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced846
Santiago

CHrNA--l;HINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
Shanghai
COSTARICA
COSTA-RICA
Trejoe Hermanos·
Apartado 1313
San Jos6

GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
Guatemala
HAITI-HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Lihrairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
Port-au-Prince
INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi
-IRAN-.IRAN
Bangahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
Teheran

CUBA-CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rem; de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LaHabana
1"

. CZECHOSLOVAKIA

TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9 •
Praha 1
DENMARK-·DANEMARK
Einar Munekgaard
Niirregade 6
-Kjobenhavn

IRAQ-.IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
Baghdad

LEBANON-LIBAN
Librairle universelle
\ Beirut

Printed in the U. S. A.

NETHERLANDS

PAYS-BAS
N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
.Lange Voorho,!-t 9
. s'Gravenhage

NEW ZEALAND
NOUVELLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch
Waring Taylor Street
Wellington
NORWAY-NORVEGE
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
Oslo
SWEDEN-8UEDE
AB C. E. Fritzes Kungl
Hofhokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
Stockholm
SWI'l'ZERLAND-8UISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
Lausanne .

• • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • ' •.•• e •

. . ·HaltsRallllhardt . ..
Kirchgasse 17
Zurichl

SYRIA-SYRlE
Lihrairie uni~;rselle
Damascus
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

UNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency Ltd.
Conniussioner & Rissik Sts.
Johannesburg
,
UNITED KINGDOM
ROYAUME·UNI
H.M. Stationery· Office
P.O. Box 569
London, S.E. 1
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA

ETATS-UNIS D~MERIQUE
International Documents
Service
Columbia University Pre!'s
2960 Broadway
,New York 27, N. Y.
YUGOSLAVIA
YOUGOSLAVIE .
Drzavno Preduzece
,.J ugosl~venska Knjiga
Moskovska rn. 36
Belgrade
5 September 1947

E
