A /75/PV.103

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

103rd plenary meeting

Friday, 10 September 2021, 12.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkır  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Arriola Ramírez
(Paraguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 12.30 p.m.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly (A/75/973)

systems development and translation services giving
rise to budgetary implications of between $50,000 and
$85,000 under the proposed programme budget for
2023 for section 2, General Assembly and Economic
and Social Council affairs and conference management.
Detailed cost estimates can be determined only
after further analysis of the system development and
translation requirements.

Draft resolution (A/75/973, paragraph 27)

Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
the draft resolution, detailed resource requirements
would be included in the proposed programme budget
for 2023.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider the draft resolution contained
in document A/75/973, paragraph 27. I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.

The statement I just read was distributed through
the plenary place on the e-deleGATE portal and will
be made available in the Journal of the United Nations
under the e-statements link for the meeting.

Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. Under the terms
of operative paragraph 47 of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would request the Secretariat to
continue to improve, harmonize and unify e-services
provided to Member States under the e-deleGATE
portal with a view to creating a full-fledged online
workplace for delegates in all six official languages in
order to save costs, reduce the environmental impact
and improve the distribution of documents.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to delegations wishing to speak in
explanation of position before the adoption of the
draft resolution, I would like to remind speakers that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.

Pursuant to operative paragraph 47, the creation
of a full-fledged delegates’ online workplace in all
six official languages would require non-recurrent

Mr. Dundon (Australia): I am pleased to deliver
this statement today on behalf of Canada, New Zealand
and my own country, Australia (CANZ). I would like
to begin by thanking Ambassadors González López
and Mlynár for their leadership of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. CANZ commends
the co-Chairs for an action-oriented draft resolution
(A/75/973, paragraph 27) containing many practical and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-24769 (E)

*2124769*

A/75/PV.103

concrete steps aimed at improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of the General Assembly. The resolution
to be adopted today is the product of an ambitious
zero draft, a transparent and inclusive consultation
process and a willingness on the part of all delegations
to engage constructively. In our view, this year’s draft
resolution makes meaningful progress on a broad
range of important reform issues that if implemented
effectively will deliver a more representative and
inclusive Organization. Among the many new measures
agreed on, the decision to biennialize the revitalization
process itself is one that CANZ warmly welcomes. It
is our hope that biennialization in this forum will pave
the way for the further streamlining of other processes
in the Assembly.
As we approach high-level week, CANZ is also
pleased that progress has been made on limiting the
number of side events in the margins of the general
debate and that the decision was made to bring forward
the opening of the General Assembly, allowing the
incoming President more time to prepare for the busiest
event of the session. Our delegations welcome new
commitments to increasing women’s representation in
high-level meetings of the General Assembly, including
achieving gender parity among invited speakers and
panellists and new language inviting the nomination
of women candidates for the role of Secretary-General.
CANZ would like to thank the Secretariat and the
Office of the President of the General Assembly for
their support and guidance throughout this process, and
we thank all delegations for showing flexibility and an
eagerness to agree on practical reforms. While we have
made significant progress on the revitalization agenda
this year, it is now incumbent on every delegation to
ensure that the measures are implemented effectively
and without delay. Australia, Canada and New
Zealand look forward to working with all delegations
throughout the upcoming seventy-sixth session to
advance the proposals contained in this and previous
revitalization resolutions.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by offering my thanks and congratulations to
this year’s co-facilitators for the Alignment Process,
Bangladesh and Slovenia, and to the co-Chairs of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly, El Salvador and
Slovakia. The fact that we were able to achieve so
much against such a challenging backdrop speaks to
their professionalism, determination and leadership. I
2/9

10/09/2021

also want to congratulate fellow delegates on the hard
work, ambition and spirit of flexibility they have shown
throughout the year.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations offered us a unique opportunity to reinvigorate
the United Nations and ensure that it remains fit for
purpose for the future, and I am glad that we took the
opportunity. This year’s draft resolution (A/75/973,
paragraph 27) and report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
(A/75/973) goes further than any recent agreement. We
have made considerable progress in several key areas
across both the revitalization and alignment agendas.
First, we welcome the progress on working methods
and a plan to appoint focal points to address the General
Assembly’s overloaded agenda. Secondly, we welcome
the biennialization of the revitalization process and the
triennialization of alignment, with a fresh emphasis
on implementation in the intervening years. Thirdly,
we welcome the adjustments made to the process for
recruiting future Secretaries-General.
While we have made significant progress this year,
more remains to be done. We must all maintain our
high ambitions in the years ahead. So, building on this
year’s momentum and heeding the call in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
let us commit to implementing this draft resolution to
ensure a more effective and efficient General Assembly.
I want to underline our congratulations on a
successful and ambitious session of the Ad Hoc Working
Group. We look forward to continued cooperation in
the years ahead.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank President Bozkır and his team for
their work. They have shown us that in difficult times
and equally difficult conditions it is still possible to
strengthen the work of the Assembly. I would also like
to express Ecuador’s deep gratitude to the co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the Work of the General Assembly, Ambassadors
Egriselda González López of El Salvador and Michal
Mlynár of Slovakia, not just for the important progress
that has been made in the revitalization of the General
Assembly, but also for the revitalization of the
revitalization process.
I would like to make three specific and fundamental
points. First, I want to highlight that the draft resolution
contained in paragraph 27 of document A/75/973
reiterates the importance of ensuring that the Security
21-24769

10/09/2021

Council continues its endeavours to provide an annual
report to the General Assembly in compliance with
resolution 58/126, which urges the Council to continue
initiatives designed to improve the quality of the report
with a substantive, analytical and material account of
its work.
Secondly, I would like to highlight the amendment
to rule 1 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, whereby effective from the seventy-eighth
session the General Assembly will begin its work one
week earlier, thus allowing two weeks of preparation
between the beginning of the session and the general
debate. That is something that we have been working on
for years and that has finally become a reality.
Thirdly, today the General Assembly welcomes
the initiatives of States aimed at strengthening the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, including through a
transition workshop that includes revitalization among
its main components. In that regard, on 3 September it
was my honour to inaugurate, together with President
Volkan Bozkır of the General Assembly and with the
President-elect for the upcoming session, the first such
workshop for the transition between teams, with the
participation of the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group. The workshop, organized by Finland, Malaysia
and Ecuador with the support of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research and the full support
of the Offices of the President of the General Assembly,
current and elect, also reflects the strengthening of this
process, to which Ecuador will continue to contribute.
Ecuador thus joins the consensus in adopting the draft
resolution before us.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of position before
adoption. The Assembly will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, entitled “Revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly”, contained in
paragraph 27 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly (A/75/973).
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution contained in paragraph 27 of
document A/75/973 was adopted (resolution 75/325).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor for explanations of position after

A/75/PV.103

adoption, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group (ACT), which is a cross-regional
group of 27 small and mid-sized States, including my
own country, Denmark.
At the outset, ACT would like to take this
opportunity to pay a very special tribute to Their
Excellencies Mrs. Egriselda González López, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador, and Mr. Michal Mlynár,
Permanent Representative of Slovakia, for their
dedicated work as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, and not least for
their efforts to hold in-person negotiations as much
as possible despite the extraordinary circumstances
imposed by the pandemic.
While the coronavirus disease pandemic has
naturally affected the work of the General Assembly
and of the United Nations more generally, it has also
offered us an opportunity to reflect on the Assembly’s
effectiveness at adapting its working methods in a
way that will enable us to continue to address global
challenges as they evolve. ACT welcomes the progress
made in resolution 75/325 and the spirit of collaboration
shown by the Member States and groups participating
in the negotiations. We have looked at possibilities for
further streamlining our agenda, dedicating more time
to genuine dialogue, reviewing the implementation of
resolutions and furthering the quality and effectiveness
of working methods. I think we also made important
strides by adjusting the starting date of future General
Assembly sessions. We adopted new guidelines to limit
the number of high-level events, as well as side events
held in the margins of the general debate, and we took
new initiatives to strengthen the work of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, all very
important measures.
In addition, we have addressed the multiplicity
and overlap of events and issues by incorporating
the recommendations made by the alignment process
regarding the agendas of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary bodies,
especially the Second and Third Committees, in the
light of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

21-247693/9

A/75/PV.103

Furthermore, we celebrate the resolution’s call for
gender parity for all high-level events and for senior
level positions, and its recognition that there has yet to
be a female Secretary-General, while inviting Member
States to bear that in mind in future when nominating
candidates for the position of the Secretary-General.
ACT set out in these proceedings with the aim
of achieving an enhanced, transparent and inclusive
General Assembly. While the outcome document
is certainly a step in the right direction, there are
discussions and issues that remain unresolved and that
we must bring with us into the seventy-seventh session.
ACT would therefore like to emphasize that it considers
the following aspects of the nomination and selection
process of the Secretary-General to be pending.
First, we call for a clarified timeline for the overall
process, a structured time frame that calls for the
process to start in October of the year preceding the
appointment and includes a deadline for the presentation
of candidates in order to ensure a transparent and
inclusive process. That will ease procedural burdens
and improve the clarity of the process for Member
States and candidates alike.
Secondly, we will continue to call for further
exploration of the prospect of the Security Council’s
recommending multiple candidates for the General
Assembly’s consideration. ACT believes that the
selection process for the world’s foremost diplomatic
post should be as thorough as possible.
Thirdly, while we stand firm and steadfast in
our support for the Secretary-General as he begins
his second term, we maintain our principled call that
it is highly appropriate as well as historically very
important to ensure that after 80 years of uninterrupted
male leadership, this Organization selects a female
Secretary-General. In that respect, we recognize the
importance of inviting Member States to present female
candidates, as we agreed this year in paragraph 68 of the
resolution. The Group strongly encourages the Security
Council to put forward women for appointment by the
General Assembly.
Fourthly, we reiterate our call for a thorough
discussion on the term of office of the SecretaryGeneral, including the consideration of a term that
is longer, but single and non-renewable, for future
Secretaries-General. ACT looks forward to discussions
with the entire membership well before the appointment
of the term anticipated to begin in 2027.
4/9

10/09/2021

ACT also requests further discussion on the annual
report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
with a view to ensuring its more substantive, analytical
and material account. Without interfering in the
prerogatives and mandates of the Charter regarding the
Security Council, this will facilitate and strengthen the
indispensable and symbiotic relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly.
Strengthening the work of the General Assembly is
key to ensuring that this chief deliberative policymaking
and representative organ of the United Nations remains
relevant, adaptable and, most importantly, capable of
addressing the plethora of global problems that require
truly global solutions.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
At the end of the term of the current Secretary-General,
this Organization will have been led exclusively by
men for 80 uninterrupted years. That is 80 years during
which patriarchy, hard security and toxic militarism
have thrived and during which women and girls have
been told that they just do not have what it takes to
be the most important diplomat in the world. That
begins with the Charter of the United Nations itself,
which states that “he shall be the chief administrative
officer of the Organization”. This error is compounded
by General Assembly resolution 11 (I), of 1946, which
states that the Secretary-General must be a man of
eminence. While we appreciate that qualified women
candidates are increasingly being considered for the
position, good intentions are not enough. We judge
policies not by their intentions but by their results, and
so far the results have always and exclusively produced
a man at the helm of the Organization.
However, with resolution 75/325, the General
Assembly is united in declaring that 80 years is too
long. We hold the United Nations and ourselves to
a higher standard. This Organization has set the
standard for the rest of the world with Sustainable
Development Goal 5 but has not yet lived up to its own
recommendations. With today’s resolution Member
States now acknowledge for the first time that it is high
time for a woman Secretary-General. Make no mistake,
the road to get us here was not easy. This is not the
text that Costa Rica wanted. We made compromises
with those who thought it was too progressive or bold
to call for elevating women to the thirty-eighth floor of
this building, and those who thought that prioritizing
female candidates or even requesting gender-balanced
shortlists from the Security Council was going too far.
21-24769

10/09/2021

(spoke in English)
Eighty years of uninterrupted male leadership
is not an accident or a coincidence. It is intentional.
And our calls for a woman at the helm of the United
Nations must therefore be intentional as well. Costa
Rica also welcomes this resolution’s call for parity at
all levels and high-level positions. Parity is a requisite
for democracy. It is a floor, not a ceiling. It is a cultural
change that this institution must adopt and promote,
because if we fail to take decisive action, we will not
reach parity at the pinnacle of power for another 130
years. As long as parity is an incomplete endeavour,
the United Nations will be an incomplete endeavour.
But change is coming. We stand ready to welcome and
celebrate Her Excellency the tenth Secretary-General as
she takes office on 1 January 2027, when we will look
back on this resolution and recognize the momentum it
helped to build before we move on to the next struggle
for equality for women in international politics.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): It is a pleasure to see you
presiding over this meeting today, Mr. Vice-President. I
am taking the floor on behalf of myself and my co-Chair
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly, my distinguished
colleague and friend, Ambassador Egriselda González
López, Permanent Representative of El Salvador. First
and foremost, we would like to express our sincere
appreciation and thanks to all delegations for the
consensus that we reached in order to enable us to adopt
resolution 75/325, entitled “Revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly”.
Recalling the Declaration on the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
(resolution 75/1), it is clear that the commitment to
multilateralism and to continued work to revitalize
the Assembly is a crucial priority for the international
community today. In that regard, the revitalization of
the General Assembly, as the main deliberative and
decision-making organ of the United Nations, plays
a key and indispensable role in the overall reform of
the Organization and in strengthening multilateralism.
Today more than ever multilateralism must be improved
so that we can address the challenges facing humanity
in an increasingly interdependent and interconnected
world. That is a long-term process, and this year’s
resolution should be seen as a progressive achievement
in a process that must continue and be strengthened in
the years ahead. One of the most important aspects of
revitalizing the General Assembly, after all, is making

A/75/PV.103

sure that we are continually building a multilateral
system that is relevant, flexible, agile and able to
react to our common challenges. It is probably not a
coincidence — and we are happy to acknowledge
it — that the adoption of the revitalization resolution
comes just after this morning’s presentation by the
Secretary-General of his report on Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) and the ensuing important debate on
the report, which certainly includes the revitalization
of the United Nations and of the General Assembly
in particular.
After last year’s technical rollover resolution, I
am also personally happy to say that today, thanks to
the current set of strict precautionary anti-pandemic
measures at United Nations Headquarters, it was
possible to conduct a full-fledged process, starting
with a standard general debate, four consecutive
thematic debates and an interactive dialogue between
the Permanent Missions and the Secretariat. But what
is more important is that we have managed to carry
out proper negotiations on the text of the resolution
through in-person meetings, and I make so bold as to
say that all delegations have greatly benefited from the
important opportunity to engage face to face on many
aspects of the draft, as several delegations have already
kindly mentioned.
I would like to very briefly highlight the most
important deliberations we managed to deliver on this
year. First, with a view to leading by example and
revitalizing the revitalization process — if I can say
that — this year we have agreed that beginning with
the next session, the Ad Hoc Working Group will
conduct the revitalization process on a biennial basis.
That will enable us to better focus our efforts on the
implementation of decisions in greater detail and to
reflect in depth on future actions.
Secondly, regarding the role and authority of
the General Assembly, we took important steps to
strengthen the relationship between the principal
organs of the United Nations, with particular emphasis
on the important interactions between the General
Assembly and the Security Council. We also established
practical measures designed to preserve the primacy,
significance and established practices of the general
debate of the General Assembly, which will start again
in less than two weeks.
Thirdly, in the light of the experience that the
General Assembly has gained during the pandemic,

21-247695/9

A/75/PV.103

we carefully considered the current situation of our
methods of work. Indeed, the pandemic has taught us
many lessons, and we are duty-bound to do our best
to learn from them and take them into account in our
future work. In that regard, bearing in mind that such
methods must keep pace with and adapt to evolving
circumstances, we acknowledged the important role of
the use of information and communication technologies
in the work of the General Assembly and for which we
intend to further discuss possible lessons learned from
the pandemic, with a view to ensuring resilience and
better preparedness in exceptional circumstances. The
issue of digital technology is of course here to stay and
would require further deliberations and efforts.
A further substantive decision reflected in the
recommendations of the Working Group concerns the
amendment to rule 1 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, allowing the session to start on the
Tuesday of the second week of September — one week
earlier than it does now — in order to provide more time
for the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
and for the President him- or herself, to prepare for the
general debate and high-level week. As we know, that
will take effect as of the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly.
Fourthly, we firmly addressed the issues related to
the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads, which have long been a key
component of the revitalization efforts. We believe
that the Ad Hoc Working Group has taken important
steps to improve the process and to continue to ensure
that it is guided by the principles of transparency and
inclusiveness. A milestone in this important process
has also been the recognition that there is yet to be a
woman Secretary-General.
Finally, recognizing the important role played by
the Presidency of the General Assembly, the Working
Group intends to review in depth the functioning of
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
during the seventy-seventh session with a view to
strengthening it further.
Where revitalization is concerned, consensus has
been, so to speak, a golden rule accepted for many
years. This year was no exception in that regard.
Following a series of informal consultations, the text
was unanimously agreed during the formal meeting of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on 27 July.
6/9

10/09/2021

On behalf of the co-Chairs, I would like to express
our gratitude and appreciation to the President of the
General Assembly, His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkır,
for the trust placed in us to steer this very important
process during this session. I would also like to express
my gratitude for the active and constructive engagement
of the representatives of all the Member States who
took part in the negotiation process, providing valuable
input. Our thanks also go to the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management for the advice
and support provided throughout the process.
Finally, if I may, and on a personal note, let me
express my deep appreciation for the trust that Member
States have placed in me to be one of the co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group for three consecutive
sessions. It is an experience that has unquestionably
enabled me to attest to the great relevance of this
intergovernmental process. I want to encourage all
Member States, Permanent Representatives, Deputy
Permanent Representatives and experts to maintain
their focus on the process and to uphold its importance
so that we can concretize the future that we want and
the United Nations that we need. It is not a technical
process that deserves merely technical considerations.
Indeed, it is at the heart of our political efforts, and with
the necessary amount of political will and attention, we
can achieve further positive results.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of the
resolution. I give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): On behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its Member States, I would
like to take this opportunity to once again commend
the co-Chairs of the Ad-Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
Ambassadors González López and Mlynár, the
Permanent Representatives of El Salvador and Slovakia,
for their excellent work in steering this important
resolution (resolution 75/325) to a successful and speedy
conclusion. I would also like to thank all delegations
for the very constructive spirit they have demonstrated
throughout the process, which was decisive in reaching
a very substantial outcome, the most substantial in
quite some time. This past year and a half, marked by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, has
taught us many lessons in terms of how we can work
more effectively and efficiently together. Resolution
21-24769

10/09/2021

75/325 was a unique opportunity to draw on the lessons
learned, and I would like to commend States for doing
their best to ensure that this was the case. I would like
if I may to highlight some of the most positive elements
of the resolution, starting with the decision to move this
resolution to a biennial cycle — something that many of
us have long asked for and that will hopefully enable us
to focus more on implementation while also serving as
inspiration for other General Assembly processes. Not
every resolution requires annual action.
Second, there is a commitment to further efforts
to streamline the work and agenda of the General
Assembly. We believe that we should use next year as
an opportunity to take stock of the way in which we
have adopted the recommendations made in previous
resolutions, and if necessary take steps to improve our
performance in that respect.
Third, there is strong alignment language on
measures aimed at accelerating the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which
has been set back due to COVID-19.
Fourth, there is an agreement to bring the General
Assembly’s start date forward by a week — a longstanding request by the Office of the President of the
General Assembly — so as to give the President more
time to prepare for high-level week.
Fifth, there is further progress on the selection
and appointment process for the Secretary-General,
including the encouragement to Member States to put
forward more female candidates for the highest office,
in recognition that this Organization has not yet seen a
female Secretary-General.
Sixth, there is a request to the Secretariat to present
lessons learned from the impact of COVID-19 on the
work of the General Assembly, with a view to ensuring
better preparedness. We see this as an opportunity to
draw further lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic in
two years’ time and to improve the way in which we
work here at the United Nations.
Seventh, there is a collective understanding of
the importance of gender parity and an aspiration
to achieve it for high-level and other General
Assembly meetings, as well as a clear commitment
to strengthening multilingualism as a core value and
pillar of the Organization.
Eighth, there is a further commitment to limiting
the number of side-events in parallel to high-level week,

A/75/PV.103

not only during COVID times but in general, so as to
preserve the primacy of the general debate and focus
on our most pressing priorities. We sincerely hope that
all Member States will honour that commitment and
contribute to a more focused high-level week.
Last but certainly not least is the collective
recognition of the important role of civil society in
United Nations processes, including in the selection
processes for the offices of Secretary-General and
President of the General Assembly, which brings a
clear added value in finding appropriate and effective
answers to the challenges we face. All in all, a very
impressive outcome that shows what we can achieve
if we all work together for the betterment of our
Organization. I hope this constructive spirit will prevail
in future negotiations.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the only statement after adoption of the resolution.
I should like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassadors Egriselda González López and Michal
Mlynár, Permanent Representatives of El Salvador
and Slovakia, the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, who have so ably conducted the Working
Group’s discussions and complex negotiations. I am
sure the Assembly joins me in expressing our sincere
gratitude for all their work.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 126?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft resolution (A/75/L.135)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/75/L.135, entitled “Modalities for the international
meeting entitled ‘Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the
prosperity of all — our responsibility, our opportunity’”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.135?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/326).

A/75/L.135

was

adopted

21-247697/9

A/75/PV.103

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of Guinea to speak in
explanation of position after adoption.
Mr. Diallo (Guinea): I have the honour to deliver
this statement in explanation of position on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.
We thank the co-facilitators, Sweden and Kenya,
and their teams, for their efforts in the negotiation
process to achieve consensus on the adoption of
resolution 75/326, entitled “Modalities for the
international meeting entitled ‘Stockholm+50: a healthy
planet for the prosperity of all — our responsibility,
our opportunity’”. We would also like to take this
opportunity to express our sincere appreciation to our
Group of 77 and China coordinator, Mr. Andrés Córdova
Chabla of the Permanent Mission of Ecuador, for his
hard work and negotiation, and for duly representing our
Group throughout the intergovernmental consultations
of both the enabling (resolution 75/280) and modalities
resolutions for this international meeting, playing a key
role in their successful and consensus adoptions.
As reflected in the resolution’s first preambular
paragraph, we recall that the purpose of holding this
international meeting is to commemorate the 50 years
since the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment and its outcome documents. The meeting
will be a contribution to the environmental dimension
of sustainable development with the aim of accelerating
the implementation of commitments in the context of
the Decade of Action and Delivery for sustainable
development, including a sustainable recovery from the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We recall
the decision to hold this event as an “international
meeting” and not as a “conference”, taking as precedent
resolutions 57/262 and 58/213.
The Group restates its understanding that there is no
expectation that the meeting will redefine, renegotiate,
or mandate new mechanisms or new commitments,
nor that it will go beyond the provisions of multilateral
environmental agreements. We also recall that the
outcome document of the international meeting will
consist of a summary of its discussions, as reflected
in operational paragraph 20. The Group emphasizes
the decision that the international meeting should be
mutually reinforcing with the commemoration of
the fiftieth anniversary of the creation of the United
Nations Environment Programme, avoiding overlap and
duplication, as well as the role of the United Nations
8/9

10/09/2021

Environment Programme in support of the preparations
of the event. We also recall the invitation to the United
Nations Environment Assembly and the Committee
of Permanent Representatives to the United Nations
Environment Programme to provide input leading up
to Stockholm+50.
With regard to operational paragraph 3, and as has
been outlined in detail through the explanatory note of
the Secretariat, we stress the common understanding
that the international meeting and its preparation will
provide for the effective participation of all 193 States
Members of the United Nations, four States members
of specialized agency — the Cook Islands, the Holy
See, Niue and the State of Palestine — and one regional
economic integration organization, the European
Union, which will participate on an equal basis, and
with no differentiation.
The Group of 77 and China reaffirms the position
it has maintained throughout the negotiation process
with respect to paragraph 15 of annex II, which is to
place a full stop after the reference to “non-objection
basis”, without reference to bringing the list of other
relevant non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to the
attention of the General Assembly for a final decision
regarding their participation in the international
meeting, as well as to replace the footnote associated
with this paragraph so that the participation of NGOs
without consultative status in the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly would be
based on previously agreed consensus language — the
language proposed by the Group aimed at ensuring
the participation of NGOs without consultative status,
on the one hand, and striking a balance between the
differing views on the General Assembly’s role in the
decision pertaining to their participation, on the other.
The Group continues to believe that the proposal put
forward during the negotiation process, if approved by
all the membership, would have offered a consensus
consideration of paragraph 15 of annex II, based on
agreed language on the issue of the participation of
NGOs without consultative status, for which the Group
expresses its full support. We are disappointed that
our proposal on the participation of NGOs put forward
during the negotiation process and based on the previous
consensus was not accommodated. We believe that as
has been the case in this and other processes of the
General Assembly, the language of the aforementioned
paragraph does not have the full support of the entire
membership and is not acknowledged as agreed
21-24769

10/09/2021

language. As such, the Group considers that further
efforts could be made to build on language that can be
broadly accepted by all.

A/75/PV.103

The Acting President: We have heard the only
statement in explanation of position after adoption for
this meeting.

the international meeting and hopes that the event

We shall hear the remaining speakers on Monday,
13 September, at 10 a.m. in this Hall, after which we
will take up the remaining item.

will be an occasion for raising awareness of the

(spoke in Spanish)

importance of protecting our planet and achieving

I would like to express special thanks to the
interpreters, who gave us 20 minutes of extra time.

The Group of 77 and China looks forward to

sustainable development for the well-being of this and
future generations.

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

21-247699/9
