United Nations

S/PV.6439

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6439th meeting
Thursday, 9 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Sumi
Mr. Khachab
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (S/2010/608)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-68327 (E)

*1068327*

S/PV.6439

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Seventh report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi
(S/2010/608)
The President: I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
participate in this meeting. I propose to invite that
representative to participate in this meeting, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome the Minister for External Relations and
International Cooperation of Burundi, His Excellency
Mr. Augustin Nsanze.
On behalf of the Security Council, I extend an
invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Charles Petrie, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi.
It is so decided.
On behalf of the Security Council, I also extend
an invitation under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Paul Seger,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding
Commission
and
Permanent
Representative of Switzerland.
It is so decided.
Participants have before them document
S/2010/608, which contains the seventh report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Charles Petrie.
Mr. Petrie: The report before the Security
Council (S/2010/608) provides an account of the main
advances over the past year and the challenges that lie

2

ahead for the people and the Government of Burundi. It
also outlines the proposals of the Secretary–General on
the mandate and structure of the post-United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB) presence.
Political activity during the period under review
was essentially dominated by the preparation and
holding of general elections and related developments.
Based on a consensual calendar set forth by the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI),
the communal, presidential, legislative and collinaire
elections were held from 24 May to 7 September. The
United Nations has provided support throughout the
electoral process, including support to the delivery of
free identity cards and other forms of technical
assistance to CENI.
Meanwhile, the twin mechanisms established in
2009 to support the elections — the Consultative
Strategic Committee and the Technical Coordination
Committee — continued their activities with a
particular focus on encouraging dialogue among all
political actors. A basket fund managed by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) was
established to cover most of the electoral budget and
the Peacebuilding Commission helped to mobilize
international support.
Initially scheduled for 21 May, the communal
elections were held on 24 May, due partly to technical
challenges. With 64 per cent of the votes, the Conseil
national pour la défense de la démocratie-Forces
nationales pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDDFDD)had a landslide victory in the communal elections,
followed by the Forces nationales de libération (FNL),
which obtained 14 per cent; the Union pour le progrès
national (UPRONA), 6 per cent; the Sahwanya-Front
pour la démocratie au Burundi (Sahwanya-FRODEBU),
5 per cent; the Mouvement pour la solidarité et la
démocratie (MSD), 4 per cent; and the Union pour la
paix et le développement (UPD), 2 per cent.
National and international observers stated that
the elections were conducted in conformity with
international norms and that the irregularities observed
were not significant enough to call into question either
the results or the credibility of the polls.
A crucial issue was that 12 opposition political
parties, calling themselves the Alliance démocratique
pour le changement-Ikibiri (ADC-Ikibiri), which
included FNL, Sahwanya-FRODEBU, CNDD, MSD
and UPD, rejected the results. They called for a re-run

10-68327

S/PV.6439

of the elections, boycotted the rest of the electoral
process, and instructed their members not to take up
their seats in communal councils.
During his official visit to Burundi on 9 June, the
Secretary-General encouraged all parties to pursue
dialogue and called upon the ADC-Ikibiri to channel its
claims through existing national legal mechanisms. In
addition, the Special Representative of the African
Union and I repeatedly engaged ADC-Ikibiri and its
constituent members to encourage their return to the
electoral process. With the exception of UPRONA,
which participated in the parliamentary elections, the
main opposition parties boycotted the subsequent polls.
President Nkurunziza was re-elected, and the CNDDFDD obtained a large majority in both houses of
Parliament.
(spoke in French)
A particular concern addressed in the report
concerns the threats and intimidation of members of
the political opposition. A number of opposition
leaders, included the most well known, have left the
country out of fear of persecution. Furthermore,
following persistent rumours concerning his imminent
arrest, FNL President Agathon Rwasa went into hiding
on 23 June. On 23 September, he addressed a letter to
the Secretary-General requesting his intervention in reestablishing the legitimate leaders of the FNL.
In his report, the Secretary-General notes his
concern with respect to the prevalent climate of
impunity, in particular regarding acts of torture
identified during the reporting period. Human rights
violations continue. They are marked, inter alia, by
significant restrictions on the freedoms of expression
and association of political parties and civil society
organizations. We have also noted reported cases of
extrajudicial killings and/or politically motivated
assassinations.
Thus, State-building remains deficient in view of
the numerous challenges still to be met. However,
dialogue between the Government and the United
Nations concerning cases of human rights violations is
going extremely well. Recent developments indicate a
slight fall in the number of arrests and other politically
motivated human rights violations. Furthermore,
national consultations on the establishment of
transitional justice mechanisms have come to a close,
and the report thereon was recently published.

10-68327

The Burundi National Security Council held its
third meeting on 19 November to assess the security
situation in the country. Among other things, the
Council reaffirmed the need to severely sanction the
members of the security forces found guilty of
violating the people’s human rights. During the
reporting period, the security situation was relatively
stable but remains worrisome. Furthermore, rumours
regarding the development of an armed movement
have fuelled fears of a return to the violent past.
(spoke in English)
Despite the aforementioned concerns, it is
important to underscore that remarkable progress has
been made in Burundi. The elections have highlighted
the affirmation of an independent and vocal civil
society that continues to play an important role in the
country. Furthermore, the absence of large-scale
violence during and after the electoral period is
indicative of the population’s political growth and of
the fact that violence is being progressively renounced
as a means of political expression. It has also
highlighted the extent to which the nature of the
violence has transformed and is no longer drawn along
ethnic lines.
The
United
Nations
supported
several
programmes and initiatives to strengthen the capacity
of women and encourage their active participation in
the electoral process. As a result, the 30 per cent
constitutional quota for women in the National
Assembly was attained and even exceeded by 2 per
cent. Moreover, 46 per cent of senators are women.
The number of women in Parliament and Government
has significantly increased since 2005.
With regard to good governance and economic
development, the Government has committed to
fighting corruption, which is a major challenge to the
country’s economic development. In this regard, some
steps have already been taken, such as the dismissal of
corrupt senior officials of some public companies. The
Government also launched the drafting process for the
second poverty reduction strategy paper in the second
semester of 2010.
A most welcome development is the steady
progress recorded in the reintegration of ex-combatants.
In May, through the World Bank-supported Emergency
Demobilization and Transitional Reintegration Project,
the Government completed the payment of the final
instalment of reintegration assistance to 6,504

3

S/PV.6439

demobilized FNL and FNL dissident combatants in
their respective communities. Under the community
recovery programme funded by the United Nations
Development Programme, approximately 3,781 former
adults associated with FNL combatants are employed
in labour-intensive infrastructural projects.
In addition, following the release of the last
group of children associated with armed groups,
Burundi was removed from the list of countries
monitored under resolution 1612 (2005) in April.
Meanwhile, the community reintegration of 626
children formerly associated with armed groups ended
successfully on 31 July.
Another positive development is that Burundi
pursued its integration into the East African
Community (EAC). A full-fledged customs union,
which aims at eliminating internal tariffs among EAC
member States, was established on 1 January.
Moreover, on 29 April, Burundi ratified the EAC
common market protocol that provides for the free
movement of labour, goods, services, capital and the
right of establishment. Burundi assumed the presidency
of the EAC on 22 November and will lead discussions
on further integration over the next year.
(spoke in French)
At the request of the Government to redefine the
role of the United Nations in Burundi following the
2010 elections, the Secretariat has launched
discussions with the Burundian authorities. We have
also consulted with civil society, the diplomatic corps,
regional and subregional organizations, the Bretton
Woods institutions and the United Nations family in
Burundi.
Following
these
consultations,
it
was
recommended that BINUB be replaced by a lighter
structure in order to support democracy-building
efforts and to lay the foundations of sustainable
development.
The
Secretary-General
therefore
recommends in his report before the Council today the
establishment of a United Nations office for a period of
one year under a renewable mandate.
In 1994, I was deployed to the Great Lakes region
for the first time, serving as a United Nations official
in Rwanda during the 1994 genocide. I then spent three
years in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as the
principal representative of the Secretariat to the rebel
groups active in that country. I witnessed suffering and

4

violence beyond compare, and I am therefore able to a
certain extent to gauge the progress that Burundi, its
people and leaders have made. This transformation is
fragile and reversible, however, and it is therefore
crucial at this critical stage that the democratically
elected authorities be supported and assisted in the
hope that they will continue to resolve their differences
through dialogue and cooperation. It is this model that
will enable Burundi to meet the political challenges it
faces and to embrace sustainable development.
As Council members know, this is my last
briefing in my capacity as Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General for Burundi. It has been an
honour to serve the Secretary-General and to enjoy the
confidence of the Security Council as I have carried
out my duties in Burundi. I should also like to take this
opportunity to convey my gratitude to the Government
of Burundi and all actors in that country for our
excellent working relationship and the trust that they
have placed in me. I cannot forget to thank our
international partners, and in particular the Special
Representative of the African Union, Ambassador
Bah — a great man of surpassing wisdom. They have
all assisted in the implementation of BINUB’s mandate.
The President: I thank Mr. Petrie for his briefing.
On behalf of the Council, I should also like to express
our gratitude to Mr. Petrie, who, as he just mentioned,
has made his last briefing to the Council in his capacity
as Executive Representative of the Secretary-General
for Burundi and head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi. We have appreciated his effective
leadership of that important Office and his service to
the United Nations over the years. We wish him every
success in his future endeavours.
I now give the floor to Mr. Paul Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Burundi
configuration
of
the
Peacebuilding
Commission, I thank you, Madame, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council today. I am
speaking in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration.
I would also like to convey my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2010/608), which
covers all the pertinent aspects of peacebuilding in a
comprehensive and balanced way. To finish my thanks,
I join with your thanks, Madam President, to Charles
Petrie, his team and his predecessors for the excellent
work they have done. I have personally greatly

10-68327

S/PV.6439

benefited from Charles’ support, and I will miss him. I
can only hope that his successor will be as competent
and excellent. I believe that the Burundi configuration
and the United Nations need a strong personality in
Burundi.
As the Council knows, in resolution 1902 (2009)
the Security Council welcomed the configuration’s
commitment to continue its work in Burundi and
requested it, with support from the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi, to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and security, reintegration and
development in Burundi and to mobilize resources to
that end.
In my report, I will briefly touch on the activities
of the Burundi configuration, assess the current
situation and try to set out a vision of the
configuration’s future tasks. In the interest of time, I
will summarize my written statement, which, I believe,
will be distributed, and I would simply ask Council
members to refer for the details to the statement.
With regard to the activities, Charles Petrie has
already mentioned several. I would first like to express
my gratitude for the excellent cooperation with the
Burundi Government, which has greatly facilitated our
work. I count on continuing that excellent cooperation
in the future.
As Charles said, during the past year in the
configuration we basically focused on the facilitation
of the elections in Burundi, the entire election cycle.
We concentrated chiefly on financial aspects. The
donors within the Burundi configuration contributed
greatly to the success of the electoral process. Just to
give a few figures — of the $46.5 million that the
elections cost, the greatest part was paid by the
contributors. Burundi assisted with $7.9 million. Also,
the Peacebuilding Fund contributed $3 million to the
elections.
Furthermore, we continued to help with political
support for the country. My predecessor Peter Maurer
and I visited the country. We also held meetings with
the Burundi Government and the configuration here in
New York.
Thirdly, I also visited the World Bank to try to
involve the Bank in the economic and social
development process. I believe that there are important
elements in merging the peacebuilding and socioeconomic efforts, because I am of the view that there is

10-68327

no peace without development, nor is there
development without peace. Hence, fusing the political
efforts of the United Nations with those of the World
Bank seems important to me.
Very briefly, with regard to the assessment of the
current situation, first of all, we fully share the
excellent analysis contained in the Secretary-General’s
report. I believe that now, after the electoral cycle
process — which concluded to the satisfaction of the
observers — a new phase, a new chapter, has opened in
Burundi. There are several positive aspects. There is
the establishment of a democratically elected, stable,
recognized Government and, in particular, the
prospects for Burundi’s integration into the East
African Community, and others.
I believe that for that progress to continue, it will
be necessary to promote an institutional and political
environment conducive to economic and social
development and, above all, to create a stable
environment attractive to foreign investment. In other
words, it seems to me that we must continue to work
on two elements: the economic and social aspect, on
the one hand, and the political and institutional aspect,
on the other.
On the economic and social side, I believe that
above all it is necessary to be aware of the fact that the
people of Burundi expect what I would call a peace
dividend. Now, following the elections, they want the
economic and social development to continue. I believe
that we have a task — a moral and political
obligation — to support them in that. I am thinking in
particular of the young people, who are rightly
expecting results.
On the political and institutional side, in my view
it is necessary to continue to improve the situation in
the areas that Charles rightly mentioned. Among others,
I will mention the fight against corruption — which,
moreover, is a priority of the Government — but also
sectors such as transitional justice. There are important
and useful elements there that can be developed.
It also seems important to establish and
encourage a culture of political dialogue in the country.
The election process and the boycott by the opposition
have left wounds. I believe it is necessary now to
encourage the moderate groups that are calling for
reconciliation and dialogue, in order to isolate potential
radical elements that could advocate violence and
oppression. I primarily refer to the politically

5

S/PV.6439

motivated acts of violence that are mentioned, as the
Council will no doubt have read, in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, and even cases of extrajudicial
executions.
I should also say that there a several members of
the configuration that are particularly concerned about
an appreciable increase in human rights violations,
which is also mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report, including cases of torture.
What is positive is that the country — as I
realized during my visit in July — has a vibrant, active
and very committed civil society, as well as a very
involved media. I believe that in the configuration we
also have the task of supporting that civil society,
supporting freedom of expression and supporting the
media. We have the will and are ready to work with the
Government on those points.
That brings me to the vision, perhaps by way of a
preliminary comment. The goal of the configuration is
to contribute to the country’s achieving a degree of
stability and security sufficient to terminate the
configuration’s help. In other words, my mandate is to
make myself obsolete. So we are working with the
Government towards that goal, but I believe that there
is still work to do, and I think the Minister agrees with
me. I touched on the socio-economic, political and
institutional aspects that we should address together. I
think that we will be able to do that now in the context
of the current Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding,
which will be completed in early 2011. We are working
with the Government towards that.
To sum up, I think that I see four areas on which
the configuration could work.
First is to support the country in its integration
into the East African Community. I believe that is an
important element for the economic and political
stability of the country.
Secondly, I think that it is necessary to
incorporate conflict-sensitive aspects in the socioeconomic aspects, that is, in the poverty reduction
strategy, in order to implement the principles of there
being no peace without development nor development
without peace.
Thirdly, the rule of law, institutional issues and
human rights aspects must be addressed. We talked
about the issues of corruption, the rule of law and

6

human rights that, I believe, we should improve and
further support.
Fourthly and lastly is perhaps the most delicate
and difficult issue; I am not sure. That is to promote
that culture of dialogue among the various parties in
the country. I think it important to consolidate and
stabilize the country politically and to help the parties
that support moderation and reconciliation.
That is more or less my vision for the future and
we will endeavour to broaden it with the Government. I
also express my gratitude for the Security Council’s
trust in the configuration to work with Burundi. As I
said from the outset, I believe that a strong and active
political presence of the United Nations is important.
In that context, it is important to appoint a new United
Nations Special Representative soon.
I conclude by reiterating that I greatly appreciate
this opportunity to speak before the Council and hope
the tradition will be maintained in the future. I believe
that the famous document S/2010/507 offers an
opportunity for the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to speak more regularly to the Council
and to help it with its task. I remain fully available to
do so at any time in the future.
The President: I thank Mr. Seger for his briefing.
I now give the
Mr. Augustin Nsanze.

floor

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Nsanze (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is my
honour and pleasure to take the floor following the
presentation of the seventh report (S/2010/608) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (BINUB) to the Council. Allow me
to thank the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral for having invited the Government of Burundi
to this meeting on the presentation of the report.
On the eve of the expiration of BINUB’s mandate,
the President of the Republic has entrusted me to
express to you, Madame President, and to the
Secretary-General the Government of Burundi’s
gratitude for the support provided by the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi over these past
four years. The Government of the Republic of
Burundi is also grateful to the Secretary-General for
BINUB’s efforts to ensure the success of the donors
round table of May 2007.

10-68327

S/PV.6439

Indeed, through the United Nations integrated
support strategy for Burundi for 2007-2008, the
implementation of which extended into 2009, BINUB
was
the
Government’s
primary
partner
in
peacebuilding on the ground, which was the main
priority of the institutions emerging from the 2005
elections that followed the socio-political crisis, which
had lasted for more than a decade.
When the Government had asked the SecretaryGeneral for the Organization’s coordinated support for
the electoral process, the primary responsibility for
carrying out that task at the country level fell to
BINUB. The Government highly appreciated BINUB’s
excellent advocacy to ensure that the Independent
National Electoral Commission enjoyed all the
resources necessary to organize the various elections,
including the allocation of resources to women’s
organizations, civil society and the Burundian media to
enable them to respectively participate in, observe and
cover these elections. As a result, the electoral process
in Burundi was successful with respect to participation,
security and transparency. All national, regional and
international observers noted this and so reported.
As to the post-electoral situation covered by the
Secretary-General’s report, the Government is in no
way responsible for the exile of political party leaders
who boycotted elections. Almost all of them chose the
path of exile. Having gone into hiding outside the
country, they declared that their security had been
threatened.
On the issue of the forum for dialogue demanded
by political leaders, I recall that the parties themselves
created the Permanent Forum for Dialogue among
Political Parties, where all political parties can speak.
Most of their elected officials participate in the
political life of the communes through communal
councils in which they have chosen to participate and
where they are able to express their disagreements with
their leaders, who decided without consulting their
followers to boycott the last four elections. Therefore,
it begs belief that these political party leaders claim not
to have a framework for dialogue with the Government.
Turning now to residual insecurity, the
Government is aware of this. That is why it has
continued its campaign to disarm civilians and has
acquired equipment to mark and track weapons so as to
control their movement. It has also revised the law
establishing the national commission on land and other

10-68327

assets and provided the Commission with additional
resources to enable it to settle land disputes more
effectively and as rapidly as possible.
It is unfortunate that overzealous media have
claimed the existence of a new rebellion without
naming its political leaders or objectives.
As far as human rights are concerned, the
Government wishes to recall that the issue of
establishing an independent national human rights
commission, which had been delayed due to the
electoral process, is on the current agenda of this
parliamentary session.
Technical and financial partners still harbour
differences with the Government in their interpretation
of the Paris Principles, but we hope to achieve a
compromise in compliance with the United Nations
Charter and national sovereignty.
It is also disturbing to read in the report that the
electoral period was marked by a lack of freedom of
expression and association, when the media freely
covered the elections and civil society deployed its
observers and monitors throughout the country without
hindrance. Furthermore, the Government always
punishes its officials if it has been established that they
are guilty of human rights or gender-based violations.
A toll-free telephone number was set up by the police
and a special unit established to punish those found
guilty of sexual violence. The independent expert on
the human rights situation in Burundi recently visited
Burundi and took note of this.
In the medium term, the Government will
continue to improve the professionalization of its
defence and security forces with the support of its
partners, first and foremost the Netherlands, Belgium,
France, Germany and Switzerland.
Along these same lines, the rights of children are
of great concern to us. One of the pillars of the
programme that UNICEF will carry out in Burundi
over the coming four years concerns better protection
for children. Parallel to this, the President of the
Republic recently expanded free education to cover the
three post-primary years in order to guarantee the
fundamental right to primary education and to ensure
that children resist the temptation to work before
reaching the legal age.
Another disputed issue is that of so-called
arbitrary or irregular arrests. Without denying that

7

S/PV.6439

some may occur, subject to the results of investigation
at each occurrence, I must point out that those detained
deliberately attempt to sow the seeds of confusion with
respect to their actions. Instead of assuming
responsibility for the crimes for which they were
arrested, they automatically claim that they are
members of a political party or civil society
organization, as if that characteristic should exempt
them from their civic duties.
Everyone knows that attempts to undermine
public order or to slander public institutions, inter alia,
are punishable under the law. The case of Mr. JeanClaude Kavumbagu — who denigrated our national
defence and security forces with regard to such a
serious situation as the terrorist threat posed by
Al-Shabaab — is typical of those sorts of cases.
In the area of justice, the report criticizes staff
movements in the Ministry of Justice done without
consulting the High Judicial Council. Unfortunately,
this confuses the competence of the management
bodies responsible for that staff. The High Judicial
Council manages the promotion of judicial personnel,
while daily management responsibility falls to the
Government entity involved.
We must also bear in mind that the reform of the
judicial system should produce the ethnic balance
foreseen in the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. Moreover, the time required for the
preparation of certain cases, such as that pertaining to
the assassination of Ernest Manirumva, has led certain
partners to the conclusion that there is an atmosphere
of impunity. My Government believes that to be a
hasty conclusion, given that the General Prosecutor’s
office has not finished its investigation. And given that
civilian cases can take several years to prepare, is it not
normal to take the necessary time in a murder case to
ensure that innocent people are not found guilty?
I should like to take this opportunity to inform
the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
Peacebuilding Commission that the report on the
national consultations on the establishment of
transitional justice mechanisms was submitted to
Burundi’s President by the tripartite steering committee
last Tuesday, 7 December. The report’s main
recommendation was that the Government of Burundi
and the United Nations should finalize an accord on
outstanding issues and agree on a timeline for the
establishment of transitional justice mechanisms. A few

8

weeks ago, our Parliament elected an ombudsperson. In
short, therefore, there exists an institutional framework
for good governance, security sector reform and the
rule of law. There is now a need to strengthen its
capacities to improve its performance.
With regard to the economic situation in Burundi,
the report is pessimistic about the possibility of
eliminating hunger and extreme poverty. I would like
to say to the Council that Burundi will meet that
challenge. I should also like to point out that, at the
time that Burundi faced post-conflict instability, thanks
to the peacebuilding process and the implementation of
our first-stage strategic growth framework and poverty
reduction strategy, our country was able to achieve
tangible results, including reaching the completion
point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative, increasing our gross domestic product and
stabilizing the inflation rate.
My Government has just begun to prepare its new
strategic framework for growth and poverty reduction,
whose implementation will enable our country to
develop its agriculture, tourism, infrastructure, energy
and information and communications technologies
sectors. The Government has already adopted a
national agricultural policy and has identified
promising sectors, including tourism. An energy policy
is currently being developed. With regard to energy,
infrastructure and information and communications
technologies, Burundi will endeavour to benefit from
its integration into the East African Community, the
Economic Community of the Great Lake Countries and
other regional and continental organizations. I would
like to take this opportunity to inform the Council that
Burundi has just assumed the 2011 chairmanship of the
East African Community. We count on the support of
the United Nations to succeed in that regard.
There is also a need to begin to attempt to
permanently reintegrate populations affected by
conflict, which is another enormous challenge. A
strategy already exists, but implementing the plan of
action will require more than $250 million in financial
resources. The Government of Burundi would like in
advance to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
responsible for the Peacebuilding Support Office for
her promise to mobilize funds for an initial programme
that will begin during the first quarter of 2011.
The Government of Burundi very much
appreciates the consultations that took place with the

10-68327

S/PV.6439

United Nations with regard to the end of BINUB’s
mandate and the establishment of the new United
Nations Office in Burundi to continue our cooperation.
The Government is quite pleased with the consensus
reached with the Secretary-General’s team with regard
to the mandate, format and name of this new
partnership structure between the Secretariat and
Burundi. As conceived, the United Nations Office in
Burundi will be a new body tailored to current realities
that will coordinate the work of United Nations
agencies in Burundi in connection with the
implementation of development support programmes
during the period 2010-2014.
However, the report does not define the
difference between previous international public
opinion on the situation in Burundi as being
precarious — namely, that the outcome of the elections
was uncertain — and public opinion today. What does
the report mean when it refers, in paragraph 60, to
establishing accountable and responsive institutions?
Will there be a need for the United Nations to issue
further reports with regard to the human rights
situation in Burundi, given that our country will soon
have its own national independent human rights
commission?
With regard to strengthening civil society, there is
a need to remind civil society that its role is, first and
foremost, to strengthen the ability of the population at
the local level, rather than to serve as an echo chamber
for certain opposition political parties. In addition,
elsewhere in the world, belonging to civil society does
not mean systematically being hostile to institutions or
behaving unpatriotically. Civil society must serve as a
stabilizing factor, rather than being a set of small
groups covertly financed by ill-intentioned backers.
With regard to the staff of BINUB, unfortunately,
the suggestion made by the report is very difficult to
implement. Stabilizing salaries is one of the conditions

10-68327

for support from the Bretton Woods institutions for the
Government of Burundi. In addition, returning to
public service is governed by our country’s civil
service statute and employment laws. With regard to
the private sector, it is not a function of the
Government to issue edicts about how it should
manage its human resources.
Lastly, I should like to request that those who
drafted the report correct the errors that have
unfortunately crept into the text and have the potential
to distort its interpretation. For example, in paragraphs
7 and 8 of the report the reference should be to the
CNDD-FDD, rather than simply the CNDD. Paragraph
13 of the French text contains a typographical error:
CNDD-FDP instead of CNDD-FDD. In paragraph 23,
Burundi has been mentioned as a new member of the
African Union Peace and Security Council, although in
fact this was not Burundi’s first election.
I would like to thank the Council again for
inviting us to the presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s seventh report on BINUB. The Government
of Burundi is ready to cooperate with the new United
Nations Office in Burundi, for the good of the people
of Burundi.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
conveying my heartfelt gratitude and that of the
Government of Burundi to Mr. Charles Petrie for the
quality of his work as Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General in 2010.
The President: I thank Minister Nsanze for his
statement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
Therefore, in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations, I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

9
