S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6288th meeting
Friday, 19 March 2010, 3.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moungara Moussotsi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Du Xiaocong
Mr. Bonne
Ms. Shiotsu
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Puente
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Kravchenko
Ms. Dinç
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Gordon

Agenda
Central African region
Impact of illicit arms trafficking on peace and security
Letter dated 15 March 2010 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2010/143)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-28131 (E)

*1028131*

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.45 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to
remind all speakers, as I indicated this morning, that
they are asked to limit their statements to a maximum
of five minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving my country the
opportunity to participate in this important debate.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
Every day, hundreds of people suffer from the
consequences of the proliferation of illicit arms.
Implications for economic development are obvious.
Illicit arms trafficking is all too often one of the causes
of humanitarian tragedies.
Germany has long been committed to a
comprehensive approach to combat the destabilizing
accumulation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, as well as their ammunition. My country
attaches high importance to fully implementing and
further developing the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. It supports the Fourth Biennial Meeting of
States in New York in June 2010, which will mark an
important step in the implementation of the Programme
of Action.
For more than 10 years, Germany has chaired the
so-called Group of Interested States in New York. This
Group has offered a platform to the disarmament
community based in New York to exchange views on
how to cope with the scourge of small arms and light
weapons.
In recent years, my country has paid particular
attention to the issue of the security and thorough
management of national stockpiles of conventional
arms and ammunition. Under German chairmanship, a
group
of
governmental
experts
drew
up
recommendations on the proper management of
stockpiles. My Government is contributing to the
ongoing United Nations-steered process leading to the
development of technical guidelines for the
management of stockpiles of conventional ammunition.

2

My country remains committed to reducing and
ultimately ending the illegal global trade in small arms
and light weapons. Therefore we continue to attach the
utmost importance to the ongoing process towards the
development of a comprehensive and legally binding
arms trade treaty on the highest possible common
international standards for the transfer of conventional
arms. We stand ready to engage actively and to
cooperate constructively in the process leading to the
United Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty
in 2012.
I should like to provide a few examples of my
country’s cooperation. In 2006, my Government began
to support the East African Community (EAC) by
implementing a project on non-proliferation of small
arms and light weapons in the EAC. As a result,
networks were created that paved the way for the
engagement of the EAC in maintaining peace and
security. The EAC has worked closely with the
Regional Centre for Small Arms and Light Weapons,
based in Nairobi, thus reaching out to countries in the
Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa.
The African Union (AU) has been mandated by
its member States to establish an African Peace and
Security Architecture. Germany is assisting the Peace
and Security Department of the African Union
Commission in setting up the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
One of the priority areas of cooperation in Africa
is the establishment of a continental early warning
system. The system will enable the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union to identify the rise of a
potential crisis scenario. My Government is assisting
the AU in designing such an early warning system. It is
also supporting the development of the police
component of the African Standby Force. The project
aims at providing a minimum level of civilian security
in fragile post-conflict situations and at raising public
confidence in the security forces.
That leads me to my last point. From the very
start, Germany has supported the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). By helping
societies emerging from conflict and laying the
foundations for sustainable peace and development, the
PBC is entrusted with a crucial contribution to
international peace and security. It should therefore
play a central role in fostering cohesion among
political, security, development and humanitarian

10-28131

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

actors. In that context, my Government is of the view
that the PBC should strive for close cooperation with
the United Nations Security Council to focus on small
arms trafficking and to curb the harmful effects of
these weapons.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important debate.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
arising from their illicit trade has devastating effects on
peace, security and development in Central Africa,
both in countries in conflict and in those at peace. In
that region, Switzerland has long cooperated with
Burundi. Our commitment is currently being furthered
through our chairmanship of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
that country. My statement will be based on our
experience in the context of our activities in Burundi. I
will address five points.
First, the regulation of the trade in small arms and
light weapons illicit by international instruments at the
global, regional and subregional levels plays an
indispensable role in the fight against the proliferation
of such weapons. We strongly encourage all Member
States to implement and strengthen these instruments.
In this respect, the negotiation of a comprehensive and
legally binding arms trade treaty would represent a
great step forward.
Secondly, among our priorities is the effective
implementation of existing instruments relating to
small arms and light weapons, such as the Programme
of Action and the International Tracing Instrument. The
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action at the
national, regional and global levels will be an excellent
occasion for Member States to step up their efforts.
Thirdly, arms collection campaigns have proven
to be useful. However, buy-back programmes risk
being counterproductive if they do not reduce demand.
They may actually stimulate demand if the reward is
greater than the going price for a weapon. Such
initiatives should also extend to ammunition and
explosives and provide for the immediate destruction
of the equipment retrieved. Finally, all States must
make every possible effort to respect the rule of law,

10-28131

ensure security for all their communities without
discrimination of any kind, and complement civilian
weapons collection programmes with confidencebuilding measures.
Fourthly, it will not be enough to address the
supply in light weapons if we want to achieve
sustainable improvements in the security situation in
regions that are particularly affected by armed
violence. We underscore the need to intervene on the
demand side as well — that is, to take a comprehensive
approach to the problem of armed violence.
Finally, in the Secretary-General’s recent report
(A/64/228) on promoting development through the
reduction and prevention of armed violence, the
Secretary-General calls for increased international
efforts to prevent and reduce armed violence. He
makes several very useful recommendations. He also
welcomes the efforts undertaken in the framework of
the Geneva Declaration on Armed Violence and
Development, a diplomatic initiative launched jointly
by Switzerland and the United Nations Development
Programme in 2006 and signed by 108 countries to
date. That process supports Governments and civil
society in achieving measurable reductions in armed
violence, both in conflict and non-conflict settings, by
2015. We invite all countries that have not yet done so
to sign that instrument and to participate actively in the
process at the regional and global levels.
I underscore once again the importance of
Member States and international organizations taking a
coherent, coordinated and complementary approach to
the fight against armed violence in Central Africa by
dealing with both the demand and the supply sides of
the issue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Congo.
Mr. Maboundou (Congo) (spoke in French): I
would like first to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption to the presidency of the Council, and
to thank you for having organized this debate on an
issue of great relevance to the Central African
subregion, the rest of Africa and other regions of the
world affected by conflicts and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons.
In 2008, it was estimated that there were already
870 million firearms in circulation around the world,
causing on average 740,000 deaths per year. Even in

3

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

areas free from conflict, they continue to sow death
and devastation. Small arms and light weapons are
easily absorbed into illegal trafficking networks. They
are widely used in armed conflicts and foster crossborder crime.
For over three decades now, illegal trafficking in
small arms and light weapons has fed conflicts and
their corresponding phenomenon, cross-border crime,
in Central Africa. The subregion has been particularly
hard hit by the many armed conflicts that have
damaged the stability of States and destroyed their
socio-economic fabric. Many such States are in postconflict situations, while others are undertaking
reconstruction and the revival of their development
processes.
The persistent tensions in the subregion provide
fertile soil for the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, which, alongside organized crime, severely
destabilizes our States and poses a serious threat to the
peace and security of the subregion and to overall
international peace and security.
Furthermore, the process of economic integration
on which our development strategies depend has been
hindered and could even be held up entirely. Indeed,
the illicit circulation and proliferation of small arms
and light weapons are a destabilizing factor. They
promote armed violence and prolong armed conflicts.
They also promote the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, illicit drug trafficking, the recruitment of
child soldiers, sexual violence and other human rights
violations, such as illicit trafficking in children.
The unremitting armed violence and insecurity
resulting from this harmful traffic have weakened the
economies of most States in Central Africa, which must
also face the challenge of implementing programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants. The recurrence of armed violence
arising from the proliferation of light weapons in
border areas, roadblocks and acts of piracy displace
entire populations, making them more vulnerable and
their situation more precarious. The current situation in
the northern part of my country is a vivid illustration of
this point.
Here, my delegation would like to reiterate its
appeal for assistance for our brothers from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who have fled the
hostilities there and taken refuge in the Republic of the
Congo. We would also like to take this opportunity to

4

echo the United Nations appeal for funds to relieve the
suffering of the victims of armed attacks in Equateur
province.
The States of the subregion have committed
themselves to combating this scourge in the framework
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. Given what is at
stake, they have resolved to coordinate their efforts on
a regular basis within the framework of ECCAS, in
which they have created a Peace and Security
Department, and of the Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa.
These efforts have led to the adoption of several
decisions and recommendations. I would highlight in
particular the Subregional Conference on the
Proliferation of and Illicit Traffic in Small Arms in
Central Africa, which was held in October 1999 in
N’djamena, Chad, and the meeting held in Brazzaville
in May 2003 that led to the adoption of the Programme
of Priority Activities for the implementation of the
2001 United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
It is clear that effective control of the scourge of
illicit small arms is crucial. It is through the
strengthening of subregional, regional and international
cooperation that our States will be able to meet the
challenge of the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. This cooperation will have to focus on
exchanges of information and experience among
States, on the one hand, and between States and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
on the other. This will be particularly true in terms of
assistance being provided for the drawing up of
registers of arms, lists of illegal arms brokers, and the
provision of equipment and materials for border
surveillance and weapons detection.
In this respect, a workshop/seminar on the fight
against the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons was held on 10 March in Brazzaville by the
Regional Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons in
the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of Africa and
Bordering States. Through this workshop, the Congo
obtained an electronic device to trace weapons.
Conflict prevention must also be addressed on a
priority basis in order to ensure that non-State actors
are unable to acquire such weapons, the destructive

10-28131

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

effects of which have proved to be comparable to those
of weapons of mass destruction. To that end, we must
emphasize rigorous management of arms stockpiles,
the destruction of collected illicit weapons and surplus
munitions, and disarmament education by involving all
national actors, in particular civil society. Furthermore,
the submission and regular consideration, in the
context of the Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, of national
reports on the implementation of the Brazzaville
Programme of Priority Activities and the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is an encouraging exercise
that will allow us to take stock of the progress that has
been made in the fight against the scourge of arms in
Central Africa.
The forthcoming ministerial meeting of the
Standing Advisory Committee, to be held in April in
Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, will
focus exclusively on the consideration of the
preliminary draft of a legally binding instrument on the
control of small arms and light weapons in Central
Africa, which has been drawn up at the request of the
Economic Community of Central African States. As a
result, my delegation hopes that the Kinshasa meeting
will equip Central Africa with an ideal framework for
action to better combat the scourge of the illicit traffic
in small arms and light weapons.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to
discharge the pleasant duty of conveying to you, Sir,
my delight at seeing you preside over the Security
Council. I am all the more gratified by your presidency
as a result of the fact that you represent a country, the
Gabonese Republic, with which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has long enjoyed excellent
relations marked by mutual esteem and respect.
Allow me also to welcome the presence here of
Ms. Migiro, Mr. Costa, Mr. Duarte and Mr. SylvainGoma, and to thank them sincerely for their valuable
contributions to this debate.
I am from a country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which, owing to its geographical situation
and the breach of international peace and security that

10-28131

it has experienced, unfortunately embodies the tragedy
that Central Africa has suffered as a result of the
proliferation and illicit circulation of arms, in
particular small arms and light weapons, to which
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan once referred as
African weapons of mass destruction.
Indeed, over the past decade my country has been
the theatre of the most murderous war Africa has ever
known. The price that has been paid by the Congolese
people is unimaginable. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo has suffered millions of deaths, millions of
lifelong disabilities, millions of internally displaced
persons and refugees, massive violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, exponential
growth in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in conflict
zones, and especially — and this is of great concern for
our future — the sacrifice of an entire young
generation that already comprises the majority of our
population and will be the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of tomorrow.
I wish to spare the Council further litanies.
Today, my country is in the process of reconstruction,
institutional consolidation and rebuilding the nation. If
this process is to be successful, we cannot sufficiently
stress the imperative need to strengthen cooperation
and partnership at the international level, since the
fight against the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons largely transcends Central Africa and extends
to the entire continent and, indeed, the entire world.
How can we face this challenge and together
travel the road to normalization? In Central Africa, we
require peace and stability. We require a peace to keep
or build, even through political settlements likely to
prevent recourse to violence and therefore the demands
of a potential market for arms and ammunition. Our
countries seek better cooperation with the United
Nations bodies primarily responsible for dealing with
small arms and light weapons: the General Assembly,
the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and the position
currently under creation of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
On the ground, we need to rethink and better
populate programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; disarmament, demobilization,

5

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

reintegration and repatriation or resettlement;
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement; and security sector reform.
Our States should more firmly address the supply
networks for small arms and light weapons through a
process of registering, tracing, marking and identifying
weapons, with the assistance and support of such
organizations as INTERPOL, or through international
instruments under United Nations auspices, without
prejudice to the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter, their commitments vis-à-vis other
existing international instruments, and of course their
national security and interests.
We should also clearly identify the links between
the illicit traffic in these weapons and the illegal
exploitation of natural and other resources, as well as
the illicit traffic in narcotics, and in response develop
innovative strategies. Practical cooperation is desirable
among the authorities of our States responsible for
investigations, the Security Council sanctions
committees, peacekeeping missions, and relevant
regional and international organizations. To that end,
coercive measures should be considered not only
against individuals, but also against any State Member
of the United Nations that violates arms embargos
against conflict zones in our subregion.
The efforts of our States to combat the
uncontrolled proliferation of these weapons should be
based on the belief that security, development and
human rights are all interconnected. Our national plans
for combating the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons should incorporate peacebuilding efforts,
gender equality, strategies for the empowerment of
women, broader poverty reduction policies, and
concepts of national and human security. Our States
should be encouraged to strengthen cooperation aimed
at the gathering, storage and exchange of data on small
arms and light weapons. Appropriate training and
capacity-building policies for the implementation of
national arms control and reduction programmes are
desirable. The task would be crushing for our States
without appropriate international assistance, and it
would be difficult for them successfully to implement
policies for peace, stability, security and the protection
of our young democracies.
To fight the scourge of the illicit traffic in
weapons, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
undertaken remedial measures, some of which will
become preventive in the future and all of which are

6

aimed at strengthening our capacity to counter the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and to
reduce armed violence. My country has thus acquired
an institutional framework, inter alia, through the
creation of a national commission for the control of
small arms and light weapons and the reduction of
armed violence. With the assistance of the United
Nations system, the European Union and a number of
non-governmental organizations, and with the support
of certain States, including the United States, Belgium
and France, my country has taken myriad legislative
measures, bolstered its operational capacities and,
finally, undertaken appropriate steps in terms of
information exchange and the maintenance of registries
on the control, seizure, confiscation and destruction of
weapons. By way of illustration, in 2009 our country
destroyed over 100,000 weapons and 480 tons of
munitions. Furthermore, a weapons-marking operation
was launched on 20 February.
I would also briefly like to mention the efforts
made
in
awareness-raising
and
community
disarmament under the aegis of the Government by the
Ecumenical Programme for the Transformation of
Conflicts
and
Reconciliation.
Moreover,
the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has signed and
ratified all the legal instruments of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) in this
field. With regard to Congolese law, as the Council is
aware, duly constituted international treaties and
agreements take precedence over national law.
I can assure the Council that the States members
of ECCAS — which, as its Secretary-General has
mentioned, include almost a dozen countries, more
than half of which were in conflict situations not long
ago — understand perfectly the seriousness of the
problem of the illicit traffic in weapons. Our countries
are pursuing cooperation in the context of both ECCAS
and the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa, which was
established as a framework for coordination in May
1992 by Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
Working in close cooperation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, as many
delegations have mentioned, next month my country
will host the Committee’s thirty-first ministerial
meeting, which will focus almost exclusively on a draft
legal instrument on the control small arms and light
weapons in Central Africa, their ammunitions and any
equipment that might be used in their manufacture.

10-28131

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

Having said that, I cannot but express my great
satisfaction and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
your timely initiative to convene today’s meeting of the
Council. I very much hope that it will contribute to
sustaining and strengthening the solidarity of the
Security Council and the international community with
the Central African region with a view to eradicating
the illicit traffic in these weapons.
If I may just exceed a bit more the time that has
been given to me, I wish to inform the Council that my
country will host a regional preparatory meeting in
Kinshasa in connection with the Fourth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, to be held in New York in
June. I should like in advance to thank the delegations
that will join us and the Department for Disarmament
Affairs in ensuring that the Meeting can take place,
thereby underscoring their resolve and commitment to
succeed in defeating a traffic that all of us deplore.
In conclusion, I should like to associate myself
with all the calls on the international community to
provide the Central African region all the assistance
requested in effectively coordinating the fight against
the illicit traffic in weapons. The commitment of the
Security Council is crucial to that end. Our countries
have already welcomed the felicitous partnership that
has been established between the United Nations and
the ECCAS. However, if we wish to work to resolve
the problems posed by the illicit traffic in weapons at
the national, regional and international levels in order
to produce the greatest benefit for our countries and
peoples, that partnership deserves to be built upon, and
even strengthened, with regard both to the necessary
coordination of United Nations efforts and to broader
and more effective cooperation with regional
organizations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): Allow
me, first, to convey my delegation’s sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the holding of
today’s open debate on the impact of illicit trafficking
in small arms on peace and security in the Central
African region. My delegation believes that today’s
debate is both timely and relevant, considering the
challenges that we face not only in Central Africa but
in all corners of the world. I would also like to express

10-28131

our gratitude for the continued interest of the Council
on this issue, as well as for the work of the SecretaryGeneral in raising public awareness on this matter by
publishing biennial reports, which I believe will be
circulated in the near future.
Small arms and light weapons are the weapons of
choice in many present-day conflicts. Their widespread
availability and excessive accumulation contribute to
the prolongation of violence and the aggravation of
regional conflicts. Illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is often closely linked to organized
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking. Furthermore, it is
also associated with various development, human
rights and humanitarian problems, such as child
soldiers, refugees, food insecurity and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Preventing the illicit
flow of small arms is key to addressing those
multifaceted issues.
We greatly appreciate the efforts being made by
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), especially its work on a legally binding
instrument on subregional monitoring of the illicit
traffic in small arms, ammunitions and related material.
That is not only necessary for the region, but it is also
in line with the global trend to regulate the illicit flow
of conventional arms. We would also like to commend
earlier initiatives by African States, such as the
Bamako Declaration, the Nairobi and Southern African
Development Community Declarations and Protocols,
and the Economic Community of West African States
Convention.
My delegation is particularly pleased with the
Council’s continued interest in addressing the issue of
small arms since its first thematic debate in 1999,
considering its potential to impede the Council from
fulfilling its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I would especially
like to emphasize the importance of ensuring the
effectiveness of the Council’s arms embargo, not only
because of its direct effects in curbing illegal arms
transfers but also because of its far-reaching impact on
the work of the Council, including its peacekeeping
activities.
Also within the framework of the United Nations,
in June we will have an opportunity to strengthen our
joint efforts to address issues concerning small arms at
the Fourth Biennial Meeting of States, as well as to
consider
the
national,
regional
and
global

7

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. In that regard, I would like to commend the
extensive consultations being undertaken by Mexico as
the Chair of the Fourth Meeting. I would also like to
reiterate my delegation’s full support for the success of
the Meeting.
My delegation would also like to point out that,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 64/48,
the preparatory committee meetings for the United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty will start
in July 2010, with a view to establishing a legally
binding instrument on the highest possible common
international standards for the transfer of conventional
arms. Considering the grave impact that the illicit
traffic in small arms has on peace and security in all
regions, including Central Africa, I believe that small
arms should fall within the scope of the arms trade
treaty.
Among the various aspects concerning illicit
trafficking activities, my delegation would like to point
out the importance of preventing and combating the
illicit brokering of all conventional weapons, including
small arms. From that standpoint, the Republic of
Korea, together with Australia, introduced in 2008
General Assembly
resolution
63/67,
entitled
“Preventing and combating illicit brokering activities”,
which was adopted by consensus. Considering its
positive implications on international efforts to curb
illicit trafficking in small arms, my Government would
like to request the continued support of all Member
States for that biennial resolution, which will next be
introduced at the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): First of all, I
would like to commend you, Mr. President, on your
timely initiative to hold this open debate on the impact
of illicit small arms trafficking on peace and security in
the Central African region.
We all come to this debate with our own regional
and geographical perspectives. Some of those speakers
who have spoken this afternoon have, of course,
demonstrated a much deeper knowledge of the
situation in Central Africa than Australia has. I would
like to take this opportunity to formally congratulate

8

those States on the specific measures they have listed
for us here today. But equally, we all share a common
purpose, as reflected in Article 1 of the United Nations
Charter, to maintain peace and security, including
through taking effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace.
The achievement of these goals involves building
confidence between nations and developing an
effective international security system. In part, this
requires concerted international efforts to prevent the
excessive
accumulation
and
proliferation
of
conventional weapons, including the eradication of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
But regional solutions to regional problems are
also critical. In this regard, Australia recognizes and
commends the efforts being made in Africa to bring
about sustainable peace and security. These efforts
include the Economic Community of West African
States Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials; the
Southern African Development Community Protocol
on Control of Firearms, Ammunition and Other Related
Materials; and the Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention,
Control and Reduction of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the Horn of
Africa. As my Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, said
just today in a speech at Sydney University, it is
difficult to imagine making progress on global issues,
including disarmament, without working closely with
African countries and the African Union.
In our own region, Australia, in partnership with
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
hosted a Pacific regional meeting last year to further
the goals of the United Nations Programme of Action.
In doing so, we recognized that national security
cannot be achieved in isolation from regional or global
security. We also realized the importance that
confidence-building and effective collective action
among States plays in the pursuit of these goals.
Regional arms control arrangements, including in
Africa and the Pacific, are important examples of
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to peace and security. They also underpin, in
practical ways, the broader international security
framework, including the key United Nations
initiatives, such as the Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons and the prospective arms

10-28131

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

trade treaty, in that they seek to prevent the illicit or
irresponsible transfer of arms.
It is in these broader international security
frameworks that all Member States can contribute to
strengthening cross-regional security. As United
Nations Members, we have valuable opportunities this
year to build on regional arms control initiatives and to
further strengthen international measures. As has been
mentioned by speakers before me, the Fourth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, and also the first Preparatory
Committee meeting on the arms trade treaty, provide us
with an opportunity to buttress existing regional efforts
and to make real international progress.
Broader efforts in the General Assembly should
not be ignored either. As my colleague, the Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea,
mentioned just a few moments ago, Australia and the
Republic of Korea will once again be together
sponsoring a draft resolution on preventing and
combating illicit brokering at the Assembly’s sixtyfifth session. The resolution encourages States to
implement the domestic controls necessary to counter
illicit trafficking, and also recognizes the key role of
regional and subregional cooperation in countering that
threat.
We believe that we all share the same goal. The
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
identified it in the context of the arms trade treaty in its
summary report on the regional seminar for countries
in Central, Northern and Western Africa, but this goal
is applicable across the entire arms-control agenda.
The goal I refer to is working towards freeing people
from fear. We look forward to working with other
Member States to further advance this objective and
the goals of the United Nations Programme of Action
on Small Arms and of the arms trade treaty. The United
Nations membership’s continued and active support for
these initiatives will send a strong message to wouldbe proliferators about the strength of international
resolve to stop the illicit and irresponsible trade in
conventional weapons, particularly small arms and
light weapons. In doing so, we will be living up to our
United Nations obligations to the maintenance of peace
and security.

10-28131

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Central African
Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I should like at the outset to convey
to you, Mr. President, my warm congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for March, which you are conducting so
skilfully. I would like to pay tribute to the welcome
initiative of holding a public meeting on the topic of
illicit arms trafficking and its impact on peace and
security in the Central African subregion. I do so with
pleasure, because Gabon is well known for its role as a
mediator in Africa, and in the Central African Republic
in particular for its involvement in the search for
solutions to the Central African crisis. My delegation is
grateful for all his efforts on the ground.
I am also grateful to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Costa; the SecretaryGeneral of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), Mr. Sylvain-Goma; and
Mr. Duarte, the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for their involvement in seeking solutions to
the issue of small arms.
At a time when the international community has
achieved notable progress in some parts of the world
through its praiseworthy and courageous efforts to
reduce if not to eradicate illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons, which has led to so much loss
of life, it is powerless to address that issue in the rest
of the world, especially Africa and, more specifically,
Central Africa. Many actions have been taken —
including confiscation, collection and incineration —
and yet all have amounted to a drop in the bucket. The
circulation of small arms and light weapons has gone
from bad to worse, sometimes thanks to public and
international services.
The possible reasons for such failures include
porous borders between neighbouring countries; a lack
of defence and security capacity; a lack of trust among
the population; the stockpiling of unneeded weapons;
trafficking in natural resources, such as precious
stones, elephant ivory and animal pelts; attempts at
destabilization; and so forth. My delegation can only
welcome the consideration of the topic at hand, since
our country is emerging from conflict with difficulty in
the face of constraints beyond its control, such as the

9

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

circulation of illicit weapons throughout our territory,
held by rebel groups, bandits and road blockers.
There is no need to describe the effects of this
scourge on the country’s people and development. In
2003, the Government of the Central African Republic,
in the context of its comprehensive defence policy,
placed the individual at the centre of security issues
and reaffirmed its firm commitment to peace and
stability efforts in Central Africa and the Great Lakes
region, for the security issue in the Central African
Republic cannot be analysed without taking the
regional perspective into account.
Since reducing the presence of arms is essential
to development, a national programme to support
development by strengthening security has been
launched, based on an approach integrating community
policies and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. Community policies are
aimed at reducing insecurity through rehabilitation
activities, post-crisis support to victims of such crises,
and reducing the small arms and light weapons held
illegally by civilians. DDR is aimed specifically at the
ex-combatants who continue to pose a threat to civilian
peace and security. We have to turn them from
destructive forces to forces that can build the nation.
Consequently the restoration of security runs in
tandem with civic responsibility and with DDR. From
this point of view, the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons is an issue not only of
security but of human rights as well. A number of
disarmament initiatives have been launched by the
Government with the assistance of the international
community, which in 2001 adopted the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, accompanied by concrete measures.
What is the result of all those recommendations?
At the subregional level, the decisions of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa are sufficiently persuasive
to endorse the initiatives taken at the subregional level.
In fact, the member States of that Committee are on the
verge of concluding the consideration of an advance
draft legal instrument on the control, in Central Africa,
of small arms and light weapons, their ammunition and
all equipment that can be used for their manufacture.
That instrument takes into account all aspects of arms
from their manufacture to their sale in the markets.

10

Moreover,
it
will
strengthen
comprehensive
cooperation among Member States in the fight against
the circulation of arms, transboundary crime,
widespread banditry and so on.
At the national level, the Central African
Republic has developed strategies that range from
strengthening
security
cooperation
with
the
neighbouring States to adopting laws, raising public
awareness,
establishing
the
Anti-Corruption
Commission, training, and strengthening the national
disarmament and reintegration programme, which was
launched with the financial and technical support of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic. Because of the financing
difficulties facing the Central African Republic, the
implementation of such a programme requires
mobilizing the financial resources of the State itself,
which, unfortunately, it cannot do owing to the crisis in
which it has been thrown.
To end the illicit sale of firearms, international
partners should help the States of the Central African
region by providing them with workable monitoring
means and adequate logistical resources, that is, the
requisite material means to eradicate the pandemic of
small arms and light weapons in Central Africa, which
means are lacking. As the States of the subregion are
undertaking serious commitments on future binding
legal instruments to control light weapons, the
international community should help the subregion to
achieve that objective.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
conclusion of this meeting.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Paschalis (South Africa): The Security
Council has been considering the issue of small arms
and light weapons during regular open debates since
1999, informed by the recognition that the excessive
and destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light
weapons has a direct bearing on the Security Council’s
mandate. Small arms and light weapons have the
potential to increase the intensity and the duration of
armed conflicts, undermine the sustainability of peace
agreements, impede the success of peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction, frustrate efforts aimed at

10-28131

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

the prevention of armed conflict, and hinder the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
South Africa therefore congratulates the
delegation of Gabon for taking up this important issue
during its presidency of Security Council in order to,
inter alia, promote international support for the efforts
of the Central African countries to address a specific
dynamic of this issue, namely, the illicit trafficking of
small arms and light weapons in their region.
The issue of small arms and light weapons is
complex and has a direct bearing on a number of other
important policy areas, such as sustainable
development,
human
rights,
poverty
and
underdevelopment. It is, therefore, clear that that
scourge requires attention at the national, subregional,
regional and international levels in order for it to be
effectively addressed. It also remains vitally important
that each of the relevant United Nations organs afford
the issue priority attention, based on their respective
mandates and in cooperation with one another.
It is equally important for the international
community, particularly the United Nations family, to
render effective support to the home-grown solutions
of regions and subregions, such as the Central African
initiative. Legally binding agreements adopted at the
subregional level represent concrete building blocks in
the fight against the illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons at the broader regional and global
levels. In that regard, we may add that the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) adopted the
Protocol on the Control of Firearms, Ammunition and
Other Related Materials in the Southern African
Development Community Region in August 2001 as a
comprehensive legally binding agreement aimed at
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, as well as at
promoting greater cooperation amongst SADC member
States, inter alia by enhancing and harmonizing
national controls.
The United Nations Programme of Action on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons remains
the central global instrument to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The Programme of Action represents a hardwon agreement by the international community, and its
full implementation in all its aspects should remain
central to all our national, subregional, regional and
international efforts.

10-28131

With reference to the issues addressed today, we
wish to underline the importance of the General
Assembly as the custodian of the Programme of Action
to further explore ways to advance the synergies
between the Programme’s provisions on cooperation,
capacity-building and assistance, on the one hand, and
regional and subregional initiatives, on the other hand.
The issue of small arms and light weapons has a
particular bearing on two aspects of the Security
Council’s mandate, namely, arms embargoes, and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
efforts. Guided by our commitment to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, we support arms embargoes that
contribute to lasting peace and stability, in this case
also as it pertains to the Central African region.
Our involvement in peacekeeping operations led
us to recognize the value of effective DDR activities as
a vital element that contributes to the success of entire
peace processes. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations, handed down through Security Council
resolutions, need to be backed up with the system-wide
resources of the United Nations so as to ensure that
such mandates are sufficiently sustainable and
effectively carried out.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes today’s
open debate as a further opportunity for the Council
and the broader United Nations membership to develop
and refine our common understanding of such issues in
order to contribute concretely to the attainment of
peace and security in the heart of Africa.
The President (spoke in French): Following
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms the
statements of its Presidents of 24 September 1999
(S/PRST/1999/28), 31 August 2001 (S/PRST/
2001/21), 31 October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/30)
and 29 June 2007 (S/PRST/2007/24), and its
resolution 1209 (1998) of 19 November 1998,
welcomes all initiatives taken by Member States
following the adoption of the Programme of
Action by the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects and takes note of the progress
towards an Arms Trade Treaty.

11

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council is gravely concerned
about the illicit manufacture, transfer and
circulation of small arms and light weapons and
their excessive accumulation and uncontrolled
spread in many regions of the world, particularly
in the subregion of Central Africa, which have a
wide range of humanitarian and socio-economic
consequences, in particular on the security of
civilians by fuelling armed conflict, which in turn
exacerbates the risks of gender-based violence
and the recruitment of child soldiers and poses a
serious threat to peace, reconciliation, safety,
security, stability and sustainable development at
the local, national, regional and international
levels.
“The
Security
Council,
while
acknowledging the right of all States to
manufacture, import, export, transfer and retain
conventional arms for self-defence and security
needs consistent with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, underlines the
vital importance of effective regulations and
controls of the transparent trade in small arms
and light weapons in order to prevent their illegal
diversion and re-export.
“The Security Council reiterates that
Member States should comply with existing arms
embargoes and export bans and take necessary
steps to effectively implement these measures
imposed by the Council in its relevant
resolutions.
“The Security Council is alarmed that illicit
transfers of small arms and light weapons in
contravention of arms embargoes and export
bans, to or by criminal organizations or other
irresponsible actors, including those suspected of
engaging in terrorist acts, are linked with illicit
trafficking of drugs, illegal exploitation of natural
resources and illicit trade in such resources. The
Security Council encourages all members that
have not yet done so to accede to, ratify and
implement the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its protocols,
including the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition.
“The Security Council welcomes the
various initiatives that are currently under way

12

within the subregion, notes the efforts to establish
a subregional register of small arms and
encourages the Central African countries to take
necessary measures to build up the capacity of
the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) through the establishment of a
subregional register of arms dealers as well as the
elaboration of a subregional legally binding
instrument on the control of small arms and light
weapons, their ammunitions and all equipments
that might serve for their manufacture.
“The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of addressing illicit arms trafficking,
in particular of small arms and light weapons,
through an approach of common and shared
responsibility, and encourages the States of the
subregion to fully implement relevant measures
adopted at the national, subregional, regional and
international levels and to consider appropriate
steps in this regard.
“The Security Council calls on the States of
the subregion to strengthen efforts to establish
mechanisms and regional networks among their
relevant authorities for information sharing to
combat the illicit circulation of and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons. The Council also
stresses the need for the States of the subregion to
strengthen their cooperation, including through
regional and subregional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in order to identify
and take appropriate measures against individuals
and entities that engage in illegal trafficking of
small arms and light weapons in the Central
African subregion.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need
for national authorities in the subregion to fully
participate in the practical implementation of the
Programme of Action, adopted on 20 July 2001,
by the United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Is
Aspects, and the International Instrument to
Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely
and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and
Light Weapons, adopted on 8 December 2005,
and encourages Central African countries to
regularly submit national reports to the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with the abovementioned
instrument.

10-28131

S/PV.6288 (Resumption 1)

“The
Security
Council
encourages
Economic Community of Central African States
to assist Central African countries in ensuring the
effective implementation of arms embargoes
imposed by the Council and, in this context, to
establish measures such as inquiries into illicit
arms trafficking routes, the follow-up of possible
violations and cooperation in border monitoring,
in consultation with the countries concerned. In
this regard, the Security Council encourages the
committees in charge of monitoring arms
embargoes in Central African countries and
neighbouring countries, consistent with their
mandates, to continue to include in the annual
reports
a
substantive
section
on
the
implementation of arms embargoes, on possible
violation of the measures reported to the
Committees and with recommendations, as
appropriate, for strengthening the effectiveness of
arms embargoes. This information could also be
shared with Interpol’s International Weapons and
Explosives Tracking System.
“The Security Council encourages the
Committees in charge of monitoring arms
embargoes in Central African countries and
neighbouring countries, consistent with their
mandates,
to
establish
channels
of
communication with ECCAS, its member States
and the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.
“The Security Council supports the action
of the United Nations missions present in the
subregion, consistent with their mandates, to
assist disarmament processes in the framework of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration

10-28131

programmes, and calls upon international partners
to assist the Central African countries to build
and strengthen their capacities to set up and
implement measures relating to the prevention of
illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, and the security and management of
stockpiles of arms, especially small arms and
light weapons.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of the forthcoming United Nations
Fourth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat, and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects, to be held in June 2010, and encourages
Member States, including those in the subregion
of Central Africa, to fully cooperate with the
Chair to ensure a successful outcome of this
Meeting.
“The Security Council encourages Member
States to undertake vigorous actions aimed at
restricting the supply of small arms and light
weapons and ammunitions to areas of instability
in Central Africa.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to take into account in his
biennial report, as a follow-up, the content of the
present presidential statement.”
This statement will be issued as a Security
Council document under the symbol S/PRST/2010/6.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

13
