A/65/PV.72

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

72

nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 22 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that, in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e)
of resolution 60/180, of 20 December 2005, the
Organizational Committee shall be comprised of the
following: seven members of the Security Council,
including five permanent members; seven members of
the Economic and Social Council, elected from
regional groups; five top providers of assessed
contributions to United Nations budgets and of
voluntary contributions to United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies, including a standing
peacebuilding fund; five top providers of military
personnel and civilian police to United Nations
missions; and seven additional members elected by the
General Assembly, giving due consideration to
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that at its 67th plenary
meeting of the sixty-fourth session, on 22 December
2009, the General Assembly elected the Czech
Republic and Peru as members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission for a
two-year term beginning on 1 January 2010.

Members will further recall that, by resolution
63/145, of 18 December 2008, the General Assembly
decided that, beginning with the election to be held
during the sixty-third session, the term of office for the
members of the General Assembly on the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission shall begin from 1 January instead of
from 23 June.
By a letter dated 16 December 2010, contained in
document A/65/635 and addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, the facilitator of the group of
the leading financial contributors informed me that the
financial contributors had decided that Canada, Japan,
Norway and Sweden shall serve full two-year terms in
2011 and 2012, and that Germany and the Netherlands
shall serve one-year terms in 2011 and 2012,
respectively.
Also, by a letter dated 16 December 2010,
contained in document A/65/636 and addressed to the
President of the General Assembly, the facilitator of
the troop-contributing countries informed me of their
decision that the terms of office of Bangladesh, India,
Nepal, Nigeria and Pakistan, from the troopcontributing countries category of membership, shall
start on 1 January 2011 and end on 31 December 2012.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of documents A/65/635 and
A/65/636?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-70475 (E)

*1070475*

A/65/PV.72

The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly shall now proceed to the election of five
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The President (spoke in French): I congratulate
Benin, Brazil, Indonesia, Tunisia and Uruguay on their
election as members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

By resolution 60/261, the Assembly decided that
the members of the Organizational Committee shall
serve for renewable terms of two years, as applicable.
Accordingly, Benin, Chile, South Africa, Thailand and
Uruguay are therefore eligible for immediate
re-election.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 112?

Regarding candidatures for the five seats, I would
like to inform members of the following: for the
African States, the Group has endorsed Benin and
Tunisia; for the Asian States, the Group has endorsed
Indonesia; and for the Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Group has endorsed Brazil and Uruguay.
Members will recall that, in resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies will
apply to its election of members of the Committee. For
this election, rules 92 and 94 will be applicable.
Accordingly, the election will be held by secret ballot
and there will be no nominations.
However, I should like to recall paragraph 16 of
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Since the
number of candidates endorsed by the Group of
African States, the Group of Asian States and the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides to elect
Benin, Brazil, Indonesia, Tunisia and Uruguay as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2011?
It was so decided.

2

It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/65/L.39/Rev.2)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly held a debate on
agenda item 13 jointly with agenda item 115, entitled
“Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit”, and agenda item 120, entitled “Strengthening
of the United Nations system”, at its 52nd plenary
meeting, on 23 November 2010.
Members will also recall that, under agenda items
13 and 115, the Assembly adopted resolution 65/7, at
its 41st plenary meeting, on 29 October 2010, and,
under agenda item 13, adopted resolution 65/10, at its
52nd plenary meeting, on 23 November 2010.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Yemen to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.39/Rev.2.
Mr. Al Hadhrani (Yemen): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/65/L.39/Rev.2 under agenda item 13,
entitled, “Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields”. The draft resolution is
entitled “Follow-up to the International Conference on
Population and Development beyond 2014”.
At the International Conference on Population
and Development (ICPD) in Cairo, 16 years ago, the
world agreed on a Programme of Action that integrated
a comprehensive range of the population, development
and human rights factors necessary for ensuring that
every person can live a healthy and dignified life.
However, considerable gaps still exist in the
implementation of various areas of the Programme, in

10-70475

A/65/PV.72

spite of the progress that has been made towards
achieving its goals and objectives. Moreover, the ICPD
Programme of Action is due to formally come to an
end in 2014, although its goals and objectives remain
valid.
That is why the Group of 77 and China have
sought, by introducing this draft resolution, to extend
the Programme of Action and the key actions for its
further implementation beyond 2014, and to ensure its
follow-up in order to fully meet its goals and
objectives. The draft resolution would also have the
General Assembly convene a special meeting during its
sixty-ninth session in order to assess the status of the
Programme of Action’s implementation and to renew
political support for the actions needed for the full
achievement of its goals and objectives. It would
further decide that the Commission on Population and
Development should also convene and enter into active
discussion, during its forty-seventh session, on the
assessment of the status of implementation of the
Programme of Action.
It is the conviction of the Group that adequate
mobilization of resources at the national and
international levels as well as new and additional
resources for developing countries are vital for the
implementation of the Programme of Action. After all,
Governments are not expected to be able to achieve the
ICPD goals and objectives without assistance. It is of
great importance that the international community
recommit itself at the highest political level in order to
achieve the Programme’s goals and objectives.
I would be remiss if I did not recognize the
diligent work and dedication of Mr. John Mosoti of
Kenya as the facilitator of this important draft
resolution. Through the informal consultations he
conducted, we were able to arrive at a consensus text.
We also thank Ambassador Conrad Hunte of Antigua
and Barbuda for coordinating the Group’s position, as
well as our negotiating partners for their efforts and
flexibility throughout the process.
I have two minor technical corrections to the
draft resolution. First, the first preambular paragraph
should read as follows:
“Recalling its resolutions 50/124 of
20 December 1995, 51/176 of 16 December 1996
and 53/183 of 15 December 1998 on the
implementation of the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population and

10-70475

Development, adopted in Cairo, Egypt, in
September 1994, and its resolutions 49/128 of
19 December 1994 and 52/188 of 18 December
1997”.
Secondly, in the second preambular paragraph
and in paragraph 2, the phrase “the Key Actions for the
Further Implementation” should be read with the initial
letters capitalized.
It is the hope of the Group that the Assembly will
adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that, under agenda items 13 and 115, the
Assembly adopted resolution 65/7 at its 41st plenary
meeting on 29 October, as well as resolution 65/10
under agenda item 13, at its fifty-second plenary
meeting on 23 November.
Before we continue, I should like to consult the
Assembly with a view to proceeding immediately to
the consideration of draft resolution A/65/L.39/Rev.2.
Since the text of the draft resolution was circulated
only this morning, it will be necessary to waive the
relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure,
which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will therefore proceed to consider draft resolution
A/65/L.39/Rev.2.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.39/Rev.2, entitled “Follow-up to the
International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development beyond 2014”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin: (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that Portugal has become a sponsor of
draft resolution A/65/L.39/Rev.2.

3

A/65/PV.72

The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.39/Rev.2, as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/65/L.39/Rev.2, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 65/234).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya, who wishes to
speak in explanation of position following the adoption
of resolution 65/234.
Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): My delegation is pleased
to join the consensus in adopting this important
resolution, whose aim is to extend the International
Conference
on
Population
and
Development
Programme of Action and its key actions beyond 2014,
when they were set to expire.
Kenya was honoured to facilitate the informal
consultations on the text that led to the resolution’s
adoption this morning. In that regard, my delegation
wishes to express its gratitude to the Group of 77 and
China for providing the initial text for negotiations and
for according my delegation the honour and
opportunity to facilitate it. We are similarly grateful to
all delegations for their active participation during the
consultations and for their constructive contributions,
without which this morning’s adoption could not have
been possible. My delegation is also grateful to the
Secretariat, in particular the United Nations Population
Fund and the Population Division of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs.
Please allow me to briefly turn to the substance
of the resolution. The adoption of this resolution is
indeed historic. While extending the ICPD Programme
of Action beyond 2014, Member States have also
reaffirmed their commitment to the ICPD goals and
recognized the nexus between those goals and the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which,
incidentally, are supposed to be achieved by 2015.
It is noteworthy that the ICPD Programme of
Action is being extended, not only because it is still
relevant but also due to the fact that the goals have not
been achieved — and most likely will not be achieved
by Member States even by 2015, the last year for the
MDGs. It is therefore imperative that countries strive
to achieve the Goals by adhering to the principles of
the ICPD.
Countries must also integrate population and
development strategies in national planning and put in

4

place programmes and interventions to alleviate
poverty, empower women and arrest child and maternal
morbidity. These actions will definitely lead to
sustained economic growth and a manageable
population.
It is now patently clear that the goals pertaining
to maternal health and child mortality may not be
achieved by countries by the target year of 2015. With
this extension, we gain time to pursue those goals. We
should, however, not let our guard down, as the
reprieve is very brief. Genuine progress will only be
made if we pursue meaningful international
cooperation and partnerships, and by ensuring that the
Programme of Action is implemented. Additionally, we
must prudently utilize and invest resources where we
can obtain the greatest returns.
In conclusion, we look forward to holding the
special session in 2014, when we will review the
progress achieved and address the obstacles that stand
in the way of implementing the Programme of Action.
The President (spoke in French): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position following
the adoption of the resolution.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution (A/65/L.55)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution (A/65/L.56)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the Assembly held the debate on agenda
item 122 and its sub-items (b) to (w) at its 63rd and
64th plenary meetings, on 13 December 2010.
I now give the floor to the representative of Viet
Nam to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.55.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of

10-70475

A/65/PV.72

the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) — namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam — to introduce draft resolution
A/65/L.55, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations”.
The draft resolution once again expresses the
strong commitment of the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to strengthen
the partnership between the two organizations aimed at
ensuring durable peace, stability, sustained economic
growth, shared prosperity and social progress in the
Southeast Asian region, as well as to contribute to the
resolution of pressing global issues of mutual concern.
It builds on resolution 63/35, which the Assembly
adopted by consensus in 2008, and reflects new
developments since then in the cooperative relationship
between the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
With the entry into force of its Charter, on
15 December 2008, ASEAN is entering a historic stage
in its development in which its member States are
making efforts to build an ASEAN community. The
draft resolution recognizes that important endeavour of
ASEAN and encourages the United Nations to support
ASEAN’s community-building efforts in all three
pillars, namely, the political and security community,
the economic community and the socio-cultural
community.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations — an
observer at the General Assembly — has always been a
cooperative partner of the United Nations. The draft
resolution recognizes the concrete achievements of
such partnership and encourages the two organizations
to further their cooperation in all the areas mentioned
in the outcome document of the third ASEAN-United
Nations Summit, held in Hanoi on 29 October.

in previous years, the Assembly will adopt this year’s
draft resolution by consensus.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands to
introduce draft resolution A/65/L.56.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): It is my honour and
pleasure to introduce to the General Assembly draft
resolution A/65/L.56, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”. On behalf of the
sponsors, I would like to express the hope that it will
be adopted by consensus.
There can be no doubt that one of the key
objectives of the United Nations — a safer world for
all — is greatly enhanced by the activities of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPWC) in the areas of the destruction of chemical
stockpiles,
non-proliferation
and
international
cooperation on the peaceful uses of chemistry. The
OPWC’s activities, which are often undertaken in
cooperation with regional organizations, remain as
valid today as when the organization was established,
in 1997.
The primary objective of the biennial draft
resolution on this subject is to highlight the importance
of the continued cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW, an organization that, with its
current membership of 188 countries, is coming ever
closer to the universality of the United Nations. OPCW
States parties already represent about 98 per cent of the
global population and landmass, as well as an equal
percentage of the world’s chemical industry. But the
aim remains full universalization, which still requires
special efforts by all concerned and by all stakeholders.
In preparing to join the Convention and to effectively
implement the global ban on chemical weapons, the
OPCW provides support to all States not parties to the
Chemical Weapons Convention.

We are thankful for the contributions made by
interested delegations to improve the text of the draft
resolution. We are likewise grateful to both the original
and the new sponsors of the draft resolution.

The adoption of this draft resolution will provide
the basis for the General Assembly’s continued
consideration of the issue of cooperation between the
United Nations and the OPCW at the Assembly’s sixtyseventh session, in 2012.

In submitting this draft resolution for action by
the General Assembly today, ASEAN member States
are fully confident that the cooperation between
ASEAN and the United Nations will be further
enhanced for the benefit of all nations. We hope that, as

The Netherlands, as initiator of the draft
resolution and as host country of the OPCW, welcomes
the decision of the fourteenth session of the
Conference of States Parties in December 2009 to

10-70475

5

A/65/PV.72

appoint Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü as the DirectorGeneral of the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW.
Let me conclude by warmly thanking all the
Member States that have sponsored the draft
resolution. Their support is most valuable and highly
appreciated.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.55,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”. I give the
floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since its publication, the following
countries have become sponsors of draft resolution
A/65/L.55:
Afghanistan,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, the
Republic of the Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Greece, Grenada,
Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liberia,
Lithuania, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.55?
Draft resolution A/65/L.55
(resolution 65/235).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.56,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. I once again give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that, since its introduction, the following
countries have become sponsors of draft resolution

6

A/65/L.56: Afghanistan, Argentina, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cuba, Estonia, Finland,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malta,
Montenegro, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Paraguay, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovenia, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine.
The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.56?
Draft resolution A/65/L.56
(resolution 65/236).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-items (c) and (p) of agenda
item 122?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
draw the attention of members to the date of recess of
the current session. Members will recall that, at its
62nd plenary meeting, on 10 December, the General
Assembly decided that the sixty-fifth session would
recess today, Wednesday, 22 December. I expect us to
finish our work today. However, should that not be the
case, I would like to propose to the Assembly that the
date of recess of the current session be Thursday,
23 December. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take
it that the Assembly agrees to this proposal?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Following
consultations with the Chairman of the Fifth
Committee, we have decided that the deadline for the
completion of the work of the Committee will not be
extended beyond today, 22 December. The items that
have not been dealt with will be dealt with in the
meetings to be held in March 2011. We will thus have
the entire day tomorrow to consider the proposals of
the Fifth Committee that will be prepared today. As
tomorrow, 23 December, is the eve of an official
holiday, we will not meet beyond 6 p.m.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

10-70475
