A/65/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

84

th plenary meeting
Monday, 4 April 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Waffa-Ogoo
(Gambia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process
for global reporting and assessment of the
state of the marine environment, including
socio-economic aspects (A/65/759)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.65)
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
under sub-item (a) of agenda item 74, the Assembly
adopted resolution 65/37 at its 59th plenary meeting on
7 December 2010, and decision 65/545 at its
78th plenary meeting on 15 March 2011.
I give the floor to the representative of Saint
Lucia to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.65.
Mr. St. Aimee (Saint Lucia): My country has the
honour to sponsor draft resolution A/65/L.65, entitled
“Oceans and the law of the sea”, along with Australia,
Brazil, Canada and New Zealand. I should like to begin
by expressing appreciation for the cooperation
exhibited by all delegations involved in negotiating the
draft resolution.

By adopting the draft resolution today, the
General Assembly would endorse the recommendations
of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the
Regular Process for global reporting and assessment of
the state of the marine environment, including
socio-economic aspects, as contained in document
A/65/759.
It is sometimes forgotten that the marine
environment plays a critical role in the health of the
terrestrial environment, with which we are more
familiar. We therefore cannot ignore it in our analysis
of and discussions on topics such as climate change,
food security and biodiversity. We therefore need to
know much more about the state of this sector of our
planet, and it is our hope that equal attention will be
given to monitoring and reporting as well as to the
measures that may be necessary, as a result of our
findings, for improvements and corrections.
We look forward to the convening of the second
meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole at
the end of June 2011 to address the outstanding issues
identified in the report of the first meeting, held in
February.
On behalf of my co-Chair, Ms. Renée Sauvé, I
wish once again to thank all delegations for their
cooperation during the February meeting and during
the informal consultations on the draft resolution. We
are particularly grateful for the assistance of the
Mission of Canada, through Mr. Keith Morrill, who led
the negotiations to their conclusion last Tuesday.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-28764 (E)

*1128764*

A/65/PV.84

We look forward to agreement on all of these
very important matters through the adoption of this
draft resolution by consensus today.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/65/L.65. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.65?
Draft resolution A/65/L.65 was adopted (resolution
65/37 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 74.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now consider the reports of the Fifth Committee
under agenda items 129 and 135.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Ms. Nicole Ann Mannion of Ireland, to introduce the
reports of the Fifth Committee before the General
Assembly in one intervention.
Ms. Mannion (Ireland), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour today to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee
containing recommendations on issues that required
action during the first resumed part of the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 7 to 25 March and
held four plenary meetings and numerous rounds of
informal
consultations
and
informal/informal
consultations. I therefore have the honour to present
the following brief report on the work of the
Committee.
Concerning
agenda
item
129,
entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011”, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly, in
paragraph 8 of its report contained in document
A/65/646/Add.2, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Draft resolution I deals with special subjects relating to
the programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011,
and draft resolution II relates to the capital master plan;
both were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Under agenda item 135, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in

2

document A/65/796, the adoption of a draft resolution,
which was adopted without a vote.
I wish to thank all delegations for their
cooperation during this session. I should also like to
thank the members of the Fifth Committee secretariat
for their consistent hard work and dedication in
supporting the work of the representatives in the Fifth
Committee. Special thanks must go to Mr. Moses
Abelian, who is now moving on from the post of
Secretary of the Committee after seven years and
whose wisdom and tireless efforts on behalf of the
Committee will be sorely missed.
Finally, I should like to congratulate the new
Secretary of the Fifth Committee, Ms. Sharon van
Buerle, on her new position. We look forward to
working with her in the future.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee that are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records. May I
remind members that, under paragraph 7 of decision
34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
members are notified otherwise in advance.

11-28764

A/65/PV.84

Agenda item 129 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2010-2011

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 129.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/65/646/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 2010-2011”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 65/268).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Capital master plan”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
65/269).

11-28764

Agenda item 135
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/65/796)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution entitled “Report of the Joint Inspection Unit
for 2010 and programme of work for 2011”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
65/270).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 135.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

3
