S/2013/630

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 October 2013
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
The members of the Security Council recall that consultations between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing countries should
enhance the ability of the Council to make appropriate, effective and timely
decisions in fulfilling its responsibilities and recall the functions of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations in accordance with the note by the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/56).
In this regard, the members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment
to making full use of and improving existing consultation with troop- and policecontributing countries with a view to ensuring the full consideration of the views
and concerns of troop- and police-contributing countries by the Council.
The members of the Security Council agree that the following measures, which
are complementary to those contained in its resolutions 1353 (2001) and 2086
(2013) and in the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507),
contribute to the aim of enhancing interaction and consultation with troop- and
police-contributing countries:
1.
Prior to the constitution of a peacekeeping operation, the Secretariat is
encouraged to make the broadest possible call for contributions to that
operation. Once potential contributors have been identified, the Secretariat will
provide them with all necessary information in order to facilitate their
decision-making regarding participation in the operation.
2.
The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations will continue to hold
regular meetings with troop-contributing countries and police-contributing
countries on relevant issues.
3.
The members of the Security Council underscore the importance of
consultations with relevant troop- and police-contributing countries, including
at their request, on urgent situations that affect their operations, particularly
regarding the safety and security of their personnel on the ground.
4.
The members of the Security Council also underscore the importance of
consultation with troop- and police-contributing countries in cases of transition
from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding operation, and on major changes in an
operation, such as withdrawal, scaling down of the size or termination.
5.
As regards the renewal of mandates of peacekeeping operations, the
Secretariat will provide the relevant troop- and police-contributing countries
with a copy of the report of the Secretary-General with, as far as practicable,
13-53183 (E) 281013

*1353183*

S/2013/630

enough anticipation in order to allow the preparation for and the timely
holding of meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries before
discussion among Council members.
6.
The President of the Security Council will report to the Council on
consultations with troop- and police-contributing countries.
7.
The Security Council may, as appropriate, hold informal meetings in
order to encourage more interactive dialogue between Council members and
troop- and police-contributing countries.

2/2

13-53183
