S/2017/373

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 April 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 28 April 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the forty-third monthly report of the
Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The report covers the period from 23 March to 22 April 2017.
The situation with regard to the destruction of the chemical weapons
production facilities declared by the Syrian Arab Republic remains unchanged.
OPCW has verified the destruction of 24 of the 27 declared facilities. The Director
General, in his note to the OPCW Executive Council, reiterates that the security
situation continues to preclude access to the three remaining fa cilities.
I note that, in March 2017, the Director General invited the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to resume the high-level consultations to address the
unresolved issues related to the declaration of the Syrian Arab Republic, and that
the timing of such discussions is currently under consideration. I welcome the
pending resumption of those consultations and continue to encourage the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and OPCW to cooperate on resolving
those issues.
I am deeply distressed by the use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic as confirmed by the Director General in his note to the OPCW Executive
Council. As previously determined by the Security Council, the use of chemical
weapons anywhere constitutes a threat to international peace and security and a
serious violation of international law. I hope that the Security Council will now be
able to come together and use the tools available to it to take concrete steps to
ensure that those who have used chemical weapons are held accountable, in order to
deter and put an end to those inhumane acts. There can be no impunity for such
abhorrent attacks.
The OPCW fact-finding mission in Syria is continuing its work to further
investigate allegations concerning the use of chemical we apons in the Khan
Shaykhun area in southern Idlib, on 4 April 2017, and in Umm Hawsh, on 15 and
16 September 2016. I note that the Director General states that an interim report on
the Khan Shaykhun attack will be submitted in the coming weeks and that a report
on the allegation of the use of chemical weapons at Umm Hawsh will be submitted
in the coming days. I also note the confirmation by the fact -finding mission that the
two female victims reported in relation to the incident in Umm Hawsh were exposed
to sulfur mustard, and the reference of the Director General to incontrovertible

17-06903 (E)

010517

*1706903*

S/2017/373

analytical results that the victims in Khan Shaykhun were exposed to sarin or a
sarin-like substance.
I reiterate my call upon all States to support the critical OPCW fact -finding
mission, as well as the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. The
Mechanism is operational and has continued its cooperation and coordination with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat and member States.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/7

17-06903

S/2017/373

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of OPCW Executive Council Decision EC -M-33/DEC.1
and Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for
transmission to the Security Council (see enclosure). My report covers the period
from 23 March to 22 April 2017 and fulfils the reporting requirements o f Executive
Council decision EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

17-06903

3/7

S/2017/373

Enclosure
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]

Note by the Director-General
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
Background
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapon s and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports of
the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February 2015)
noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) in Syria, along with information on the Council’s discussion thereof, as
part of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations Security Council resolution
2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eighty-First Session, adopted a decision
entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the Declaration and Related
Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-81/DEC.4, dated 23 March 2016),
noting the Director-General’s intent to provide information on the implementation
of that decision.
4.
The Council, at its Eighty-Third Session, adopted a decision entitled
“OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism Reports on Chemical
Weapons Use in the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-83/DEC.5, dated 11 November
2016). In subparagraph 12(a) of that decision, the Council decided that the Director General shall “regularly inform the Council on the implementation of this decision
and incorporate information regarding the implementation of this decision into his
monthly reporting to the United Nations Security Council, through the United
Nations Secretary-General, regarding EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
5.
This, the forty-third monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions and includes information relevant to the
period from 23 March 2017 to 22 April 2017.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
Executive Council decisions EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
6.

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) The Secretariat has verified the destruction of 24 of the 27 chemical
weapons production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian Arab Republic. The
4/7

17-06903

S/2017/373

security situation still continues to preclude safe access both for the Syrian Arab
Republic to destroy the remaining aircraft hangar, which stands ready to accept the
explosive charges, and for the Secretariat to confirm the condition of the two
stationary above-ground facilities.
(b) On 18 April 2017, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
forty-first monthly report (EC-85/P/NAT.2, dated 18 April 2017) regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19
of EC-M-34/DEC.1.
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties
hosting destruction activities
7.
As reported previously, all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014 have now been destroyed.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to Executive Council
decisions EC-81/DEC.4 and EC-83/DEC.5
8.
As reported previously, an invitation was sent to the Deputy Foreign Minister
of the Syrian Arab Republic, H.E. Dr. Faisal Mekdad, and his delegation to resume
high-level consultations to address the unresolved issues related to the Syrian Arab
Republic’s declaration, in accordance with Council decision EC -81/DEC.4 and
paragraph 6 of Council decision EC-83/DEC.5. The planned consultations will be
carried out on the basis of a matrix that summarises the issues pertaining to the
Syrian declaration, after the Syrian Arab Republic has submitted, in advance of the
consultations, any new documents and other information as requested b y the
Secretariat, in order to achieve tangible progress. The timing is currently under
consideration, and the Director-General will report to the Council on these
consultations.
9.
In accordance with paragraph 11 of Council decision EC -83/DEC.5, the first
inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies
and Research Centre took place from 26 February to 5 March 2017. Samples were
taken by the inspection team and were sent to OPCW designated laboratories for
analysis. The Secretariat is awaiting the analysis results before completing the final
inspection report.
Other activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian
Arab Republic
10. As previously reported, amendments to the tripartite agreement betwe en
United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), the OPCW, and the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and to the contribution agreement between
the OPCW and UNOPS are currently under review. These amendments will extend
the support provided by UNOPS to the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
until the end of December 2017, and ensure that the necessary administrative and
logistical support is provided to the OPCW -United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM).
11. As requested by the Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of
EC-75/2, dated 7 March 2014), the Secretariat, on behalf of the Director -General,
has continued to brief States Parties in The Hague on its activities.
12. As at the cut-off date of this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as
part of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic.

17-06903

5/7

S/2017/373

Supplementary resources
13. As previously reported, a Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in
November 2015 to support the FFM and other remaining activitie s, such as those of
the Declaration Assessment Team. As at the cut-off date of this report, contribution
agreements totalling EUR 9.7 million had been concluded with Canada, Chile,
Finland, France, Germany, Monaco, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Swede n,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America, and the European Union.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
14. As stated by the Director-General on 13 April 2017 during the Fifty-Fourth
Meeting of the Council, the FFM is focusing its work on the allegations of use of
chemical weapons on 4 April 2017 in the Khan Shaykhun area of southern Idlib in
the Syrian Arab Republic, which reportedly resulted in the d eaths of over 80 people,
including children, and injuries to hundreds of others.
15. On 4 April 2017, a note verbale was sent to the Syrian Arab Republic
requesting its authorities to share, as soon as possible, any information they might
have about the incidents reported by the media on that day. A similar note verbale
was also sent on 5 April 2017 to all States Parties. Additionally, at the request of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Director-General made available to all States Parties a
letter regarding that incident, which was received on 5 April 2017 from the Deputy
Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic, H.E. Dr. Faisal Mekdad.
16. On 11 April 2017, the Director-General received another letter from
H.E. Dr. Faisal Mekdad, inviting the OPCW to deploy a technical mission to both
Khan Shaykhun and Al-Shayrat airbase “to establish the facts with respect to what
really happened, in an exhaustive and transparent manner”. In a letter received on
13 April 2017, the Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, H.E. Sergey Lavrov,
requested the preparation of an ad hoc mission to visit Khan Shaykhun and
Al-Shayrat airbase.
17. During the resumption of the Fifty-Fourth Meeting of the Council on 19 April
2017, the Director-General explained that while the FFM had not yet been able to
visit the said location and review original records in situ, the team had to date
collected facts in the form of:
(a) witness interviews and statements (taken as audio and/or video
recordings), as well as documents, photos, and videos handed over by witnesses.
The collection process was still ongoing;
(b) various biomedical samples collected in the presence of team members,
either from patients undergoing treatment or at autopsy. Such samp les had been sent
to OPCW designated laboratories; and
(c) environmental samples collected by witnesses and/or representatives of
non-governmental organizations.
18. The biomedical samples collected from three victims at autopsy were analysed
at two OPCW designated laboratories. The results of the analyses indicated that
these victims were exposed to sarin or a sarin-like substance. Biomedical samples
from seven individuals undergoing treatment at hospitals were also analysed at two
other OPCW designated laboratories. Similarly, the results of these analyses
indicated exposure to sarin or a sarin-like substance.
19. The FFM is currently continuing the process of interviews, evidence
management, and sample acquisition. A first interim report is expected to be

6/7

17-06903

S/2017/373

completed in the coming weeks, at which time it will be submitted for the
consideration of the States Parties and shared with the JIM.
20. At the aforementioned Fifty-Fourth Meeting of the Council, a draft decision
entitled “Addressing the Situation Around the Alleged Use of Chemical Weapons in
the Khan Shaykhun Area of Southern Idlib in the Syrian Arab Republic”
(EC-M-54/DEC/CRP.1, dated 13 April 2017) was circulated by the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the Russian Federation. A revised version of the draft decision
(EC-M-54/DEC/CRP.1/Rev.1, dated 19 April 2017) was further amended on
20 April before being considered by the Council and put to a vote. The draft
decision was not adopted.
21. The FFM has also continued its work to investigate the allega tions of use of
chemical weapons at Um-Housh on around 15 and 16 September 2016, as requested
by the Syrian Arab Republic in a letter dated 29 November 2016. Based on the
interviews carried out by the FFM and the documents and other related materials
reviewed, as well as the results of blood sample analyses, the FFM can confirm that
the two female casualties reported to have been involved in the incident in
Um-Housh were exposed to sulfur mustard. The report on this incident will be
submitted for the consideration of States Parties in the coming days, and will also be
forwarded to the JIM.
22. Guided by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1 (dated
23 November 2015), as well as United Nations Security Council resolution 2209
(2015), the FFM continued to study all available information relating to the
allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Conclusion
23. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will be on the activities of the FFM and on the implementation of
Council decisions EC-83/DEC.5 and EC-81/DEC.4, as well as on the destruction
and verification of the remaining aircraft hangar, confirmation of the status of the
two stationary above-ground facilities, and annual inspections of the underground
structures already verified as destroyed.

17-06903

7/7
