1st

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
THIRTY-FlFI'H SESSION

Official Records

PLENARY MEETING

•

CONTENTS
Page

Agl'l1da lIelll 1;
Opel1ing uf the session by the Chairman of the delegation of
the United Republic of Tanzania , ........•..•.• , •...
Agenda item 2:
Minute of sHent prayer or meditation .. , ...•.•..•..••. ,.

NEW YORK
wish, in keeplng with establfshed tradition, ta reflect with
you on the experiences wc have accumulated and the lessons
we have learned since the last regular session of the General
Assembfy and on their relevance to the future agenda or the
United Nations.

4.

1

Addre" by MT. Salim Ahmed Salim. Temporary President.
Chairnmn of the delegation of the United Republic of
Tan7.ania
, ........••...•..••.•..••.........
Agenlla itelll 97:
Sçale of assessmcnts for the apport ion ment of the expenses
01: the. United Nations: report of the Committee on Contributions
, .....•....•..... , ..•..•..•

4

Agenda item J;
Credentials of representatives ta the thirty-fifth session of
the General Asscmbly:
(a) Appointment of Ihe membcrs of the Credenlials Committee
, ....•.••.......... , ..•...•.. ,
.

4

Agl'nda item 4:
Eil'l'Iion nI' the Presidel1l nI' the Gelll'rui A»e'lllbly

4

i\g"l1da Itl'Ill 19:
Adlllis:<inn of new Ml'mbl'rs to \hl' l'nlll'd Natiom

Tuesday, 16 September 1980,
al 3.30 p.rn.

The last 12 months have been a very busy and challenging period for the United Nations. 1 might cven chanlcterize the year as turbulent and difficult, both politically and
economically. The General Assembly had to mect twice at
the sixth and seventh emergency special sessions-devoted
respeetivcly to the question of Afghanistan and lo the question 01' Palestine-in addition 10 the seheduled clevcnth
special session on international economie co-operation.
5. When wc met last yearwe had a very longagenda berme
us. Most orthe problems on that agenda arestill with usand
new ones have been added. The palh to ajust and equitable
solution to major outstanding problems still e1udes us, ln
sOllle cases the positions on issues have hardened, making it
more dirticult to search t'or negotiated solutions. Further·
more, in addition to the old crises, new ones have emcrged.
J.

5

There has becn, t'or example, the dramatic deteriOnltion

)1' relations between the United States and Iran and the
',olding or the American diplomatie personnel. lt is. indeed.
sourœ of deep l.ltsappointment and unxiety that therc has
been no improvement in these relations during the year and
tl1at American diplomatic personnel have eontinued to be
he Id as hostages l'or 10 months now.
,1

President: Mf. Rüdiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany)
AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation or the United Republic of Tanzania

J. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: 1 declare open the
thirty-tifth regular session of the General Assembly.

7. The devcloprnents conccrning Afghanistan have also
led to further deterioration of the international situation.
The sixth emergeney special session of the General Assembly
was speeilically eonvened lo de.li with this question.

8.

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: 1 invite representa-

Olf the who le. the year has witncssed a dangerous esealation of international tension. engendering a elimate of
deep distrust and mutual su~pieions. panicularly among the
great Powers. and, in the proccss. undermining. il" not
seriously threalening. the spiri t and letler of détente. There is
no doubt that the present internalional situation is very
disquieting. and, unless its l"urther c1eterioration is arreskd.
it poses ominous consequences l'or world peace ami security.

tives ta stand and observe one minute of silent pmyer or
meditation.

9,

AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of sUent prayer or meditation

The "epresenlalives slood in silence.
Addres~' by Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Temporar)' President,

Chairman of the delegation of the United Repllblic of
Tanzania
3, The TEMPORAR y PRESI DENT: As wc meet for the
opening of the thiny-tirth session of the General Assembly. 1

This is thererore not ,In occasion l'or jo)' or ~ell"·
congrallilation. The prob\cms we Illce cali for even grelltt:r
erfort. imagination and wisdom; they cali for courage and
resilicmce: thev cali l'or l.kdication and sacrifice. Abovc ail.
they cull l'or ,:estnlinl among the tllosl powerl'ul nations.
10, During the past ye<lr there has beel1 a strong real1ïl'111ation of the importance of the Geneml Assembly <lS a vital
forum in which scrious attcmpts can bl" made to resolve
global problel11s. The ract that somctÎmes we do not agree.
A/35/PV.I

2

General Assembly -

Thirty-fifth Session -

or come up lmmedlateîy with solutions, should not obscure
the importance of the General Assembly and the significance of the efforts of the United Nations,
II. T,he s,trength of the United Nations is in the principles
for whlch lt stands. These principles underlie our vision of
the future as weIl as the foundations for harmonious interaction among nations. We ail subscribe to the principle of the
equality of inde pendent sovereign States; we ail subscribe to
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; we ail subscribe to the principle of the equality and dignity of aIl
human beings, irrespective of l'ace, colour, creed or sex; we
are opposed to racial discrimination under any form or
p~ct,e.xt;. we are committed to the advancement of the quality
01 hte for ail people; and, by our very membership in the
l!nited Nations, we are committed to conciliation, negotiatlon, peaceful coexistence and the preservation of international peace and security. These, and more, constitute the
purpose of and the need for the United Nations.
12. These are not goals to be achieved at once. These are
goals and objectives for which every generation has to strive.
They ~onstitute a permanent agenda and challenge for
humamty. We cannot be naïve or simplistic and expect that
we can ,achieve th:m in one year, in a decade or in a single
generatlOn. What IS needed is a clear vision ofwhere we are
going and the ability to create and to capitalize on every
opportunity which will bring us closer to our goals. Our
greatest challenge is the provision ofvisionary and resourccfui leadership capable of promoting and willing to promote
the principles of our Charter.
13. This century has been blessed with that kind ofleadership. Those who drafted the Charter of the United Nations
I~a~ a vi~ion which enabled them to see beyond narrow and
Illlllted lllterests. Likewise, 25 years ago, visionary leaders
met at Bandung l and saw the needs and future roles of
countri.es which until then had found themselves hopeless
p~wns 111 the rivalries of other nations. There the ground was
laId for t~e eventual formai bil'th of the non-al igned movement, whlch today exercises tremendous intluenee in worJd
affairs.
14, .Our task is to translate their vision into reality through
practlcal programmes. Each time we make observable
strides in this di~ection should be a cause for joy, a source of
hope and a re1l1forecment of our commitment to even
greater achievements.

15. Thus it was a.great moment for ail of us, on 25 August
last, at the openmg of the eleventh special session, ta
wele~me among us the independent Republie of Zimbabwe.
The 1I1.dcpc~dcnc,e of Zimbabwe has a special place in the
evoJutlO~ 01 the Il1ternational community. Year aner year,
the question of Southern Rhodesia remained on the agendas
of the General Assembly and the Security Council. General
Assembly resolutiOl~s were sometimes ridiculed as meaningless and ,hollow. ThiS notwithstanding, the General Assembly conslstently upheld the prineiples of the Charter and in
the ~nd. was ~indicated thanks to the resilience, courage and
declication of the gallant people of Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe is
a prized birthday present for the twentieth anniversary of
1 Asiun-Al'ricun Conference, held al Bandung l'rom 18 to 24 April
1955.

Plenary Meetings

the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of 1ndependence to Colonial COllntries and Peoples.
16. The indcpendence of Zimbabwe is also a lesson for a[]
of us. It has demonstrated that with a resourcefll/ and
eommitted leadership-in this case the leaders of the people
of Zimbabwe-no problem is insurmollntable. The liberation or Zimbabwe also had another signiJicance for us ail. It
showed us that, with perseverance, determination and goodwill, the negotiating pro cess can triumph even in the Illûst
complex of cireumstances. In a way, the victory in Zimbabwe, like the reeent important breakthrough in the negotiations at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea, eloquently reafflrms the conviction that, with
vision, dedication and political will, the most monumental
of problems are not beyond solution. The General Assembly must continue to uphold its principles and give encouragement to those who try to give meaning to the Charter's
vision,
17. Only yesterday, the General Assembly concluded its
eleventh special session, whieh was devoted to a review and
appraisal of progress in development and international eeonomic co-operation. That session was convened to deal witll
one of the most diflicult yet crucial issues of our time. For
some time wc have witnessed a deterioration of the world
economic situation as sorne of the pillars of the old world
arder have collapsed and others face imminent collapse
unless urgent corrective measures are taken. The interdependence of nations is no longer wishful thinking, and the
reality and pervasiveness of that interdependence can no
longer be ignored. Indeed, it is this perception of interdependence which encouraged us in the 1970s ta deline in
broad terms the parameters of the new world economic
arder. T!le need for such an order, whieh implies major
changes 111 power relations, is gradually gaining acceptancc.
And yet the translation of the princip les of the New International Economie Order into praetical programmes ta realize
the new order remains disturbillgly distant.
18.

The world is not lacking in analytical studies of the
pr~sent eeonomie situation. We have the reports of the
Dlrector-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation,2 the Brandt Commission,3 the Conference, on International Economie Co-operation,4 several
studles by UNCTAD and the Organisation for Economie
Co-operation and Development, and many more. What is
missing is the politieal will and a spirit of genuine coopt;:ration among nations. Without these, declarations or
de~elopmentstra~egies ar~ worth no more than the paper on
:-vh1ch they are pnnted; wlthout them, global negotiationslI1deed any negotiations-eannot succced, And where the
will ta negotiate is demonstrated, experienee has shawn that
a way can be found to agree on otherwise illtractahle problem~. The cxperience of the just concluded eleven th special
se~slon of the General Assembly is in this case very relevant.
Glven the political will. it was possible to arrive at a consensus,on the 11.1lernational Development Strategy for the Third
Ulllted Nations development deeade\ whieh this Assembly

iillbe formall)

tœ required pC
~'SSion 10

ael
bunching of tl

II. The neec
ro-operation i
dutions (0 tl:
t!3..In the Mid
South-East As
lill continue te
l'dl as the ne<
ib:re cannot 1
'~lIciples of tl

ll. Where tt
dTorl on the Il
mentallenets 1
threatens the
lhould be lai
ifllerest of hun
ridicule the \
lllldermine its

11. The Uni
prineiples. Th
rolicies of api
r.ocompromi
œn Ihere be c
righls. ln Ihe
right or the P
respect, the s
IraI Assembl
, lellied the eu
,hip to respo
of Ihe Palest
able right to l
nationhood t

22. In Nan
conlinue ils
Organizatior
vigorously pl
oui delay of

23. In my
I~onb 1 l'ema
fronling the
intensilied p
unabated. ~
ti"e1y estim~
sents a stagi
background
world.

24. To COI
l'ion and di
~ver·incl'eas

become eve

Document A/S-l lI5 and Corr. t, annex,
NOI:fh~Soulh: A program Jar survival; report of Ihe Inde pendent
C~mm.lssl,on on Internalional Development Issues under tlle chairmanshlp of Willy Brandt (Cpmbridge, Massachusetts, the MIT Press 1980)
4 H,-Id in Paris from 30 May to 2 June 1977,
. .
.

25. It cam
crossroads i
willlead Inl

, AIS-III AC.1IL,2 and Add, 1-3. Subsequently publishcd as do' _
cu
ment A/351464.

lion, Plenary

l

; 5<:c (~ijïâ(

ht meeting -

k'$M)n 101' ail
ourcerlll and
ullhe pI:'Op~
t. The Iibtra·
''l.'lorusalLl:
01; III

.ml! ~l),."j.

ri lnl!le(lll.l\l

Il') Hl 21mba·
ri Ille negotla-

lllllhe Law cl
>l1 Lhal. y,jù

monllffiClluJ
l'k'nll Asse~
1gJ\'f cnccw'
.he Charter'l
;'!1Kiudw il!
i.1 fit" ie" ar.-rl

national 1."((>,hodealv.ilh
~ur lIInt:. Fû!
tIf tlle wolil
h>l:' old 'i\or'ld

~t'11I1

(oUap><:

Tl~c inlerdc-

.in~. and th:

iellll.'lC am 00

Il

ir'" iOlerdt-

hl Il.kIÎne i~

Id econom i,
npl;r.;:l, m.lJlI!

1.1... '1:1"1.:1 lKr,

''''" ImernJ"
nc;. hl 1('.1 Il 11

hldi'e~ il{ lh:

flll!n'i of Ih.:
illll>mlll Et\}

" ,i".r'i'Conlt-!·
~%1\n,,· S1C\er.aI
',r l:'(ll1ûmi.:

:,~r(' Wlili/ll>
~':nUlll;e \:\}o

;i.mIlK)ftS ()!
ahe pilpt"f (}!'l

'F,)IUIl'-~ll~­

III \\ htlfe l~
/\'-;hü\\'n lhal

.:1.tlblc prooh'enli'l spe\.iJl

t'r~ tfic\ am.
;IU 'Ii (tm,;en-

orlheThlfd

iS. Asse-mb-1)

.r1~~1
Il'>~ .:n3 ~rr.'ii,~.

l Pn'u, 19$il\l

will be forma\ly launching, l'et, at the same time, t11e lack ol
the required political will made it impossible for the special
session to achieve the expected positive results on the
launching of the global negotiations.

19. The need for political will and a spirit of genuine
co-operation is perhaps most relevant as we search for
solutions to the major political problems of the post-war
era. In the Middle East, in Lebanol1, in Cypl'US, in Korea, in
South-East Asia, to mention sorne orthe crisis points, peace
will continue to elude us unless there is a genuine desire-as
weil as the necessary political will-to achieve peace. And
tllere cannot be peace unless we respect and abide by the
principles of the Charter.

20. Where therc is a deliberate, consistent and deterl11ined
e1Iort on the part of any Governl11ent to violate the fundamental tenets which bind us together, where sllch behaviour
threatens the well-being of us ail, appropriate I11camrcs
should be taken by the international commllnity in the
interest of humanity. To do othe l'wise, or to do nothing, ts ta
ridicule the whole purpose of the Organization and to
underl11ine its usefulness.
21. The United Nationsshould nevcr compromise its basic
principles. There is no basis for compromise on the inhuman
policies of apartheid in South Africa, Similarly there can be
no compromise on foreign occupation and domination. Nor
can there be compromise on the flagrant violation ofhuman
rights. In the Middle East we cannot continue to ignore the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination. In this
respect, the seventh emergency spccial session of the Generai Assembly, devoted to the question of Palestine, represented the culmination of the joint efforts of the membership to respond positively to the long-frustrated aspirations
of the Palestinian people for the cxercise of their inalienable right to self-determination and to achieve the sovereign
nationhood they so desire,
22. In Namibia, South Afriea ShOllld not be allowed to
continue its illegal occupation in total detïance of our
Organization and international law. Wc must therefore
vigorously pursue the objective of the implementation without delay 01' the United Nations plan l'or Namibia.
23. In my opening statement at the eleventh special session" 1 remarked that the complex economic problems confronting the world today are further compounded by the
intcnsified pace of militarization. The arms race continucs
unabated. Military cxpenditures are at present conservativcly estimated at $500 billion pel' annU11l and this represents a staggering figure, purticlilurly when sct againsl thc
background of l'<lmpnnt poverty in the grenter part of the
world.
24. To compound this trend and the psychosis of suspicion and distrust which it procluccs, the danger l'rom the
ever-increasing proliferation of nue/car weapons has
become even more acute.

25. It cannot be denied that our world is now at a critical
cl'ossroads and that we must choose betwccn the road which
will lead mankind to its own fatal destruction and the road
,. ~~~ ql/ldal R~{(ml.\ o{ Ih,' General A.l"sl'mbly, Elel'ell/h S!,~cil/I Session. Plenary Mee/ings. Ise meeting, paras, 11-34.

16 Seplember 1980

3

towards mutual understanding, peaceful coexistence, progress and prosperity.
26. These are some of the challenges which we pass on to
the next session. They are not easy problems. And yet there
is no room for discouragement or despair. We have to continue untiringIy to search for solutions. We should not be
discouraged even if in the process we reveal new challenges.
Let us continue to build on the roundations which we have;
let us resurrect and expand on the spirit of détente; let
us respect and abide by the rules and norms of diplomatic
intercourse to which we ail subscribe; and let us dedicate
and commit ourselves to work for peace, progress and prosperity for ail people.
27. During the past year, 1 had the singular honour and
privilege of being invited, in my capacity as President of the
thirty-fomth session of the General Assembly, to visit cOllntries in ail corners of the world. Those visits alTol'ded me a
unique opportunity to reœive the wisdom and guidance of
many a head of State or Govcrnl11ent and of other higll
government officiais on matters affecting world affairs,
which are our eommon preoccupation. l derived l'rom them
enormous encouragement and inspiration, which have been
of great help ta me in diseharging the enonnous task of
presiding over this important organ of the world
Organization.
28. 1 should like ta place on record my deep appreciation
of the opportllnities thus afforded me and of the warm,
cordial and generolls receptioll accorded me by ail those
Governments withollt exception. My only regret is that,
owing ta the constraints oftime, it was not possible for me ta
accept ail the invitations sa kinclly extended to me. To those
Governments, 1 wish to express my warm thanks for their
kindness. understanding and considemtion.
29. 1 wish also ta express my appreciation and gratitude
for the help and support whieh l rcceived t'rom the staff or
the Secretariat in the course of my duties. You, MI'.
Secretary-General, were most generous with yom time and
advice. 1 wish to tha nk you must sincercly for YOllr cooperation ancl for your fricndship. To llnder-SecretaryGeneral Bill BulTum 1 owe a particular debt ofgratitllde for
his lIntlinching co-operation, assÎstuncc and t'riendship. My
sincere thanks also go to the dedicated men and womcn of
the Division of General Assembly Affairs, the speakers' table
and the Ocpartment of Conl"ercnce Services l'or the exelllplal'Y disclHl rge of thei l' responsi bilities. A hovc ail, whatever
we have accomplished has been possible only with the support and co-operation of all c1elegations. 1wish to thank yuu
ail for yom co-operation and support.

30,

1 wish al50 to express illY profound gratitude to you
once again for the honour you bestowed upon me, upon my
country and upon I11Y continent in electing me to the presidency of the thirty-follrth session, as weil as of the three
special sessions of the General Assembly hcld during the
year.

31. 1 am confident that the work of the thirty-fïfth session
of the General Assel1lbly will contriblllc towards the realinltion of the noble objectives of the Charter. May we hope that
it will also help to cl'eate a clilllllte conducive to genuinc
efforts towards peace and prnsperity.

,
General Assembly -

4

Thirty-fifth Session -

AGENDA ITEM 97
Seale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations: report of the Committee on
Contributions
32. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before turning to
the next item on our agenda, 1 should like, in keeping with
the established practice, to invite the attention of the GeneraI Assembly to document A/35/456, whieh contains a
letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General in which he
informs the Assembly that two Member States are in arrears
in the payment oftheir financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
33. In this connexion, 1also wish to draw the Assembly's
attention to the letter annexed to document A/35/456, in
which the Government of Chad has requested that its voting
rights be maintained, because its present failure to pay its
arrears is due to cireumstances beyond its control.
34. In the light of the second sentence of Article 19 of the
Charter, whereby the General Assembly may permit a
Member to vote if it is satisfïed that the failllre to pay is due
to conditions beyond the control of the Member, may 1take
it that the General Assembly agrees to the reqllest of Chad
and authorizes it to participa te in the vote?
/t !l'as so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the thirty-fifth session
of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials Committee
35. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Rule 28 of the
rules of procedure provides that the General Assembly at
th~ beginning of each session shall appoint, on the proposai
of the President, a Credentials Committee consisting of ni ne
members. Accordingly, it is proposed that for the thirty-fifth
session, the Credentials Committee should consist of the
iCJJlowing Member States: Angola, China, Costa Rica,
Haiti, Kenya, Singapore, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and United States of America. May 1 take it that
the countries 1 have mentioned are hereby appointed
members of the Credentials Committee?
11 Il 'as .so decided (decision 35/301).

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President of the General Assembly
36. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: 1 now invite the
members of the General Assembly to proceed to the election
or the President of the thirty-fifth session of the General
AssembJy.
37. 1have been informed by the Chail'man of the group of
Western European and other States that his group has
endorsed the candidacy of His Excellency Baron Rüdiger
von Wechmar of the Federal Republic of Germany for the
presidency of the General Assembly.
l'

;'f

Plenary Meetings

48. 1
lions r
confer
eleclio

38. Taking into aceount the provisions of I?aragraph 16 '~f .
General Assembly decision 34/401, 1 therelore declare HIs
Excelleney Baron Rüdiger von Weehmar of the. Federal
Republic of Germany elected President of th.e thlrty-fifth
session of the General Assembly by acclamatIOn.

49. 1
and P'
Every
additi(
appalll
live 01
reache,
goal. ~
years;

MI'. von Wechmar (Federal Republic of Germany) Il'as

elected by acclamation President of the General Assemhly
(decision 35/302).

39. 1 extend my profound and sincere congratulations to
Baron von Wechmar and 1 invite him to assume the
Presiden"y.

millio~

[ round

40. The PRESIDENT: Let me begin by saying how deeply
honoured 1 feel that the General Assembly has seen fit to
endow me with the presidency of its thirty-fifth session. The
distinction and trust you have thus accorded me extend weil
beyond my person; they are an honour bestowed upon my
country and its people.

lhis Al

50. S
1 compre

in 10 fe,
logelhe
and shi

41. 1shaH endea vour to do my utmost to serve the Assembly in the spirit of the Charter and in aecordance with the
high example which has been set by those who have preceded me on this l'Ostrum.

1

51. T

realilie!
cal. ee
renecls
despen
emplo)'

42. ln assuming my new office, 1 am privileged to puy
homage to my predecessor, Ambassador Salim, for 50
admirably discharging his duties during four sessions of the
General Assembly. His outstanding competence and expertise arÏd-not least-his rare sense of timing have set a
standard which will be hard for me to emulate.

52.

....l,

war,
row
Ht
dign
righl
and

43. Considering the magnitude of the responsibilities of
the President, 1 shaH gratefully and confidently rely on the
wise and experienced counsel of the Secretary-General,
whose judgement 1 have come to value so greatly over the
years.
44. 1 shall also count on the co-operation and support of
ail delegations and on the assistance and advice particularly
of the Vice-Presidents of .the General Assembly and the
Chairmen of the Main Committees.

"t
res(J1

sour
Ht
in la

45. This Assembly convenes at a time when the world has
entered a difficult decade. Dangers and crises abound. Few,
if any, international contlicts lend themselves to easy solutions. None of the problems confronting us can be treated in
isolation. Therefore, only our common and sustained
endeavours will yield results. Here is a challenge to this
Assembly; here is a challenge to the politieal will of representatives, Governments and groups.
46. We must ask ourselves at the beginning ofthis session:
have we ail really done our best in the past? Have we always
exhausted every possible means of achieving mutually
acceptable compromises? Have we done everything to reach
consensus? Have we not often been hiding behind instructions from capitals instead ofguidingour own Governments
towards agreement with negotiating partners here?
47. The need to create a new, more just and balanced
international economic order, for example, is much too
urgent to permit any substantial further delay. For millions.
it could literally mean the difference between life and death.

A

53. T
which

",
one

1
;/,

~,

).;

"t
and

'"

"1

1

of tt

1

54. T

1;

,

and t1
United

55. )
Gener,

.-

li
lsl meeting -

la ragraph Ibd
ore declare !il
of the Feduoi
the thirly.f~!l11'
lation.

GermallJ1 1i1 ii
neral Assrml!î

gratulaliom ~é
assume t~

ta

ing hOlVdeepi~
has seen fit ~
'th session. nt
meextend~:j

Jwed upon l'!.~

rve Ihe A$r!!',
dance with I~
who have~

vileged to pl~
Salim, for ~
sessions ofik
nce and exp:1ng have set 1
ate.
lonsibilities ~
tly rely on l~
:tary-Gener.iil.
'eatly over the
nd sUPP0rl â
~e particulaif:
mbly and th

the world hJi!
abound. Fe\!.
: t0 easy Sll!lln be treated:m
nd sustaincé
lIenge to th!
Il a frep restlr
If this session:
Lve wealwa)~
ng mUluaJl~
hingtore~

hind instro;·
]overnmen~

here?
nd balancd
is mueh \01
Formillioo>
fe and deatA

16 September 1980

5

48. The beginning of sincere and canerete global negotiations must thcreforc not be allowed ta hinge lIpon the neKt
conference of oil-exporting countries. yet anotller na tional
eJection or another meeting of IMF and the WorJd Bank.

contribuled its share towards a comprehensivc settlcl1lent in
the Middle East based on Security Council resolution 242
(J 967)-a just, secure al1d lasting peace betweel1 Isnlc/ and
its Arab neighbours, including the Palestinians.

49. Let us show compassion lor those who still live in wanl
and poverty. Let us help them to overcomc their plight.
Every day, week or monlh losl may result in tragedy lor
addilional hundreds of thousands of hUIl1:1n beings. I lind it
appalling Ihal sorne countries in a position to do so, irrespcctive of their econamic and social systcms. still have nol
reached lhe 0.7 per cent official developrnent assistance
goal. Saille have made substantial progress during reeent
years; others are still far behind. The untald sulTerings of
millions of people will nol be terminated by yel anolher
round of well-intentioned but sometimes bland debates in
this Assembly. We are ca lied upon ta act and lo act no\\'.

56. f trust that at the end or our work we shall rcgistcr
further subslantial steps towards an independent, sovcreign
Namibia through free and United Nations supervised clectians as weil as towards the abolition of ail forllls of racial
discrimination, including, in part[cular, the apal'lheidsystem
praclised in South Africa.

50. Sorne of the problems on our agenda are so vast, sa
cOlllplex and so profound lhat one mighl be ternpted to givc
in ta feelings of hclplessncss and despair. So Ict us face them
togelher realistieally and wilh determination.undcrstHnding
and shared conœrn.
The Unitcd Nations has becorne a Illirror of the harsh
realities of the world. Our Organization rellects deep political, economic, national and ideological dirferences. It
ref1ects the anguish 01' those who live in povert)' and the
desperation or those with no education. those wilhout
employment, witholIt food and withollt hope.
51.

52.

57. 1 hope that by December we shaH have taken determined action to promote security and disarmament. This
should include a reaffirmation of earlier support for the
SALT II agreement? as weil as renewed and seriaus efforts
to hait the arms race. In particular, 1trust that the Assembly
will conlinue to contribute to the policy of détente. In this
conl1e.~ion 1 appealto Governments la use lhe presence of
their Foreign Ministers during our debates here to resull1c
direct talks and prepare the ground for rruilful negoliut ions.
58. 1sineerely hope that, with both patience and perseverance. substantial progress will be made. through global
ncgotiations, towards the establishment of a new and more
equitable international economic arder. That requires compassion, imagination, ereativity and, above everything else,
the genuine politiea] will of ail conccrned. 1 am convinced
that the time has now eome for meetings saon at ministeriai
or even summitlevelto genemte this polilical will, which is
so badly needed.

And yet our peoples relllain dctermined

"ta save suceeeding generations l'rom the scourge 01'
war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow ta Illankind. and
"ta reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth 01' the hlll1lan persan. in lhe cqual
rights of men and womcn and of nations large and smalt.
and
"to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising l'rom treaties and other
sources of international law cun be maintaincd. Hnd
"to prol1lote social progress ancl belter standards or lile
in larger l'rccdom''.
53. Those are word\ l'rom the Prl':nnblc to oLlr Charter.
which goes on ta commit ail of LIS
"ta practise lolerance und live IOgelher in peace with
one anothcr as good ncighbours, and

59. The list or problems on our agenda is tao long ta allow
me 10 reJer to every one or lhem. The lHsk is huge, our time
Jimitcd. Let us theret'ore devote our energies and e.~perience
to achieving our eommon goal. Your President will encleavour to serve you ta the best or his abilities. l'airly and
impartially.

60. ln conclusion. 1 wish to idenlify mysell'with a cOlllmitment which a reeipient of the Nobel prize, the late Ralph .1.
Bunche. made here at lhe United Nations:
"1 have a nUll1ber 01' ycry strong biases. 1 have a deepseated bias against hate and intolerancc: 1 have a bias
:q.~ainsl rucial~and rcligious bigotry: 1 have bias against
\\~ar, li bias ror peace; 1 have a bias which leads me to
belie\'C in the essential gomines, of my rellow l11an. which
leads me to believe that no problem of human relntions is
ever insoluble. 1 have a strong bias in favour of the United
Nations and its abililY ta maintain a peaceful world."

"ta unite our strength to maintain international peace
and security. and

AGENDA ITEM 19

"ta ensure ... that armed force shaH not be used .... and

Admission of lIew Mcmbers to the United Nations

"ta employ international machinery l'or the promotion
of the economic and social advuncel11ent of ail peoples".
54. Those are solemn commitments inta which our peoples
and their Governl1lents have entered llpon joining the
United Nations.
55.
hope that at the close or this thirty-lifth session the
General Assembly will be able to take pride in having
1.

61. The PRESIDENT: ln accordlJl1e.:- \.vith the procedure
rollowed in the pasto 1 shoulu now lih.:- to invite the GL'l1cral
Assemblv to consider the positive r.:-eollll1lcndalion by th.:Seeuritv"Colllll:il for lhe admission 10 l1l.:-mbership in the
United" Nalions or Saint Vinccnt amI' thc (irclHldincs
---:r;:-eal\ bet\\'cen the lInilcd Sialcs of Amcric<l anù Ille Union or
Slwic\ S(~cüllisl Repuhlics on the Limilil\iol1
SlrJllcglC Offcnsive
Arms. ,igned al Vienn'I on I~ .lune 1979.

or

General Assembly -

6

Thirty-fifth Session -

LA/35/107]. This special procedure has been applied pre-

viously in order to give States recommended by the Security
Council for membership in our Organization the opportunity, if the General Assembly acts favourably on their
requests, to participate fromthe outset in the work of the
session. If there is no objection, we shaH proceed
accordingly.
It was sa decided.

62. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has recommended, as stated in document A/35/107, the admission of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to membership in the
United Nations. In this connexion, a dran resolution has
been submitted in document A/35/L.l and Add.1. May 1
take it that the General Assclllbly accepts the recommendation of the Security Council and adopts the draft resolution
by acclamation?
The riraft resolution was adupted (resolu/ion 35/1).

63. The PRESIDENT: 1 therefare declarc Saint Vincent
and the Grenadin~s admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
The de!egafion of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was
escorJed Jo ifs place in Jhe General Assembly hall.

64. The PRESIDENT: It gives me greatpleasure to
extend-as a first official act in my new capacity as President
of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly-a warm
welcome to our new Member State, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines. Hs accession to this family of nations, which
has now increased ta 154 Members, marks a further step in
the process towards universality, thus underlining an historical and irreversible evolution.
65. With the admission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, aState has joined our Organization which belongs to
a region that takes pride in its ancient civilization and
diversity of cultural tradition and which has a great potential for development. The United Nations has become
stronger and richer through the accession of this new
Member which willjoin in our endeavours to implement the
principles embodied in the Charter, to consolidate peace
and security and to strengthen co-operation and understanding between nations.

,1

Il

~ ...

felicitations to you, Sir, upon your e-Iection to the presidenëy
of this session of the General Assembly. At a later stage, the
Foreign Ministers of Latin America will have the opportunity to convey their separate congratulations to you in a
more formai manner, and to express the feeling of confidence that your assumption of this most important post
inspires in the Governments of our respective countries.
69. We should like to extend a very warm welcome to the
United Nations to the one hundred and fi fty-fourth Member
of the Organization, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, a
sister nation of Latin America, which we are certain will
enhance the contribution of our geographical region to the
work of the United Nations. We in Latin America have
al ways enthusiastically supported the principle of the universality of the United Nations and we are now pTOud to
note that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has joined the
ranks of the independent nations, bringing the goal of universality c10ser to its final consummation.
70. The delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
may rest assured that it will have the whole-hearted friendship and co-operation of its fellow Latin American
delegations.

1

t

,

71. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): MT. President, first 1 offer you my warmest congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the General Assembly. It is a
great pleasure to have a personal friend as weil as the
representative of a country so c10sely Iinked with mine in
that important post.
72. By the same token, my warmest thanks and congratulations go to Ambassador Salim ofTanzania, another good
friend and colleague from a country with very close ties with
the United Kingdom. We have admired him, respected him
and, indeed, sympathized with him thraughout a year which
must at times have seemed to him ta be without end.
73. Six months ago 1had the pleasure oftaking part in the
Security Council proceedings 8 that led to the unanimous
recommendation that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
should be admitted to membership in the United Nations.
This is an equally happy occasion. We welcome Saint Vincent as the one hundred and fifty-fourth Member of our
Organization.

67. Several representatives have expressed a desire to
speak at this juncture_ 1 cali first on the representative of
Brazil, who will speak on behalf of the group of Latin
American States.

74. My delegation takes special pleasure in greeting Saint
Vincent as the thirty-eighth of our Commonwealth partners
to come to New York to assume United Nations membership_ The United Kingdt?m and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have a long history of friendship going back to the
early seventeenth century. In the second half of this century
it was wholly appropriate that the nature ofthat relationship
should change with the times. At the end ofthe 19608 Saint
Vincent took a long step towards independence by becoming an Associated State. That left only the conduct of its
foreign affairs and defence policy in our hands as administering Power. Then, exactly 10 years later. its people decided
that it should become a fully independent State within the
Commonwealth. A conference on the Saint Vincent constitution wa.'i held in London from 18 to 21 September 1978.

68. Mr. CORR1!:A DA COSTA (Brazil): 1should like, on
behalf of the group of Latin American 'States, to offer our

MSee Official Records of/he Securi/y Council. Thir/Y-fif/h Yeur,2197th
and 2198th meetings.
.

66. 1 should Iike to congratulate the new Member State,
and in particular its Prime Minister and Minister of Finance,
Mr. Robert Milton Cato, and its Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for External Affairsand Tourism, Mr. Hudson
K. Tannis, on the unanimity with which the application
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for membership has
been approved by the international community [A/35/898/13784]. 1 welcome its delegation to the United Nations
and assure it of our friendship and co-operation.

1!

Plenary Meetings

r

,
lst meeting -

tte presidellC)
lter stage,1k
the apport\}-

i lo you int

ling of conf~
lportant pOl!

~ counuies-

dcomelolk

Llrth Membcr

irenadines,l
~ certain \$'il
region lo tif
.merica m\!
le of the 1Jlli.
ow proudll:
as joined tH
: goal of tmi-

: Grenadine!
:arted friendn Ameriœ

n): Mr. Presi-

That led to the achievement of fuH independence on 27
October 1979.
75. My Govcrnrnent naturally weleomed that evolution.
We were particularly happy to see Saint Vinœnt forging its
links with the Commonwealth. We naw look farward to
develapi~lg.-ncw rorms of partnçrship ta complement our
long-standing tics or friendship and co-operation.
76. 1 should like to extend the warmest possible welcOllle
ta ML Milton Cato, the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, who has come to New York for this occasion with his Minister l'or Externnl AlTairs, Ml'. Hudson
Tannis, whom we met in Febrllary. ML Cato's Governmcnt
has quickly earncd the respect of the international commllnit y since steering Saint Vincent to independence. We much
look rorward to sceing his represcntativcs taking part in ollr
deliberations here.
77. 1 do not have ta emphasize the impact that island
States have made at the United Nations. The size or a
country's economy or its population have rarcly bccn the
determining factor in its infiuence on United Nations an'airs.
We arc sure thut Saint Vincent will be a valuable Member of
the United Nations ramily and that the internationul COlllmunit y will benelit rrom its membership.

ions on)'oo
embly. ]1 is 1
welJ as 1k
with mine m

78. Saint Vincent has a long and lively ùemocratic tradition which 1 am sure will equip its l'epresentatives weil l'or
the tasks which lie ahead ofusall in New York. 1 wish every
good fortune to our old friends in Saint Vincent l'or the
future Ilappiness and prosperity or their beautiruJ country.

nd congra~

79, The PRESIDENT: 1 now cali upon Ihe repl'esentative
of Sierra Leone. who will speak on bel1alf or the group or
African States.

nolhergoo!
lose lies will
:s peeled hiI'J
ayearwhid

)Ul end.

19 part in the

unanimom
Grenadina
le<! Nalions.
e Saint V~

nher of 0Iîl
'eeling Sai«
llih partnen
ns membef'
1dlheG~

back lolk
this centlllJ

relationsm,
l %Os SaillI
: by becolt
nduct ori!
as adrniniilp!e decic.W

e withinthl'
,centconsS
:mber lm
Jr Yra,,2Im

b

80. MI'. GELAGA-KlNG (Sierra Leone): Ml'. President,
allow Ille on belullr al' the African group 01' States ut the
United Nations to eongratulate you on yom unanimous
election to the pl'esidcncy of the thirty-firth regular session
of the General Asselllbly. We have no doubt that, with l'our
profound experience you will carry oui l'our duties
successfully.

RL We wish also to take this opportllnity or etJngrat ulating our denr rriend and brother, Alllbassador Salim A.
Salim or the United Republic 01' Tanzania, on the excellent
way in which he condueted the alrairs of the General Assel11bly. Wc ail remember quite weil the inderatigable way in
which he condueted our work. und the fuct that he brought
this year's work to <1 sLlccessfu\ conclusion givcs cause l'orjoy
to ail or LIS who come l'rom Arrica.
82. As tht: CUITent ChuÎrmun of the group or African
States at tile United Nations. [ have great pleasure in welcoming Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as the one hundred
and fifty-fourth Member of the United Nations.
83. The Arricun group or States always has a reeling 01'
triull1ph and satisfaction whennewly indt:pendent StatL's me
<ldl11itled to this world b(ldy, We reel victorious and juhilanl
nol Llnly bec<luse wc ourseh·t:s <Ire. L'ol11panttively sI1L'<lh;iIH.'
newlyi"dt:pendent. bu!. il fOrliori, becH.use sLieh aUl1llssion i1i

16 September 1980

7

visible proaf that an adll1inistering Power nus onCe agllln
l'ultillcd its obligations and its sacred trust under the United
Nations Charter by ensuring that the peoples in its L'<lre
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and
freedom.
84. In line with this,lllY country, Sierra Leont:, wus one or
the sponsors of draft resolution A/35/L.l, admitting Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines ta the United Nations, We
congratulate the ncwest Member and wish il wdl. The Al'rican group of States is eonvinced that Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines is n peace-Joving State wllich has aceepteù the
obligations L'ontained in the United Nations Churter, amI
we have every confidence in its ability and willingncss to
carry out those oblig<ltions.

85. Finally, our congwtulations must also go to the erstwhilc <ldministering Power, the United Kingùol1l. Indced,
having reg<lrd to the l'act that the ties between Ihis newly
independent Member and the United Kingdol1l go b:1Ck as
l'al' as the seventeenth eentury. we ean understand it il' the
changc in stutus or the rormer is uccompanied by sOl11e
emotion on the part or either Stute,
86. Be that as il ma y, this is ajoyoLls occasion for us ail. Wc
are sure thal. in accordance with the principle or the sover·
~ign equality 01' all States embodied in the Unill:d Nations
Charter, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will plllY an
active role in I.he deliberations or this Organization.
87. 1 want tn take this opportunity also ol'welcollling to
the United Nations the Prime Minister. the Minister l'or
Extl:rnal All'airs and the entire delcgation or Saint Vincent
<111(j the Grenadines.
RR. The PRESIDENT: The nexl speakl:l' on illY list is th~
representative or Banglauesh. who will speak on behalf or
the Asian grtlU p or States.
R9, Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Ml'. President. on hL'hall'
or the Asian group or Simes, 1 cxlend tl1 you our warmesl
eongrat ltlations on you l' assulll pt ion or the high Ol1ïCl' or 1he
President orthe thirty-Iirth session orthe General Asscl1lbly,
CnllllllÎltetf as you are 10 the purposes and prineipks ol'lhe
United Nalions, your e1ection to the presidency ni' this
altgust body is a litting tribute 10 your pt:rson1l1 qualities a~
un outstanùing diplomut and a man of peace and wi"dolll,
and III your great country t'or thL' erreetive l'Ole that it has
played inlhe United Nations elier since it beeurne n Mel1lber
01' the world body.

90. On ,behalr of the Asian group or States. wc pil~ !lUI'
"'armesl trihltte 10 the President 01' tlle prL'\'ious SL'S.'lnn !lI'
the General Assembly, Mr. Salim Ailmed Salim.tIlL' Perm,lnent Repn:selltative nI' non-aligned Tanzania. ;\ L'lllllllr~
which wc respect. lt was under his wise guidancL' and k;llkrship that sOllle mOl11entmls decisions oli'ar-reachin!! sig.nllïe:lnCt: round aL'L't:ptant:e. President S,i1illl dit! us pnllid ;II\LI
brnught une",' dedication to t\1L' rurpOSL'S and prillll11k,
enshrined in the Charter or Ihe Uniled Nations Inr uni, L'rsai
peace und lhL' prn~ress nI' nwnkilld.
91.

lt is \Vith:\ ~real SL'nsL' ,li ~atisf;\etillil lhat IlL' L'\lL,ld

OUI' heaniest J.\reetilll.!s tnSuinl VincL'nl and lhL' Ciren,ldine,

on its admission ln the United Nations as ilS one hUlldred

8

General Assembly ~ Thirty-fifth Session -

and lirty-fourth Member. The admission of Sni nt Vinœnt
and the Grenadines as the ncwest Member and as a sovercîgn equal in the world community of nations constitutes
another vitHl step forward in vindicating the inalienable
rights of ail peoples to sclf-determination and independence.
92. Speaking on bdlalf of the Asian group of States, 1
should like to emphasize that wc in Asia have becn in the
vanguard of action to remove the remnants of colonialism
and in support of the right to sell'-determination. In pursuit
of the goal of universality, Asia has been among the tirst to
extend lirm support to any State seeking admission to membership of the United Nations, irrespective ofits size, ideology or political, economic or social conditions. Saint
Vincent. 1 am sure, will l'rom the first day of its admission
contribute effectively and meaningfully to the deliberations
of this Assembly on the matters of universal importance.
93. The Asian group of States also takes this opportunÏ!y
to warmly congratula te the administering Power. the United
Kingdolll, on this joyous and happy occasion.
94. May 1 again, on behalf of the Asian group of States,
convey our heartfelt congratulations ta the Government
and people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadincs antl our
best wishcs for the continucd prospcrity, pcncc and IHlppiness of its people.
95. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Norway, who will speak on hehalf of the group
of Western European and other States.
96. MI'. ÂLGÂRD (Norway): MI'. President, the members
of the group which has unanimously nominated YOll 1'01' the
high omce of President of the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly will certainly offer their individual warm
congratulations at the appropriate time. Permit me now
however. as a colleague and an old l'riend, to extend to you
my most heartJelt personal congratulations.
97. ln my capacity liS Chairman of the group of Western
European and other States, it is (\ great pleasurc to cxtcnd 11
warm welcomc to Saint Vinccnl and the Grenadines in lhe
United Nations.
98. Jt is always a most important occasion whcn ncw
Members join our Organization. The group of SlHtcs for
whieh 1am speaking welcomed the application l'or I11cmbership by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Today we should
like to express our satisfaction that Saint Vincent and thc
Grcnadines has declared itself ready to accept and L1ndcrtakc the obligations in the Charter of the United Nations.
99. Although Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will be
one of the smaller Members of our world Organization, 1am
conJident that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will l'ullv
discharge ail responsibilities connected with mel1lbership a'f
the United Nations. 1am furthermore convinced that, as the
one hundred and lifty-fourth Mcmber or the Unitcd
Nations, it will make a valuablc contribution to our
activities.
100. On behalf of the group of Western European and
other States, 1 taki. this opportunity to congratulate the
Government and people of Saint Vincent and the Grena-

Plenary Meetings

dines on attairiing the(r independence on '27 October 1979.
We look forward to working in close co-operation with the
members of their delegation to the United Nations in the
years to come.
ID I. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represcntative of Bulgaria, who will address the Assembly on behalf
of the group of Eastern European States.

102. MI'. TSVETKOV (Bulgaria) (interpretation Jrom
French): MI'. President, may 1 at the outset, on behalf of the
delegations of the Eastern European States, extend to you
our most cordial congratulations on your election to the
high office of President of the General Assembly and wish
you complete success in the discharge of your important
mission.
103. J am certain that when the head of my delega tion, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of
8ulgaria, addresses this Assembly next week, it will be his
pleasure ta express to you the sentiments of the Bulgarian
deJegation, as weil as our fullest appreciation to your eminent predecessor.
104. As Chairman, during the month of September, of the
group of Eastern European States, 1 have the honour and
the great pleasure of warmly welcoming the representativcs
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on the admission of
their country to the United Nations. At the same time, l
should like to express ta them our most cordial wishes for
the prosperity, well-being and happiness of their people and
country.
J05. The entry into the United Nations family of a new
Member is in itself a felicitous political event, because il
represents yet another victory of the world Organization in
implementing the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted by the
General Assembly [resolution 1514 (XJ1].
106. Furthermore, this event is ail the more significant
since it coincides with the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of that historie Declaration,
which has played and continues to play an extremely important role in abolishing the colonial yoke and promoting
access to freedom and independence for ail colonial countries and peoples, as weil as in the evolution of the world in
general. No one can doubt that the proclamation of national
independence by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is an
expression of the historical changes that have occurred in
the contemporary world and is yet ncw proof of the will of
peoples to put an end to the last vestiges of the colonial
system, as weil as to ail the practices of exploitation, pressure, racial discrimination and injustice which accompany
il.

:
1
"

107. The countries of Eastern Europe, which have from
the outset worked tirelessly for the full realization of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, are desirous of establishing close
and friendly co-operation with the delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for the altainment of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.

1

f

15t meetilllll -

:7 October 1l'i'"'Ilf

>eration 'lII'\lllJî!:~
j Naliom.!~ ,1ll!
risthe~
;embl}'oo~

rprelalltli'J!J /tzrs
on bchd·,n,j!.

>, extend klè :!frj}j:
elccl ioo (ll,'li •
embl}'aM.~
yourÎm~

r delegat1i!l(*.~k

c's Re~:lt
:k. il wllllbrllii
If the B~~1iIf
:> n t 0 )'ew 4Ml'

:ptcmb<:If'.'I~~!I:

lhe holt'OIlIiI ,_

represeM.'\"l1~

le admŒs.œli\!! 11Jf

le samel~,

rdial wnM~tr

heir~~

Imily or.a ~
en t, bcQlgIC'f
)rganizalm;li!, '11"

:ng of lodJt~f·

ldopled b~ it1tl.t

ore sll1nh~
Iryonhe~.

ie Decla••lIi"Jlj'.
tremel)! .llll!'lp'li7'.
.nd pmm.~!f
colonud t!:L~
of the 'lII~Jli,!f~:Il ,if
i on of llilt!!t1',qn
enadill(5; fi. ;i1il'

ve <..X'C'UlT~:tf

If of lhe .~$@ ilf'
If the I:(~_w'
oitation. F~

:h att~I:"

ich h.wC' h't!.
ization (II !Jl~

::e loCœ~~

•bHshins ""'~k

1 of SniOI \,l'l""

r the purp'c'~

IOK. l'he PR ES 1Dl:N 1: 1now cali on the reprl'Sent:.mve ni
the Svrian Arab Republi<:. who will addrl'Ss the Assemblv on
behaif of the group 01" Arab States.
109. Mr. MANSOURI (Syrian Arab Republic) (itlferpre/Glial/fi'om Arabie): Mr. PrLosiclcnl. permit me ta convcy to
vou on behalr of the Arab group of Stales our sinccrL'
~ongratllialinns on your unanimous election to the prl~i·
denc)' of this thirty-Iifth sessÎon or the General Assembly.

110. The he'lds nI' delegations of' our countries will soon be
able 10 ollcr their cnngratulations \0 ynu in an appropriate
fashion 011 behul r 01" our Govcrnments. Howevcr. wc shnuld
like tn express our pleasure and 10 say tbat l'our Inng
c,\perience in internlltit)nal alTairs and your skill inconductin,!,! proceedings in tbis Organization make us conlidenl that
vou will contlucl Ihe procccdings or this session in sllch a
~l'aY as to cnsure the Sl1ccess to which this Organinltion
aspires.
III. Wc arc also sure that YOU will devole vour elTorts 10
Ihe implemenWlion of the objectives and principles or Ihe
Charter or Ihis inlernational Organil.3tion. Wc should like
Il) assure YDU l1ere that the Arub gmup orSlatcs is rcady to
coooperate with ynu in the attainment or thcse objectiws.
Il::!. Your eountry. the Federal Republi<: or Germany,
plays a very important and positive role in relations wilh Ihe
wllI'ld's countries in gcncml. and with the Arab countries in
rarticular. Wc ha"e no doubt Ib'll this role will promote the
SllCCCSS or this sl'Ssinn and will succeed in strengthening the
links or solidarity and co-operation among the various
countrÎLos.
J l3.
r take Ihis opportllnily aiS() to greet. on behalf or'lhe
Arab group of States. Ihe 5tate or Saint Vincenl and the
Grcnadines on ilS admission to the international rumBy. We
shollid also like 10 repeat that wc are read)' 10 co-operate in
ail Iiclds with thal Statc. The admission or an increasing
nlllllber or independent States which have fought againsl
Cl1lonialism and nlcism will no doubt strengthen L11e role or
thc United Nat ions in Ihl;' service or the causes or justice and
international peace.

114. In conclusion. 1 should Iike lU hail the tireless and
inlense efrorts and Ihe encrg,elie .letions undcrtakcn by)'our
predecessor. Mr. Salim Ahmcd Salim. to ensme the succcss
tIr the wor" nI' the 1hi rI v-l'ourt h sL~si()n as weil as of the
seventh ernergency special session and the elcvenlh special
session.
J 15.
The PR ESt DENT: t cali next on the representativc of
Saint Lucia. who will speak as the Chairman of the West
Indies Associated SlatL'S.

Il6. Mr. AUGUSTE (Sain! Lucia): Mf. Pn.osident, may [
Lake this Iïrsl occasion to congratulate you on your election
as PrL'Sident or thc thirty·fifth session orlhe General Assembl)'. r <lm certain that }rou will occupY the chair with the
dlaracterislic ability and expericnce that you have displayed
o\'er many yeurs in this and other ronuns.

l17. One year ago rny country was atlmittcd anl l
acclaimed as the youngest Mcmber Stute of this allgllst
body. Toduy Saint Vincent and the Grenadines assumes this

16 Seplember 1980

9

man tic ancl joins us ln the corridors or this most reputable
Organir.ation. Wc e:<tcnd a brotherly welcome not only
because Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is an island State
like ours. but more so becaLlse it is the last of the Windward
group ofisland Stales to achieve independenee 'lIld membership of the Uniled Nations.
] l8.

On behalf or my country in its eapacÎty as Chairman

or the Committee of Foreign Ministers or the Caribbean
Communily [CAR/COM) and alsa. more especially, as
Chairman orthe West lndics Associated Stales, constillHing
bOl h the Windward and Leeward groups ofislands. 1extcnZI
a very special welcome. The Windward group is the forerunner of the small island Caribbe.tn Stales in <lchieving
indcpendence and United Nations membership, and wc are
looking forw'ard to Ihe earliest materialization of a similar
slatus and aehievement l'or the Leeward group of islands.
119. Like our sis1er isla nd States in the Pacifie and lndîan
Oceans. we add a new and important dimension to the
social. economic and politicnl thrust 01" lhe thirc1 world.
There arc now sorne 24 island Member States and more arc
10 follow. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is the Ialest
addition. This is an important consideralion that the Uniled
Nations musl accommodate in its calculations and projet:o
tions and ta which it must giveadequaleand full signilicance
in ilS deliberations.

120. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. in common \\Iilh
ail our other sister States. represents a unique and peculiar
manifestation of the nation State. But its problems <lrc no
less demanding and its demands no less perlinent than is
rc:corded in the general third wnrld movement lo elicit u
rcasonablc and morc acceptable slandnrd of living for our
pcoples. Size in area or population does nol warrant any
apology within this ('orum. The Suite cxisls and the international community must at eyery juncture live with. contend
with and embody it. mindful of the exc\usi ve system or
co-operalion and c()-ordinalion that is harboured therein.

121. Saint Vincent and the Grenadinl."S.like oursclvcs and
small island Stales thal came before us. is expectcd to live up
10 the same obligations and rcsponsibilitics that arc applicable to larger Slates. [t is expected ta reprcscnt its inlerests
and objcctives in this rorum and tn play an ellective and
effectuai l'Ole in the preservation and maintenancc of pellce.
Tbere is no doubl that. likc its sis1er Stales, Saint Vineenl
and the Grenadines will have Ihe oppartllnity 10 rullil its
role. whatcver the priee; for it is a burden thal il agrccd to
accept and whose existence it acknowlcdged must e.~ist.
when il electcd lo seck indcpendencc and 10 be accepled inlo
the ranks or tllis esleemcd galhcring.
122. The only salvalion for a smatl island Slale is 10 be pnrt
oran entilY whme major objective is to preserve pence in thi~
world. Il is only the communily of intcrests that will represent and maintain the bascfrom whiê:h the peoples ofa smaH
island Slatc l'an hope ta achieve their goals and objectives.
E\'Cry Input ta that cause. directly or indircctly. is a slep in
the proper direclion.
123. ln welcoming Sainl Vincent and the Grenadines. wc
arc proud to aeknowlec.ige that tbe end or the Windward
Islands conslilutionnl and international l'ndeavour has
arrived. We note. en passant, thal the beginning of the

10

General Assembly -

Thirty-fifth Session -

Leeward Islands objective is at hand. The sOlga 01" eolonialism in our area has been sung.
124. We arc assured that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will bring its own particu lar contribution to interplay
with the forces a Iready at work in this forum, and will ably
support the concerted movement towards the realization of
those developmental provisions which must be achieved
before a small island State can obtain economic liberation
for its peoples.
125. To the State of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
and to its Prime Minister, may 1suggest that their vision be
never blurred by the untimeliness of events, and that they
pursue their people's path, encouraged and fortified by the
Shakespearian metaphor "Ripeness is ail".
126. The PRESIDENT: 1 nowcall on the representativeof
the United States, who will speak as the representative orthe
host country.
127. MI'. McHENRY (United States of America): Sir, on
behalf of the United States, the host country, 1 wish to
express our warmest congratulations on your election ta the
presidency of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. You have, MI'. President, the
disadvantage and the challenge of following Ambassador
Salim of the United Republic ofTanzania in the office of the
presidency. We are, however, conlïdent that you will meet
the challenge sa ably put before you and us by A mbassador
Salim-a challenge, 1might add, that you have ably demonstrated your ability to meet in the pas!.
128. As Permanent Representative of the hast country, 1
take pleasure in welcoming Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as the one hundred and fifty-fourth Member of the
United Nations. The people of the United States extend
congratulations to the Government and people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines as they join our efforts to
establish international peace, justice and prosperity.
129. In February 01' this year, when the Security Council
considered Saint Vincent and the Grenadines' application
for membership in the United Nations, the United States
representative expressed confidence that the people and
Government of the newly indcpendent nation would support the basic princip les ol"the United Nations Charter. We
expect that these principles will guide Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines as it assumes an active l'ole in international
affairs, both within the Caribbean region and in the United
Nations.
130. The United States looks forward to a continuation of
the friendly relations that we have enjoyed with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We have in the past provided them
with economic and development assistance through multilateral agencies, and we maintain a Peace Corps programme
there. The United States was also pleased to \end assistance
to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines last yeur in the wake of
the tragic volcanic eruption.
13 J. Wc wish tD assure the representatives of Saint Vincl.:'nt and the Gn:nadines of the full cD-operation. or the
United States in our future endeavours. We extend ta them
ollr warm greetings and best wishes on this happy occasion.

Plenary Meetings

132. The PRESIDENT: 1thanktï~~-r;present~îive of the
United States for his good wishes and lor reminding me of
the special challenge of this office. The Assembly.w.iII now
hear a statement by the Prime Minister and Mmlster of
Finance of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Mr. R. Milton
Cato. 1take pleasure in inviting him to address the General
Assembly.
133. MI'. CATO (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): MI'.
President, on behalf of the Government and people of the
nation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, my delcgation
would like to extend to you persona'lIy and to the country
you represent our very sincere congratulations on your
appointment to the very high office you now hold in this
august body.
134. We have observed with great interest the record of
your country over the last three decades in bringing about
the tremendous reconstruction which has placed you in the
forefront oftaday's developed countries. We knowonlytoo
weil that the progress ofyour country has been made possible not only by whatever natural resources you may have at
your disposaI but principally by the hard work and dedication of YoU!' peopl'e; and it is in this respect that my own
country can gather encouragement and have hope for its
own future in spite of its own extremely limited resources.
135. 1 should Iike, if 1 may, to express my delegation's
thanks to ail those countries represented here today who
have made our presence and our membership possible; and
in this respect 1speak for those Vincentians in this country
who have given my delegation encouragement during our
periods of difficulty. Some of them have found it possible ta
be here to lend us further moral support. We know that
there arc thousands of citizens in our own home today who
have great expectations; and 1 trust that with God's help
they wHI 'have no reason to regret the democratic mandate
which they placed in our hands when, on the fifth day of
December last, they renewed and extended the authority of
the Saint Vincent Labour Party to manage the affairs of our
small island State.
136. The application ol'Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to become a Member of the United Nations, having received
unanimous approval in our own House of Assembly, was
dispatched ta the Secretal'y-General on 8 January 1980 and
came up for consideration before the Security Council on 19
February 1980.
137. 1should like to express my thanks to ail the members
of the Security Council for giving such ready and easy
passage to the resolution and for the very kind sentiments
and good wishes which were then expressed by delegations
in recommending my country's membership to this distinguished Assembly.
138. 1should particularly iike ta relèr to the contributions
made by the representatives ofSaint Lucia and Trinidad and
Tobago, who requested to be invited to participate in the
Security Council's discussion of the application and who
also expressed very complimentary and encouraging words
about my country. Our particular countries are bound not
only by ties of geography, situated as we arc practically
within a stone's throw of each other in the same Caribbean

lst meeting -

)(lk

basin, but also by our common historieal deveJopment,
sÎnce we have travdled in the same direction along the
colonial road to an unfortunately shorÎ-lived Federation
and ta eventual independence.

ned

1.lWfI'

Pd
ibiœJ
œral

139. 1t was most titting and appropriate that our sponsor
should have becn the United Kingdom. We were under their
tutelage for sorne 300 ycars and should we demonstrate any
evidence of unpreparedness for our ncw l'ole, then the part
played by our erstwhile colonial masters mighl very praperly be brought inta question.

~Mt

:If.

ale

Li~

)'tlU

lélr;

140. As we have been reminded, the association between
the United Kingdom and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
has been a long one, dating back to the early seventeenth
ccntury. We have travelled together over storl11Y and perilous waters; we have had our long periads of dispute and
controversy and we have progressed along the constitutional road, sometimes impatiently and sometimes without
any obvious signs of benefit to our long-suffcring and rrustrated people who were so anxious to attain a reasonable
standard of living un der conditions over which they had no
contraI.

rd~

1-'

in*

Iy!Pl

~

l~iI1

~
~

()CE

m:u.
141. Happily, time, which has been said ta be the heaJer of
ail ills, marched on; and on 27 October 1969 we entered into
an Association with the United Kingdom under the terms of
which we were to manage ail our internai affairs, whiJe the
United Kingdom Government continued to rctain responsibility for our external affairs and defence.

:-

~'.
'iim.I!

.I!~

p:~1ia!

*~

~

••

142. In the course of the negotiations which resulted in
that Association it was made clcar that this was only an
interim measure leading ta full independcncc for our State.
At the final conl'erence-Constitutionul Conference, he Id in
London l'rom 23 to 27 June: 1969-1 spoke on behalr or Lhe
Government or Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and
announced that my Govcrnment and the people of our State
were l'ully commilted ta indepcndence, as weil as the political and economic intcgratian of ail the Cmibbean peoples,
and that, ifthis dream should praye illusol'Y, then we would
procecd together with any or those States that were so
disposcd and, in any event, would seek to proceed to
independence.

ht1l4
1dIi!.:t
.) !li
it)'d

c.

l~
:i'll~
'iI;$

m rt

143. In the circumstances whieh cnsued We were ùestincd
ta becomc a member of the Curibbean Free Trade Association and later the East Caribbean Common Market, cconomie groupings which were aimed at helping us withstand
sorne of the pressures of the international and multinational
economic systems. Even within tbis grouping, the Eust
Caribbean ComlUan Market was established to give furtller
protection ta sorne of what have becol11e known as the less
devclopcd eountries. At the present time, thc East Caribbean cauntries WOl'k for regional co-operation llnder (he
LI I11bre Il a or the Couneil of Ministers of the West Indics
Assoeiate States, embracing the indcpendelll States as weil
as some Stutes which are still in association with the United
Kingdol11 Government and one State which for the til11c
being has elected ta remain a British colony. Wc still horc
that in this manner we will givc strength tn the kss devcloped
countries.

,bd:!:
Cl1iI$~
~

iœ,
~Ci\o

Ill.

œ

lk

I(~

~
R'lll&

~
'l':lii!ll

De

16 Septernller 1980

11

144. Our own eonstitutional association wrtn the UnIted
Kingdol11 was to last a matter of sorne 10 years and it was
not until 27 October 1979, fess than a year aga, that our own
flag was unl'urled in thc State of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Vinccntians throughout the Caribbcl1n, in
the United Kingdom, in the United States, in Canada and
elsewhere celebrated the historie day of our coming of age.
And so, histOl'Y has reeorded the end ofa most eolourrul era,
during which time there were skirmishes between thc Caribs
and the original settlers, followed by alternate periods of
mie by the French and British, and eventuaJJy a long and
varied colonial relationship between my own country and
the United Kingdom. [ am confident that 1 speak fol' that
country as weil as my own in saying that, as wc turn ovcr this
new page and embark on this new relationship, the warmth
of our present friendship will be strengthencd, as we work
together with other countries in Ollr mutual endeavours to
tind solutions ta common problcms with grcatcr suecess,
one would hope, than we have had in former years.
145. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was put through
severe tests during the year 1979, shortly afterwe had settled
the timc-tabJe for our maye to independence. In April of
that year we were reminded in no uncertain manner that we
lived at the foot of a volcano, for La Soufrière madc its
presence felt by a series of cruptions which compelled us to
embark on an instantaneous evacuation programme involving some 20,000 people, cornpletely disrupting the lives of
our entire population of sOl11e JI 0,000 and bringing the
economic progress which we had been making ta a temporary standstilI.
146. We had hardly c1eared the dcbris and rcnewed our
lorward march when we got the al"termath of hurricane
"David", which reminded us of our vulnerability l'rom the
sea as weil as l'rom the [and, when rough seas and heavy
winds practically dcstroyed two villages and did considerable damage to our roads and vegetable crops.
[47. It was during this pcriod that our faith in humanity
was strengthened. Our friends l'al lied round us l'rom ail
quarters. We received immediate assistance to help us with
rehabili tation l'rom a number of countries, agencies, groups
and individuals, in the forefront ofwhich was this Organization, in which we have today attained formai membership.
148. It was in these circul11stanees that our people demonstrated their spirit nI' detcrmination to work together as a
united people, and so we praceeded with our rehabilitation
prognllllme and diù not alter our schedu le for proc.eeding t?
independence. The morale of Dur people was 11Igh, thelr
dedicatioll was unquestionable. and our economy once
again began to gather momentum. Many representati~es
here C8n beur testimony to the spirit ofdetermÎnation whlch
was in evidcnce during our indepcnclence cclcbratioll, by
which lime We had restored conditions to normalcy.
149. Within a periocl of two mllnths we invitcd the electorate to rcnew our mandate if'thev sO wishcd, and the Labour
Party of Saint Vinccnt and thc Grenadines was rcturned ta
ollïe'e Il\' an overwhell1ling l1lajority, ar gencra! cleetions
which t~)ok place on 5 December 1979.

12

General Assembly -

Thirty-fifth Session -

150. Wc wcre weil on the way to recovery by August laSI
when the elements struck again in the shape of hurricane
"A lien". On tilts occaSion, the l'oree of the hurricane was far
greater than that of the previaus year and the damage donc
far cxceeded the ravages of the volcanic eruptions. We werc
to have our principal agricultural crop-which accounts for
over 60 per cent of our expart trade-95 pel' cent destroyed,
besides sustaining considerable damage to our vegetable
crops, our roads, our only deep water wharf, our sewerage
system and a considerable number of houses, particularly
those in the low-cost areas. The hait ta our weekly shipment
of bananas means in effect that we face considerable unemplaymcnt weil into the next year.
151. The question now is where do we go l'rom here? How
do we fulfil our obligations to the people of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and live up ta their expectations? How
do we perform our obligations ta the United Nations and
carry out the pledges wc have made to identify with the
international cam munity? My Government has made a declaration to the United Nations Secretary-General that Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines considers itsclf bound by the
treaties formally entered into on its behalr for a limited
periad during which the texts of the treaties will be studied
and a final decision reached whether to accept each treaty or
ta terminate il. Several countries have adopted this method
of acceptance of treaty rights and obligations on the attainment of independence.
152. My Government has given deliberate consideration
ta our awn foreign policy and to diplomatie representation,
and my delegation will be making our main statement on
foreign policy in the course of this session. There are, however, certain brief matters of concern to us which 1 should
likc ta stress at this stage and at this particular point in time.
153. We shall endeavour ta main tain the contacts which
wc have cstablished over the years with our traditional
friends, and wc look forward to their co-operation in ail
malters pertaining to our external affairs. Wc shall, of
course, main tain our friendly relations with other Caribbean nations and strengthen existing tics wit h other call1ltries where it is in our interest to do so. We intend to remain
members of, and actively participate in, the several regional
institutions to which wc now bclong.
154. At the last meeting of the West Indian States Association Council of Ministers, it was agreed to establish an
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States, the abject being
to achievc the fullest possible co-ordination offoreign policies within the respective competences of member States, ta
seck ta adopt, as far as possible, eommon positions on ail
international issues and to establish and maintain joint missions and representations in pursuit of thdr intern;ltional
relations with other States and international organizations.
The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines feels
that security and peace in the world is ofparamount importance and should not involve one nation arming itself
against another or imposing its superior force on another
nation.
155. We subscribe to the principle that ail nations should
work logether in a spirit of good neighbourliness based on
l11utual respect for each othcr's equality, irrespective of
nllrnerical strength, size or tïnancial resourct.'S.

Plenary Meetings

Il

156. We are completcly opposed to the arms raec and ta
the proliferation ofnulcear weapons which wc sec as two or
the major arens of expenditure whicl1 could be divcrtcd to
giving 'assistance to the Jess developed and the underdeveloped regions of the world, which are sa badly in need or
assistance for their economic ,Ind social dcvcloprncnt. Wc
eondemn in the strongest possible ter ms any situation in
which one nation should have to live in l'car because of the
superior strength of a neighbouring State. We condemn any
attcmpt by external forces to seck ta impose ideologies or
systems of govcrnment upon other countries or to subvert or
overthrow the constitutional Governlllents of other States.

e~

fe

ca

1

h

a

n

I
la

n
d

157. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines adheres to the
principles enunciated and enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
158. Wc condemn in the strongest possible terms the racist
policics practised in South Africa and e1sewhere and endorse
the Declaration on race and racial prejudice adopted on 27
November 1978 by the General Conference ofUNESCO'l at
its twentieth session on 27 Novem ber 1978.

1'(

a

a

n

r

1

159. Wc shall give our complete support to the people of
Namibia in their strugglc for freedom l'rom a de/iant and
oppressive régime and will support to the t'ullesl exlent
possible the efforts being made ta bring about free and nIir
elections under the supervision of the United Nations leading to independence for that country at the earliest possible
time.
160. Wc shall give full 5UPPOrt ta the efforts being made ta
bring about and ensure the complete independence ofBclize
and wc shall continue ta observe the procedures which are
being adopted ta bring about a just settlement in that
dispute.
161. It is quite c1ear ta my delegation that the many laudabic resalutions which have bccn adopted by this Assembly
l'rom time to time can never be implemented unless the
major POWers and the developed countries, notwithstanding
their own domestie problems, are prepared to l1lake substantial sacrifices in arder to correct the imbalancc betwccn
the rich and the pOOl' countries of the world.
162. The small island States of the Caribbean have identified two major constraints on the econornic development or
our countries. First there is the lack ofadequale tinance and
it had been hoped that the establishment ofeertain financial
institutions within the region wOllld have provided a solution. Indeed, the Caribbean Development Bank has provided a partial but often frustrating ~olution. It is nol
unusual for a project to take up ta two years l'rom the filing
of an application to approval and disbursement. lllis is
not usually due ta any cumbersome or bureaucratic procedures on the part of the Bank, but occurs because the donor
eOllntries will only provide funds lor specifie purposes and
on specifie terms and conditions of tbeir own ehaosing.
which the Bank itself describes as being unneeessarily
restrictive.
• United Nations Educulionul, Scientific and Cuilurai OrganizHtlon.
Records of the General Conference. Twenlil'lh Session. vol. 1. Resolulions. p. 61.

t
f
f
;

pe

lst meeting - 16 September 1980
111 fi race and le

vc see as IwO of

1

be diwrll'(.i 1<1

:i Ihe undefde.

ladJy in nec..'d cl
édopmclIl.
ny situation III
because o(d!lt
e condemnan~
:e ideologid- CI'
or to subvcrtûl"
Jf other Stal15

,It',

ad hel"t.'s 10 IrA:
Charter of lbr

tellns the rMl${

~re and endoOie

adopted on 2~
lfUNESCO'oÏ'l

o the p~'Opk' (Ii

163. In some cases, the less deveJoped countries are
expected to provide counterpart funds and to expend on
feasibility studies considerable sums that it is beyond the
capacity of the small island States to provide.
164. In some cases, the procurement regulatiol1s applicable to the disbursement offunds by the Bank arc so stringent
and complex that the Bank itself has described them as a
nightmare.
165. The second constraint to which 1refer is related to th~
lack of technology within the small States, Immigration
restrictions and lack of training facilities make it extremely
difficult for small island States to provide the trained labour
force needed by underdeveJoped countri~s ifthey are la find
a niche in this very competitive world, whether it be in
agriculture or in industry.
166. We would weicome a reviewoftheir position on these
matters by the countries donors to the Caribbean Development Bank as weil as to other financial institutions,
167. My delegation would not likc to give the impression
that we are setting out cap in hand, so to speak, seeking aid
wherever we can get il.

1 a dclïam aBil

~ fullest cxlcp.!
,ut frce and f.Hf
:1 Nations il".l\(}.
:arliest pœ....ib~,

s beingmadelll
Idcncc of&ilz:
lures which are
Icment in lft:lil

Ile manylaud.t·
this Ass<m~~
lted unlcs!> lb'~
Cltwithstanding
1 to l11akt: wb,dance bCl'i'tYil
:1.
~an haw ,;.kml·
:levelopmt:nI ~'I!.
a te lina nCl" .md
ertailllinan'li
rovided a ",,~11J­
Bank ha:. pro·
tion, It J~ n(~
, from the rllil'.g
,ement. Thi$ Jij
aucratic pr«e·
;ause thedol'lt\!
c purpOSI."S 'l.flIÎ
own choo'$.lng.

unl1ect'Ssatll~

.1 ra 1 Orgaml"hQ~,

~n,

vol. 1. Ri3't'!i.·

168. We fïrmly bclicve that, given the opportunity, our
people can learn the skills necessal'Y to develop our country.

13

We fïrm!y bellévé ihàtfiriancingon môre rêalistic it-nd casiér-terms for the less developed countries would put us in the
position to pull ourselves up by our own bootstraps. Wc
subscribe to the theory of John Donne that "No man is an
Island, entire of itself', and we in our chain of small
islands-now Saint Vincent and the Grenadines-have discovered this to our cost.
169. We recognize that even as independent countries we
continue to live in a state of interdependence.
170. We seek the opportunity to make our contribution to
the efforts being made by the United Nations to implement
its Charter. We believe that the United Nations will be an
effective instrument only when nations put the interests of
the international community before their own, and that
Ihere is a compdling duty for ail countries, including our
own, to subordinate our national interests to global policies
ta ken in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
171. We firmly believe that these principles should form
the corner-stone of the structllre which we shall co-operate
in building as we proudly take our place as the one hundred
fifty-fourth Member of this family of nations. 1 pledge to
you, Mr. President, the co-operation of the new State and
Mcmber, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m,
