S/2021/418

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 30 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr.
Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of
China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland (on behalf of Ireland and Norway), Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference
on “The situation in the Middle East (Syria)” convened on Wednesday, 28 April
2021. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of
the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council
members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
President of the Security Council

21-05811 (E) 040521 270521

*2105811*

S/2021/418

Annex 1
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Geir Pedersen
The Syrian Women’s Advisory Board is meeting in Geneva this week, for the
first time in person in a year. I thank the Swiss authorities for enabling this. Board
members have been very active in providing me and my team with vital information
from the ground and counsel on the political process. Though they represent different
views and backgrounds on many issues, they continue to find ways to work together
and even reach agreement often. In their diversity and commitment, they capture
what many Syrians experience and they focus on what many Syrians want to achieve
for their country.
Let us not forget that, in addition to challenges facing all Syrians, many
women have also experienced sexual and gender-based violence, early and forced
marriage, and trafficking. And with men killed and injured in large numbers,
more women than ever are heading households, against the backdrop of violence,
terrorism, displacement, instability, destitution and pandemic.
When I met the Board on Monday, members voiced a shared fear of Syria’s
permanent division and worries that differences among external actors would
perpetuate the Syrian conflict. But they also spoke with hope and determination
for a renewal of the political process, for a lasting calm across the country and for
a new constitution that guarantees the rights and freedoms of all in Syria. They
want to see an end to the conflict as a whole and a sustainable peace achieved with
the meaningful participation of Syrian women, with women’s safety, basic needs,
dignity, rights and equality at its core.
I want today to sound a warning to all — a warning to prioritize the proactive
search for a settlement of the Syria conflict. Despite more than a year of relative
calm by Syrian standards, this month reminded us of the potential for the situation
to further disintegrate or rapidly deteriorate.
There has been a significant escalation in north-western Syria. This has
included strikes on a United Nations-supported and notified hospital in western
Aleppo, close to densely populated internally displaced persons camps and on the
Syrian-Turkish border where United Nations cross-border humanitarian deliveries
take place, as well as shelling on residential areas of western Aleppo city.
On 22 April, air strikes inside Syria were attributed by the Syrian Government
to Israel for the second time in a month. The Syrian Government then activated its air
defence system and Israel claimed that a missile emanating from Syria then struck
Israeli territory. Israel said it then carried out further strikes inside Syrian territory.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continued to ramp up the scale
and reach of attacks in central and north-eastern Syria — in one instance cells
reportedly kidnapped dozens of civilians from rural Hama. Afrin, Tell Rifaat and
Ayn Isa have all seen a steady rise in hostilities. Tensions in normally peaceful
Qamishli flared into violent confrontation last week, causing civilian casualties and
displacement. And the south-west remains perennially unstable, with abductions,
killings, detention, widespread criminality and troop movements that bring the
spectre of imminent escalation.
It is all too easy to become immune to these kinds of developments and the
dangers they could lead to. A nationwide ceasefire as per resolution 2254 (2015) is
essential, as is a cooperative approach to eradicating listed terrorist groups.
I worry about the economic destitution facing the Syrian people in the
context of a decade of conflict and destruction, corruption and mismanagement,
2/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

war economies, the Lebanese financial collapse, the pandemic and sanctions. While
the Syrian pound recovered some value this month, against a backdrop of Syrian
Government measures, food prices remain at historic highs and inflation has not
abated. 12.4 million are now food insecure, an increase of 4.5 million in the last year
alone. Fuel shortages remain a key concern as well.
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock will highlight the humanitarian
implications of this destitution and of flaring coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases
in some quarters and fresh cuts to water access for almost half a million people
in Al-Hasakah. Let me also stress, as he will, the fundamental importance of
full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access to all parts of Syria, through
intensified cross-line and cross-border deliveries. The Secretary-General stressed in
his briefing to the General Assembly that a large-scale cross-border response for an
additional 12 months remains essential to saving lives. I appeal to the members of
the Council to focus on achieving consensus to that end.
I also appreciate and continue to appeal for continued donor support to the
pillars of the humanitarian response plan: humanitarian assistance, protection,
resilience and access to services.
The diverse civil society that I continue to engage with via the United Nations
Civil Society Support Room have conveyed shared concerns at the deteriorating
situation for most Syrians. In a recent joint message delivered by some members at
the Brussel conference at the end of March, they drew attention to the devastating
impact of 10 years of war on Syria’s social fabric and the ongoing displacement
and deteriorating situation for refugees. They called for increased humanitarian
and livelihoods programmes and the application of all humanitarian exceptions to
sanctions regimes. They stressed the need for progress regarding the thousands who
remain detained, abducted or missing and called for a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me here reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal regarding the importance
of avoiding and mitigating any effects of sanctions measures on the capacity of
Syrians to access food, essential health supplies and COVID-19 medical support.
Allow me to stress again the importance of unblocking progress on detainees,
abductees and missing persons. As long as this file remains largely frozen, many
Syrians will be unable to even begin to think of moving on, and Syria’s social fabric
cannot begin to be restored. I know first-hand the heavy toll this issue takes on
families, through frequent contacts with family associations, women’s groups and
ordinary Syrian citizens. Together with my Deputy and supported by dedicated staff,
I have engaged directly with the parties to this end, and we are continuing to do so.
My office also participates in a working group, together with Iran, Russia
and Turkey, and with the International Committee of the Red Cross as an observer,
though this group has met only once in 14 months. Notwithstanding a modest number
of detainees and abductees released in one-for-one simultaneous release operations,
neither track has produced real progress. Specific ideas have been offered, including
concrete procedures for clarifying the fate and whereabouts of missing persons, but
these need to be operationalized. I reiterate my appeal for the Syrian Government and
all other Syrian parties to carry out unilateral releases of detainees and abductees and
to undertake meaningful actions on missing persons at a scale that is commensurate
with the scope of this tragic issue. The coming Eid Al-Fitr would be the obvious
occasion for this kind of action.
If this highly internationalized conflict is to move towards resolution, we
need a more constructive and comprehensive international diplomacy on Syria to try
to unlock progress step for step. I have spoken about this with the Syrian parties, and
21-058113/46

S/2021/418

I will continue to do so in future engagements. I have also spoken about it in recent
engagements with key interlocutors in Russia, the United States, Turkey, Iran, the
Arab World, Europe and others on the Council. I appreciate that key international
interlocutors are expressing interest in this idea. At the same time, it is clear that
mistrust and a desire for others to move first are prominent elements in the minds
of many.
I understand this. But there are ways to overcome these concerns. A new
means of international discussion or a new international format could bring all of
those stakeholders who can put something on the table to the table. Exploratory
consultations could help test possibilities and bridge the gaps of mistrust that hinder
such an effort. Key players could identify with realism and precision the mutual and
reciprocal steps they can take and what they would seek in order to promote progress
on resolution 2254 (2015). Well defined packages without ambiguity and parallel
implementation and verification, as relevant, could help. There are no guarantees
that common ground would be found, but I am convinced that it could be. There is
enough at stake and enough common interest for us to try. We must begin to lay the
groundwork for such an effort, conscious that it will require time and effort to come
to fruition. With a relative, albeit fragile, calm on the ground and many capitals
understanding the need for a way forward, we need to explore what is possible. We
should not lose further time in exploring this seriously.
We take note that a presidential election in Syria has been scheduled for 26
May. The election has been called under the auspices of the current Constitution and
is not part of the political process established by resolution 2254 (2015). The United
Nations is not involved in this election and has no mandate to be. The United Nations
continues to stress the importance of a negotiated political solution to the conflict
in Syria. In this regard, resolution 2254 (2015) mandates the United Nations to
facilitate a political process that culminates in the holding of free and fair elections in
accordance with a new Constitution, administered under United Nations supervision
to the highest international standards of transparency and accountability, with all
Syrians, including members of the diaspora, eligible to participate.
Let me turn finally to the Constitutional Committee and preface my remarks
with two points of context.
First, the Committee is Syrian-led and Syrian-owned. It was established
and empowered by the agreement of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Syrian Negotiation Commission, as facilitated by the United Nations —
namely, its terms of reference and core rules of procedure. The Committee operates
in accordance with the terms of reference and core rules of procedure. Committee
members confirmed this in a code of conduct they adopted by consensus. I appeal to
the co-Chairs and all Committee members to respect the terminology in the terms
of reference in their official dealings. I also appeal to them to adhere to the code of
conduct in public statements.
Secondly, I have been clear that, in the interests of the Syrians themselves, a
sixth session of the small body of the Committee needed to be carefully prepared.
Assurances need to be in place to ensure that it implements the terms of reference,
restores and builds some trust and confidence, and makes progress on the
Committee’s mandate to prepare and draft for popular approval a constitutional
reform. In other words, a sixth session needs to be different from what has gone
before — with some clear goals, credible working methods, enhanced co-Chair
cooperation and a future workplan.
I have worked patiently with the co-Chairs to facilitate proposals between
them and exchanges with me to find consensus on how such a session could take
place. Since my last briefing, terminology not consistent with the terms of reference
4/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

and genuine differences on methodology led to an impasse that I assessed could
not be overcome by further exchanges between the co-Chairs. I shared with both
co-Chairs on 15 April a compromise bridging proposal, building on good ideas that
each had included in their proposals and asking each to compromise. Let me note
that it was regrettable that confidential elements of ongoing discussions found their
way to the media. I am convinced that this proposal, if implemented, would help the
Committee to move gradually forward on its work. I have also recently engaged the
middle third civil society committee members.
Just before this briefing, I received a formal response to my proposal from
the co-Chair nominated by the Syrian Negotiation Commission. I was informed by
the co-Chair nominated by the Syrian Government that a formal response would
be received next week. I will await having both co-Chairs’ responses in hand and
my engagement with them before further commenting. For now, let me say that
the United Nations stands ready to convene a sixth session as soon as logistically
possible once co-Chair agreement is in place.
The Constitutional Committee is part of what must necessarily be a broader
process to implement resolution 2254 (2015) — the kind of process that a step-bystep process can help unlock. That broader process is needed to gradually create
the kind of safe, calm and neutral conditions in which a consensual and broadly
supported constitutional reform could take hold in Syria. These are the same
conditions needed for safe, dignified and voluntary return of Syrian refugees and
for the kind of elections resolution 2254 (2015) mandates. We cannot get there all in
one go. But there are steps that could be taken to generate some movement, and it
requires constructive international diplomacy to identify and implement them. I am
open to any suggestions or advice, but I see no other path than this to help the Syrian
people to navigate out of their terrible crisis and towards a better future that meets
their legitimate aspirations and restores Syria’s sovereignty, unity, independence and
territorial integrity.

21-058115/46

S/2021/418

Annex 2
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I will cover five points today: first, the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19); secondly, the economic crisis; thirdly, the protection of civilians;
fourthly, humanitarian access; and finally, the assistance humanitarian organizations
are providing across Syria.
Let me start with COVID-19, which Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, said I would address. As I have said before, since testing
across the country is so limited, there is a high degree of uncertainty over exactly
the scale of the pandemic in Syria. But from the available information, it is pretty
clear that the virus spread is, again, rapid but also accelerating. The number of new
cases recorded by the Ministry of Health in March was twice the number recorded in
February. Hospitals in Damascus, including intensive care units, are now full.
In northern Syria, new cases have been confirmed in displacement camps,
including at Al-Hol and Al-Roj. Both those camps lack the resources to treat
COVID-19 patients.
At the United Nations, we are doing what we can to provide support, including
by enhancing surveillance capacity, providing personal protective equipment
and providing training for medical workers, as well as supporting the roll-out of
vaccination campaigns.
Last week, the first deliveries of vaccines from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility (COVAX) arrived in Syria, and additional deliveries are expected
throughout the year. The supplies from COVAX should cover around 20 per cent
of the population, but that is obviously not nearly enough. It is a vital first step
to protect medical workers and those most vulnerable, but more vaccines will be
needed as soon as possible.
Let me just make the obvious point that the vaccine doses that reached northwest Syria were delivered, like all United Nations humanitarian assistance there,
through the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing. It is really not clear how future such
deliveries could reach north-west Syria unless the Council confirms reauthorization
of United Nations cross-border access. And Geir Pedersen has made an appeal to
the Council today in that regard, reinforcing what the Secretary-General has already
said. I, of course, endorse those appeals, too.
Next, I turn to the economic crisis. The exchange rate has again been volatile;
in fact, it has appreciated over the last month or so. It is now around 3,400 Syrian
pounds to the United States dollar on the informal market. That compares with 4,700
Syrian pounds to the dollar at a low point in March.
One consequence thereof is that there are, in some places, some reductions in
prices for staples, such as rice and sugar, many of which are imported, obviously.
But food prices overall remain at historically high levels. In fact, in Al-Hasakah,
subsidized bread prices doubled this month. So, across the country, our food-security
assessments still show the situation is getting worse.
Most Syrian households — more than half of them — report not having
sufficient, or sufficiently nutritious, food. That is an increase of more than 70 per
cent as compared to last year. And the proportion is — it will come as no surprise —
much higher among people who have been displaced and among returnees.
Ongoing fuel shortages are increasingly affecting humanitarian operations as
well. Several field missions were cancelled this month because there was not enough
fuel to conduct them.
6/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

My next point relates to protection. Geir Pedersen touched again on the
violence we have seen recently. Two more aid workers were killed in Syria this
month. The two volunteers for the national non-governmental organization (NGO)
“Al-Bir Wa Al-Ehsan Ras Al-Ain” were killed in an armed attack on 17 April on
their way back from a humanitarian assistance project in Deir ez-Zor.
I again condemn this and all similar attacks. Humanitarian workers in Syria
deliver life-saving aid under the most challenging circumstances and at great
personal risk. They really must be protected.
Also, in the north-east, we are monitoring with concern the increasing tensions
in and around Qamishli and Al-Hasakah cities. Last week, clashes in Qamishli killed
at least three civilians, including two children, and injured many others. At least
15,000 people have been displaced.
Turning to Al-Hol, a security operation that concluded on 1 April resulted in the
detention of more than 100 camp residents. That exercise also forced the temporary
suspension of some humanitarian services. Insecurity at Al-Hol continues, however,
and at least two more people have been killed since that security operation. As the
Secretary-General has said, we are seeing a collective failure to protect women and
children at Al-Hol and other camps and places of detention in north-east Syria. Tens of
thousands of children are growing up in desperate and really scandalous conditions.
So, again, I join the Secretary-General in urging relevant Member States, rapidly
and safely, to allow for the voluntary repatriation of their nationals, as required by
international law and standards.
Objects that are indispensable for civilians’ survival must also be protected,
and I and others briefed the Council on that yesterday (see S/2021/415).
I want to update you on the situation at the Allouk water station. The water
supply has again been interrupted almost consistently for the past two weeks. That
affects close to half a million people in Al-Hasakah, including in Al-Hol camp. The
United Nations has now recorded more than 20 such interruptions over the past year.
Humanitarian agencies are trucking more than 3,000 cubic metres of water
every day to the area, but this is not enough to meet people’s essential needs,
particularly as the area battles, like many other parts of Syria, increasing numbers
of COVID-19 cases. I therefore call again for a sustainable solution to keep water
flowing at Allouk. Any solution must include safe and regular access for technical
teams to the station and to the electrical installations that it relies on.
My next point relates to humanitarian access. In north-west Syria, millions
of people remain pressed up against the border in an active war zone, dependent on
aid that is delivered across the border from Turkey. Our data show those people are
worse off now than they were nine months ago.
Every month, the cross-border operation reaches some 2.4 million people,
who depend on it for food, medicines, shelter and other vital supplies. A failure to
extend the cross-border authorization would sever this lifeline. I made my appeal to
the Council on that earlier in my briefing, alongside Geir and the Secretary-General.
We cannot, under current conditions, substitute for the cross-border channel.
We are continuing to engage with the parties to deploy a first cross-line humanitarian
convoy into north-west Syria. A revised concept of operations for that convoy and
the delivery was presented in March. It has not yet been rejected, but nor have the
operational details of the proposed mission been agreed by everybody. Consultations
therefore continue to try to address parties’ reservations, including on the question
of how aid would be distributed once the convoy reaches the places intended.
In the north-east, hostilities in and around Qamishli and Al-Hasakah, which
I mentioned earlier, are affecting operations as well. Twenty-five trucks containing
21-058117/46

S/2021/418

food rations have been stuck at a checkpoint outside Qamishli since 23 April. That
kind of disruption is really unacceptable, and another example of the challenging
operating environment humanitarian organizations face in north-east Syria.
While the United Nations has scaled up cross-line deliveries, needs continue to
outstrip our ability to respond. Many medical facilities remain short of the necessary
supplies and equipment, as I articulated last month in more detail (see S/2021/315).
Overall, the situation has worsened since the removal of the Al-Yarubiyah authorized
border crossing in January 2020.
Let me turn now to Rukban. Preparations are under way for United Nationssupported voluntary departures to Syrian Government-held areas. This month, the
Government approved the use of Al-Dweir, in rural Damascus, as a COVID-19
quarantine centre, and that does pave the way for those who choose to leave.
The assessment in the camp itself is, meanwhile, pretty dark. There has been
no humanitarian assistance delivered to the estimated 12,000 people in Rukban from
the Government-held areas since December 2019.
Geir touched on the issue of sanctions. I again echo what he said. I note again
the public assurances by the United States and by the European Union that their
sanctions programmes do not ban the flow of humanitarian supplies to Syria, and that
they are committed to fully and expeditiously applying humanitarian exemptions.
Unfortunately, we see the impact of sanctions on humanitarian operations in
the form of overcompliance with the measures put in place, including in the financial
sector. More than half of the international NGOs that are operating out of Damascus
have reported serious problems with their banking requirements this year. I therefore
encourage the relevant Member States to work closely with the NGOs and the banks
alike to try to resolve these problems.
Finally, I will say just a few words on the assistance we are delivering through
the United Nations and the agencies we work with across Syria.
At the fifth Brussels conference, to which Geir eluded, co-chaired by the
United Nations and the European Union on 30 March, pledges of $4.4 billion were
made to provide assistance in Syria and the region this year. Those contributions
help us sustain what is a massive humanitarian operation coordinated by the United
Nations in Syria. It reaches currently around 7.7 million people every month all over
the country.
But much more is needed. Humanitarian organizations were aiming to deliver
assistance to 12.3 million people in Syria this year. It is really vital that they receive
the additional resources and the access necessary to enable them to do so.

8/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 3
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings. In addition to their briefings and the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/390), I would like to highlight the following points.
First, the United Nations should continue its good offices and adhere to the
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process. The international community should
step up its efforts to seek a political solution and push for a swift end to the Syrian
crisis. China calls on all parties in Syria to closely engage and consult Special
Envoy Pedersen and reach consensus on the arrangements for the sixth round of
Constitutional Committee meetings as soon as possible. In its work, the Constitutional
Committee should remain independent and free from outside interference. China has
noted Syria’s announcement that it will hold general elections next month. China
calls on the international community to respect the sovereignty of Syria and the
choice of its people. The future and destiny of Syria must be determined by the
Syrian people themselves.
Ending external occupation and eliminating terrorist forces are necessary
security conditions for a political solution to the Syrian crisis. Many Council
members are concerned about terrorist activities within Syria and the risk of their
spillover. The international community should work together, in accordance with
international law and Council resolutions, to combat terrorist forces in Syria.
Secondly, the international community should enhance the relevance of
humanitarian relief in Syria and effectively alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people. The complex humanitarian challenges facing Syria today are highlighted
by soaring food prices, oil shortages and the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). United Nations agencies need to scale up food aid and help Syria
maintain its agro-infrastructure, such as water and power supplies. China supports
the United Nations in providing vaccines to Syria through the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility, and China’s shipment of COVID-19 vaccines arrived in the
Syrian capital, Damascus, on 24 April. Hopefully, the timely injection of vaccination
will help curb the spread of the pandemic in Syria.
Impacted by unilateral sanctions and economic blockades, Syria is suffering
from a severe shortage of oil, and many gas stations have been forced to shut down
because of low fuel supplies. China urges the countries concerned to heed the calls
of the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the broad membership to immediately lift unilateral sanctions against Syria.
Thirdly, the United Nations should respect the status and the role of the
Syrian Government and continuously improve the delivery of humanitarian relief to
Syria. China welcomes the positive progress made in cross-line humanitarian relief
operations. In March, the World Health Organization delivered over 470,000 medical
treatments through the cross-line modality to civilians in the north-east. According
to the Syrian Government, the Syrian side has approved the cross-line humanitarian
deliveries to its north-west, but the United Nations convoy has yet to make the trip.
The Syrian Government wants to know exactly what has hindered the cross-line
deliveries to the north-west, who is to blame and what to do next. These issues and
concerns deserve attention and warrant a response.
We hope that the United Nations, by making full use of existing border
crossings, will continue to scale up cross-line humanitarian-relief operations and
open up cross-line transport routes throughout Syria as soon as possible.
21-058119/46

S/2021/418

In conclusion, I wish to stress that China remains committed to playing a
constructive role in taking forward the political process, restoring peace and stability
in Syria and alleviating the suffering of the Syrian people.

10/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria.
Our briefers highlighted multiple challenges that Syria will face today and in
the near future. On the humanitarian front, millions of people have been deprived
of their homes and livelihoods. The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
resulted in another set of problems, putting in danger the most vulnerable groups
and hampering the overall humanitarian response. Unfortunately, the promises of
replacing cross-border deliveries with cross-line aid still fall short. Cross-line aid
is dysfunctional, irregular and unreliable. This is a fact that cannot be overlooked.
In this light, maintaining cross-border aid deliveries in July remains our utmost
duty. Sustainable, long-term, cross-border humanitarian response ensures that all
Syrian people will receive necessary food items, medicine and COVID-19 vaccines.
Reaching a nationwide ceasefire and unhindered humanitarian access to all those in
need are imperatives during the pandemic. I express my gratitude to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its continued efforts on the
ground in Syria, where 4.9 million people were reached with assistance in February
and March. I thank OCHA for its dedication and professionalism.
The economic situation remains fragile, as corruption, warlordism and intracommunal fighting continue across the country. The safe and dignified return
of refugees is still not possible. Broader regional dynamics are also at play. The
weakening of neighbouring economies has resulted in substantial losses for Syria,
where businesses have historically been strongly interlinked with those in Lebanon
and elsewhere.
Looking at the political front, numerous challenges persist. The Syrian
Constitutional Committee talks in Geneva have not enabled genuine dialogue. The
proposed presidential elections in May further undermine the political process.
The legitimate claims of the Syrian opposition must be taken into account
when looking at the future of Syria. Estonia and other European Union member
States support free and fair elections in Syria, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015), under United Nations supervision, with all Syrians, including members of the
diaspora, eligible to participate. Anything else would be considered yet another farce.
As the Constitutional Committee keeps underdelivering, Estonia encourages
the Special Envoy to explore additional confidence-building measures, which could
bring the Government and its legitimate opposition closer to each other in the interest
of all Syrian people.
Most importantly, we believe that meaningful steps with regard to arbitrarily
detained people could benefit the conflicting sides. I reiterate the call of Estonia and
the European Union concerning the need to create an international mechanism to
locate missing people or their remains. There must be accountability for the many
war crimes and crimes against humanity, and an end to impunity. We demand the
release of all arbitrarily detained people, especially women, children and the elderly.
Estonia and the European Union remain committed to finding a lasting and
credible political solution to the conflict in Syria. We encourage all international
actors to support the Syrian people in achieving those aims, which are set out in
resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).

21-0581111/46

S/2021/418

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I thank the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, and Mr. Mark Lowcock for
their briefings.
The Syrian conflict is far from over. France is concerned about the continuation
of hostilities across the country. The risk of a resurgence of Da’esh is worrying. The
chronic instability in the areas recaptured by the regime is proof that there will be
no lasting stabilization without a political solution.
As the month of Ramadan has begun, France reiterates its call for a nationally
verifiable cessation of hostilities under the auspices of the United Nations, in
accordance with the calls made by the Secretary-General and the resolutions of the
Security Council.
Indeed, the humanitarian situation is worsening every day. More than 12
million Syrians are food-insecure. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continues to spread. In the north-east, the number of cases has increased by 57 per
cent in one month. The first shipment, last week, of COVID-19 vaccines under the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility is positive. It is essential to
ensure equitable access to the vaccine, including in the north-east and the north-west.
International humanitarian law must be respected by all, not only in terms of
the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, but also
with respect to ensuring full humanitarian access. The systematic blocking of aid by
the regime shows that there is no alternative to the cross-border mechanism. France
is determined that the mechanism should be renewed for 12 months, wherever it
saves lives, in accordance with the Secretary-General’s call.
Progress in the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) must be made in
order to overcome the current deadlock. It is time for the Constitutional Committee
to finally work on drafting the constitutional reform. The regime must demonstrate
its willingness to participate in good faith in negotiations.
France urges the Special Envoy to work on the implementation of the other
aspects of resolution 2254 (2015) and to report on them, clearly indicating to the
Council where the bottlenecks lie.
We must now prepare for the holding of free, inclusive and transparent
elections, under United Nations supervision and in which the diaspora will be able
to take part, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015). France will not recognize any
validity in the elections planned by the regime to take place at the end of May. They
will not meet the criteria previously listed and will be held under the sole control of
the regime, without international supervision. Progress should also be made on the
issue of those detained in regime jails and of missing persons. Nothing can justify
the lack of progress in that respect.
There can be no peace without justice. France, along with its partners, will
tirelessly pursue its fight against impunity for the crimes committed in Syria. The
Secretary-General’s latest report on violations committed against children once
again establishes the overwhelming responsibility of the regime and the forces
supporting it, especially for attacks on hospitals and schools.
France will continue to support international mechanisms to fight impunity
and will pursue its efforts in the framework of the International Partnership against
Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons.
12/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

The adoption a week ago by a large majority of a decision to take measures as
a consequence of Syria’s failure to comply with its international obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention is an important step. The actions taken in courts
across Europe are also aimed at bringing to justice the perpetrators of the crimes
committed by the regime.
In the absence of a credible political settlement, France and its partners will
remain steadfast in their position on reconstruction, normalization and sanctions,
and will continue to work with all those who want a political solution to the crisis.

21-0581113/46

S/2021/418

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir O. Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their comprehensive briefings today.
The political track has not seen any major development since our last
discussions. The Special Envoy has a continued engagement with all important
stakeholders to push for an early convening of the sixth meeting of the drafting
body of the Syrian Constitutional Committee. The outcome of that meeting will
be crucial to the credibility of the political process. It is therefore important that
all three groups have a clear understanding of the procedure and the topics. In that
regard, we welcome the proposals made by the Special Envoy. We hope that all three
sides will cooperate with the Special Envoy to agree on the modalities of the next
meeting. An agreement on the procedure to be followed in the meeting is necessary.
As we have said before, the Syrian conflict is both deeply politicized and
internationalized. We have major foreign Powers involved with stakes in the
conflict. We also have several independent parallel political tracks. We welcome
those parallel initiatives while underscoring the centrality of the United Nations-led
political process. The parallel tracks must feed into that process. In that regard, we
support the engagement of Special Envoy with all stakeholders.
For the United Nations-led political track to move forward, we need cooperation
among all major stakeholders in the conflict. Constructive international diplomacy is
the need of the hour to bridge existing divides by focusing on mutual and reciprocal
steps. That has become difficult to achieve in the current context, since there does
not seem to be any degree of understanding among the major stakeholders. We would
like to underline again that there cannot be externally imposed solutions to the
conflict. The polarization has only hardened the resolve of all sides, which seem to
be acting at cross-purposes. We believe that there must be unity of purpose focusing
on helping the people of Syria. If we are serious about achieving progress, we need
to have greater convergence of views and act to strengthen the hand of the Special
Envoy. If we do not act now to save the United Nations-led political process, that
process may become marginalized.
The Syrian conflict and the division between the stakeholders have been taken
advantage of by terrorists, which has contributed to the rise of terrorism in Syria
and neighbouring countries. The latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/390)
dwells on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We express
our serious concern over the increased terrorist activity on Syrian soil. Further, it
is a matter of deep concern for all that the mercenaries are finding their way into
other conflict zones, including in Africa. That needs to be addressed with a high
degree of seriousness. It is imperative that all parties adhere to their international
obligations to fight terrorism and terrorist organizations in Syria, as designated by
the Security Council.
India firmly believes that long-term security and stability in the region can
be achieved only by preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We
also remain convinced that there can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict
and reaffirm our commitment to advancing a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, United
Nations-facilitated political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Today’s briefing has once again highlighted the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria. The decade-long conflict has had a devastating effect on the people of Syria.
We are deeply concerned at the alarming statistics provided at the Office for the
14/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs briefing last week. An estimated half-million
people have died, millions have been displaced, both internally and externally,
the health infrastructure has collapsed, and children have been deprived of basic
education. Women, children and youth have especially been deeply impacted. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further aggravated the humanitarian
situation. The economic crisis in Syria has pushed its people to the brink of disaster.
We hope that the announcements made at the fifth Brussels donors conference last
month will bring some respite to the population affected.
Let me reiterate once again that there is an urgent need to increase
humanitarian assistance to all Syrians throughout the country without discrimination
or politicization or any preconditions.
What we need immediately is an active engagement that is both consistent with
Syrian independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty and addresses the urgency
of the prevailing humanitarian issues in order to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people. There is also an urgent need for concrete steps to address the hurdles that
are obstructing the functioning of both cross-border and cross-line operations, in
particular the delays in granting the requisite approvals to humanitarian aid convoys.
We need both sides to make that happen.
As we have mentioned in our earlier statements on Syria, India has extended
developmental assistance and human-resource development support to Syria
regularly. These include lines of credit for developmental projects, supplies of
medicine and food, artificial-limb fitment camps and capacity-building training
programmes for Syrian nationals. Recently Syria also received a consignment of
India’s COVID-19 vaccines. We reiterate our steadfast commitment to continuing
those initiatives in support of the people of Syria.

21-0581115/46

S/2021/418

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason, on behalf of Norway
and Ireland
Today I make this statement on behalf of the co-penholders of the Syrian
humanitarian file, Norway and Ireland. My statement will be a little longer than
usual, so I ask you to give us some forbearance. We would also like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and, of
course, the Special Envoy, Geir Pedersen, for the briefings we have just heard.
We have heard the plain facts from Mark Lowcock just now, and we have heard
from the Secretary-General about the immense scale of the humanitarian crisis in
Syria and the critical role of humanitarian operations in alleviating that need. The
figures illustrate a catastrophic situation for many millions of Syrians. Nine in 10
Syrians now live in poverty, with 60 per cent of the population at risk of going
hungry this year. Those are the worst numbers in the history of the Syrian conflict.
In spite of the fragile ceasefire in parts of Syria, violence continues to cause
deaths and injuries to civilians, including children and humanitarian workers.
We note with great concern the appalling abuses outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on children and armed conflict in Syria (S/2020/525) and condemn
the reports of grave violations against children.
As humanitarian co-penholders, we are notably concerned at the alarming
reports of 137 verified incidents of denial of humanitarian access, including 49
attacks on humanitarian facilities, personnel and transports; 46 attacks on water
facilities; and 42 instances of deliberate denial of humanitarian access.
We condemn the recent killing of two humanitarian workers in an armed
attack in south-east rural Deir ez-Zor. That underlines once again the obligation of
all parties to the conflict to respect international humanitarian law. We also urge all
parties to heed the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate ceasefire and end
to hostilities.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has exacerbated the suffering of the
Syrian people, and we are especially concerned about the impact on vulnerable
people living in densely populated camps with minimal access to essential health
services. Hundreds of health facilities have been attacked and destroyed over the
course of the conflict, leaving the country ill-equipped to cope with the surging
toll of COVID cases. We welcome the allocation of vaccines to Syria through the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, as well as the plans in place to
distribute those vaccines during 2021. Humanitarian needs are particularly acute in
the north-west, where 3.4 million people are in need. That is 21 per cent more than
last year.
Ireland and Norway’s position is clear: we support any and every modality
that will ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to those in need.
We fully support all efforts to put in place a cross-line support mission to
north-western Syria. We call on all parties to engage constructively and in a spirit of
compromise to ensure that this important mission can proceed.
We must be clear, however, that the size and scope of the United Nations
cross-border operation required to meet the vast scale of humanitarian need cannot
currently be replicated by cross-line convoys. The United Nations-mandated crossborder operation in north-west Syria reaches almost 85 per cent of people in need
every month. Without that sustained and predictable access, civilian suffering in the
16/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

north-west would rise to levels not seen in 10 years of conflict, further driving the
level of instability in Syria and the region.
Furthermore, many non-governmental organizations rely on United Nations
operational support for logistics and procurement. Access to life-saving items such
as COVID-19 vaccines is directly dependent on that operation. Finally, it is worth
noting that the United Nations cross-border operation is one of the most heavily
scrutinized and monitored aid operations anywhere in the world. The United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism guarantees the humanitarian nature of all deliveries and
ensures a robust humanitarian operation based on transparency and accountability.
For those reasons, the provision of United Nations support through the border
crossing at Bab al-Hawa, as a minimum, must continue. The immense humanitarian
needs clearly demonstrate that resolution 2533 (2020) must be renewed.
Without the vital humanitarian assistance channelled through Bab al-Hawa,
efforts to reduce hunger, build resilience and ensure access to health care will falter
and fail. People are worse off now than 10 months ago, when the previous crossborder resolution was negotiated, including in the north-east after the closure of
Al-Yarubiyah.
In addition, while we welcome the initial delivery of COVAX vaccines in
Syria, without sustained access to critical supplies, COVID-19 will continue to
spread within Syria and beyond its borders, and more lives will be lost. We simply
must all work together to prevent such a catastrophe.
As humanitarian co-penholders, Norway and Ireland will continue to support
all efforts to ensure that humanitarian assistance continues to reach all those in
need in Syria. We will work closely with all of you on the Council in support of
that objective.

21-0581117/46

S/2021/418

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
Given that this meeting combines both political and humanitarian agenda items,
I will now briefly say a few words in my national capacity about the political situation.
I once again thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing today. We note with regret and
disappointment the Syrian authorities’ lack of substantive engagement thus far in the
work of the Constitutional Committee and hope that the response the Special Envoy
referred to this morning is a positive one. Despite his intense efforts, intransigence
continues to frustrate the possibilities for real progress in the Committee. The results
of the Committee’s work continue to fall far short of the legitimate expectations of
all the Syrian people.
On 22 April, the Secretary-General released his report on children and
armed conflict in Syria (S/2021/390), documenting the terrible scale of grave
violations committed against children. More than 2,700 children were verified as
killed or maimed in that two-year reporting period alone. Ireland condemns the
unconscionable violations against children committed by all parties to the conflict
and urges all to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Those parties and those with influence over them
must take immediate actions to protect innocent Syrian children.
Ireland calls on all parties to take concrete and effective measures to prevent
and end child casualties in the conduct of hostilities. The recruitment of children
simply must cease, and all children should be unconditionally released from the
ranks of all armed groups.
The plight of families left to suffer without information about their missing
loved ones is another cruel and a brutal form of collective punishment. It is especially
concerning that persistently high numbers of children are detained for alleged
associations with conflict. Children caught up in conflict must be treated primarily
as victims. The parties must provide comprehensive information on, and access to,
all detainees, particularly children. They must identify non-custodial alternatives
for children and release them. Child protection actors simply must have access to
detained children. We fully support Mr. Pedersen’s continued efforts on detainees,
abductees and missing persons.
In Ireland, we strongly believe in the centrality of education as a building
block for progress of society. Attacks on schools and their use for military purposes
are reprehensible and must end. Children in areas controlled by armed groups
should have access to a recognized curriculum. All parties should remove practical
obstacles to education in areas under their control. Every child should be allowed
to enjoy their natural right to education, in accordance with their best interests and
hopes for a better future.
Accountability for violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law is essential. Ireland commends the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for their work in
that regard. Their reports and others, including from civil society, testify to horrific
crimes, including the bombing of hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure.
Ireland clearly condemns such acts, in particular the attacks carried out on
the hospital near Atarib and on humanitarian infrastructure near Bab Al-Hawa on 21
March, as well as attacks against civil society and human rights defenders.
18/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Finally, it is past time for the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility
and call on the Syrian authorities to engage meaningfully within the Constitutional
Committee and, importantly, with the wider political process, as outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015). The Council should also insist that the Syrian authorities
comply with their obligations under international law and end brutal policies so that
the people of Syria can live their lives in freedom and without fear.

21-0581119/46

S/2021/418

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings on the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
Kenya welcomes joint meetings on the political and humanitarian situations and their
combined insights into the condition of the Syrian people. The overriding interest of
Kenya is in the safety, well-being and peace of the people of Syria.
Politically, Kenya reaffirms its unequivocal support for a Syrian-led andowned dialogue intended to achieve a sustainable political solution to the protracted
conflict. It is therefore regrettable that a return to discussions in the Constitutional
Committee has gained no traction. We encourage such constitutional discussions,
which, as stated by the Special Envoy, will be a significant door-opener and
will demonstrate the commitment of the parties to a successful outcome. These
discussions will raise the hopes of the people that at long last there may be an end to
the nightmare that has engulfed so much of their country. As a crucial confidencebuilding step, the issues of detainees and enforced disappearances must be resolved.
On a positive note, we commend the Special Envoy’s continued engagement
with the diverse group of women on the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board — a
welcome step towards much-needed bottom-up solutions.
On the security situation, Kenya notes with grave concern the unabated
mutual shelling and air strikes. It is important that all parties adhere to the
nationwide ceasefire, renew their commitment to the cessation of hostilities and
exercise maximum restraint. They should also adhere to their obligations under
international law.
Kenya categorically condemns terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Shams and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and firmly opposes all attempts to
grant them legitimacy as political actors.
Kenya further notes that the interplay of foreign interests and geopolitical
competition complicates the situation and serves only to derail the focus on the
suffering people of Syria. It is important that the international community speak in
one voice in the interest of the Syrian people.
We are gravely concerned about the growing frequency of deadly attacks
against civilians and humanitarian workers. We reiterate the fundamental need to
protect civilians and humanitarian workers, as well as the need to hold all perpetrators
to account.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, the fact that 13.4 million Syrian people
are in dire need of aid is alarming. When compounded with the challenges related to
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the situation is likely to get worse.
The President of the General Assembly’s visit to Syria early this month
confirmed that the Organization’s cross-border aid deliveries into Syria are critical
and that they have made it possible for the United Nations to roll out vaccines
through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility. These vaccines will also be
administered through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. We understand, however, that the
current needs exceed the ongoing humanitarian response.
In some situations, like the Allouk water station, primary water sources
for hundreds of people have not been functioning for a while. Special attention
should be paid to such critical infrastructure to alleviate suffering and possible
waterborne diseases.
20/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Furthermore, we must shed light on the potential for radicalization within
camps. Kenya believes it is important for the Security Council to be seized of the
importance of supporting terrorist disengagement programmes, which should be
delivered at sufficient scale within the camps. In addition, we call on the countries
concerned to repatriate their citizens from said camps and prioritize disengagement
capabilities and capacity-building.
Faced with this grim humanitarian picture, the onus is on us, as the Security
Council, to ensure that these vital principled humanitarian operations are unimpeded
so that they can reach those most in need. The Government should also work towards
a negotiated solution for aid to be administered in north-west Syria in order to meet
the significant needs of the population.
As the vanguard of international peace and security, the Security Council
should reaffirm the Syrian people by giving them hope and an opportunity to dream
of a bright future free from conflict. That can be accomplished only by working
together to facilitate the long-desired consensus towards a political solution and a
constructive dialogue.

21-0581121/46

S/2021/418

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Mexico to
the United Nations, Alicia Buenrostro Massieu
[Original: Spanish]
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their clear briefings.
Mexico welcomes the Special Envoy’s efforts to keep channels of dialogue
with civil society open as an important and integral sector of Syrian political life. In
that regard, we highlight the meeting convened in March jointly by the Office of the
Special Envoy and the European External Action Service with civil society actors,
who expressed their support for a political process facilitated by the United Nations,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), the urgency of the cessation of military activities
and respect for the unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
Regular elections are a fundamental element of every democracy. In that
regard, we specifically recall the parameters set out in resolution 2254 (2015), which
is very clear on the organization of elections in Syria. These must be carried out in
accordance with the highest international standards on the basis of a new constitution
and with broad citizen participation, including from the diaspora. Mexico calls for
these requirements to be met.
The meetings of the Constitutional Committee also represent one of the
main confidence-building measures between the parties. We call on the delegations
representing the Government and the opposition to participate constructively and
meaningfully in these deliberations. My country, Mexico, reiterates the importance
of these meetings having credible goals, viable working methods and clearly defined
timetables. We urge the co-Chairs to work together in a serious and committed
manner to draft a work plan for the Committee’s next meeting.
Another element covered by resolution 2254 (2015) is the release of detained
persons. Mexico considers this issue and the investigation into disappeared persons
to be central to the political transition. We could explore alternative avenues
dedicated to clarifying these situations, such as the mechanism proposed by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Accountability and the fight
against impunity are the fundamental pillars of any political solution.
Regarding the humanitarian situation, the arrival of the first shipment of vaccines
by the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility mechanism, as highlighted here, is
an encouraging development. In order for the COVID-19 vaccination plans to develop
effectively, humanitarian access needs to be secure, expeditious and unimpeded.
Given the challenge of providing services to mitigate the needs of the
population, it is a priority for the members of the Security Council to focus on
strengthening and expanding humanitarian access. Mexico echoes the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report (S/2021/390) in calling for the renewal of the crossborder humanitarian assistance mechanism for another 12 months. Let us remember
that, in the absence of the cross-border mechanism, there would be no way to deliver
COVID-19 vaccines to north-west Syria, and it would be difficult to continue the
food distribution carried out by the World Food Programme. All access modalities
are complementary and necessary in order to save lives.
In conclusion, it is urgent to address the needs of the population and to take
firm steps towards a political solution in Syria. The renewal of the border mechanism
will undoubtedly contribute to alleviating the suffering of the population.
22/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 11
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings on the Syrian crisis. I also welcome the participation of
the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey in this meeting.
After over a year and a half of its existence and five rounds of negotiations,
the Syrian Constitutional Committee is struggling to produce tangible results to
effectively start work on the future constitution of Syria. The parties involved are
sticking to their positions, setting preconditions and becoming more radical as the
country continues to spiral downward, causing more and more unbearable suffering
for the people, who are tired of almost a decade of conflict.
My delegation shares the frustration and disappointment of the Special Envoy
and all those who are genuinely working to find a negotiated and lasting solution to
this crisis. We call on the Syrian parties to pull together and show a minimum level
of compromise in order to break this deadlock and thus truly put the political process
on track. Only an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue reflecting the will of the Syrian
people will lead to a peaceful and long-term solution in Syria.
My delegation therefore endorses the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for the
sixth session to be different from its predecessors — with clear objectives, credible
working methods and enhanced cooperation by the co-Chairs.
We remain convinced that progress in the work of the Constitutional
Commission and in the cessation of hostilities must go hand in hand with other
aspects of the crisis, such as an end to external interference, including support for
armed groups, and the plundering of Syrian resources.
The Niger takes note of the announcement made by the Syrian Government on
the organization of presidential elections scheduled for 26 May.
On the security front, we are particularly concerned about the resurgence
of hostilities in Syria, especially in the north-west. The Niger condemns the use of
civilian facilities for military purposes, as well as the raids against them, like the
recent attack on the Atarib Surgical Hospital, which resulted in the deaths of civilians
and the closure of the facility. The increase in violent incidents, as documented and
verified by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in the
de-escalation zone and elsewhere in the country, including in Al-Hol camp, are acts
that will make the work of humanitarians increasingly difficult and dangerous and
will add to the suffering of the civilian population, including women and children.
However, we recognize the right of the Syrian Government to fight terrorism on
its territory, especially in view of the rise in assassination attempts and attacks
perpetrated by Da’esh against Government officials and the Government’s critical
facilities.
Finally, with regard to the humanitarian situation, the deliberate destruction of
food stocks and/or convoys and the water supply system is unacceptable. The delivery
of humanitarian assistance must not be hindered or held hostage to any geopolitical
calculation, but rather must be carried out according to the principles of impartiality,
independence, neutrality and humanity. At a time when Syria is going through its
worst economic crisis as a result of the cumulative effects of almost a decade of war,
unilateral sanctions and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we call on
all concerned to show compassion, especially in this holy month, to allow for the
21-0581123/46

S/2021/418

unimpeded and effective delivery of aid through border crossings and across border
lines into Syria. In these circumstances, it is feared that, if the authorization for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance is not renewed in July, the aftermath will be
even more dire for the population.
Niger welcomes the start of vaccinations against COVID-19 in Syria, including
in the north-west of the country. The World Health Organization must accelerate the
delivery of the remaining quota allocated to Syria under the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access mechanism to allow for an effective vaccination campaign throughout
the country. As the Syrian people continue to face this multifaceted humanitarian
crisis, we urge the donor community to continue to assist the Syrian people in
line with the commitments made at the fifth donor conference, which was held in
Brussels last month.

24/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I make this statement on the Syrian political situation in my national capacity
and will begin by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing.
We commend him and his team’s tireless work with the Syrian parties — and
the international community — to seek progress towards a political solution and the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That is certainly not an easy task, but it is
a very important one.
For Norway, it is particularly good to hear that the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board was finally able to meet in person this week. We have supported the Board’s
work and inclusion from the beginning and would re-emphasize its critical role in
the political process.
Even though there have been no new meetings of the Constitutional Committee
since our last Council meeting on the political situation in Syria (see S/2021/265), we
know that a great deal of work has been done. The two Chairs, their delegations and
the middle third component of the small body of the Constitutional Committee have
made efforts to move forward and prepare for the next meeting. We support Special
Envoy Pedersen’s demands for concrete results in the next round of negotiations.
Further, we urge the parties to contribute to the process in good faith and in a
constructive way. The constitutional process must move forward with the aim of
starting the drafting of a reformed constitution for Syria. However, the constitutional
process must be part of a larger effort towards a political solution in the country.
It is not enough that solely the Syrian parties negotiate. Broader international
engagement is needed, in particular from those involved on the ground. We support
the Special Envoy’s call for a new international format to find a solution. We need
a different dynamic to move away from the current stalemate, which is benefiting
neither the Syrian people nor the region. We heard again today how extremely
difficult the situation is on the ground. Although it is less violent than in earlier
stages of the conflict, the situation remains fragile. Every week there is active
fighting and violence.
Resolution 2254 (2015) called for a nationwide ceasefire — one that, sadly, is
still very much needed — and we will continue to urge its full implementation. We
remain concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is still operating and
able to carry out attacks. We are also concerned that the issue of arbitrarily detained
persons remains unaddressed. The release of those arbitrarily detained, especially
women and children, is crucial both for the sake of the Syrian people and for being
a confidence-building measure. We call on the Syrian authorities to take steps to
address this issue, as a measure of good will and in line with their international
legal obligations.
The importance of an inclusive political process cannot be underestimated.
Experience shows that the inclusion of those who are the most affected by a conflict
leads to the best results. In this respect, the inclusion of women in all political talks
is essential, and the role of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board remains vital. I
would also like to highlight and commend the role being played by middle third
component of the small body of the Constitutional Committee and the Syrian Civil
Society Support Room, and the support of these two entities to the peace process.
Syrian elections have now been announced. According to resolution 2254
(2015), elections should be held based on a reformed constitution, agreed between
the Syrian parties, and free and fair for all Syrians. In this respect, we would like to
21-0581125/46

S/2021/418

have seen resolution 2254 (2015) honoured and elections held based on a reformed
constitution. It is regrettable that the drafting of a new constitution has not yet started.
In closing, we know that progress on the political track is the key to a sustainable
peace in Syria — a peace with human rights and rule of law at its core. A political
solution remains vital to reducing the huge humanitarian needs, to development, to
the return of refugee and to stability. We — and, above all, the people of Syria —
need to see progress on this file. It is long overdue.

26/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
Before addressing the agenda of today’s meeting via video-teleconference, I
would like to express our concern over the fact that the Security Council is again
using the online format to host a discussion of important issues related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, which we believe is unjustified. It
is well known that the Security Council Chamber at United Nations Headquarters
is a safe environment. The Council held more than 10 in-person meetings there
during the Russian presidency of the Council in October 2020. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) situation in New York today is far better than it was back then.
Excessive precautions by some of our colleagues may cast an unflattering light upon
us as compared to our colleagues in the General Assembly, who have been convened
regularly — and in person — in the General Assembly Hall. Nothing prevents us
from doing the same. With that in mind, we call upon the ongoing Vietnamese
presidency, as well as the incoming Chinese presidency, to take practical steps to
transfer our work to an in-person mode in the Security Council Chamber.
We thank Geir Pedersen and Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
The state of affairs in Syria remains complicated. Even though there is some
relative stability holding on the ground, the country has seen a deterioration of its
socioeconomic and humanitarian situation, prompted by the unyielding sanctions
pressure imposed by the collective West. The direst of situations has come to pass in
the north-west, north and north-east of the country— the territory that is outside the
control of the Syrian Government. These areas are the responsibility of the de facto
occupying Powers and local authorities.
We are concerned at the continuing inter-ethnic clashes in the trans-Euphrates
region. Conflicts between Kurds and local Arab communities have escalated because
of the foreign occupation of these areas. Israel’s failure to stop air strikes on Syrian
territory are a further destabilizing factor.
On the political track, we have not slackened in our efforts aimed at helping
a successful inter-Syrian dialogue. We remain in close contact with Special Envoy
Pedersen and the Syrian sides and encourage them to act constructively and look
for mutually acceptable solutions. We hope the Special Envoy will soon be able to
bring the Syrians together at a negotiations table in Geneva within the framework
of the sixth session of the small body of the Syrian Constitutional Committee. We
would recall that the process must be a Syrian-owned process; any interference or
imposition of conditions is unacceptable and can only be detrimental.
Syria will hold presidential elections in less than a month. Despite all the
difficulties, the Syrian authorities are making efforts to ensure that the State system
functions well. It is disconcerting that some countries are opposed to the very idea
of the imminent elections and have already labelled them illegitimate. We call for the
cessation of creating a negative-information atmosphere around the upcoming vote,
which has nothing to do with the work of the Constitutional Committee. Interference
in Syria’s internal affairs is unacceptable. It runs counter to the effective norms of
international law, as Special Envoy Pedersen confirmed today.
We take note of the comment made by the former United States Special
Representative for Syria Engagement, James Jeffrey, who held the post in the Trump
Administration, which appeared in the media earlier in April. Mr. Jeffrey admitted
that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is listed as a terrorist organization by the Security
21-0581127/46

S/2021/418

Council, was an important United States asset in Syrian affairs and was the least
bad option on Idlib. That is why Mr. Jeffrey thought this jihadist group was worth
supporting. I believe that that says it all; these revelations are in fact a return to
the logic of “good terrorists” and “bad terrorists”. It also shows how, when retired,
politicians can disclose the true rationale of actions of some of our partners in Syria.
As for the humanitarian situation in the country, we welcome the delivery
of the first imported batches of anti-COVID-19 vaccine in Syria last week. In this
context, it is vital to ensure that the vaccine is fairly distributed among all those who
need it. We trust that the Syrian Government will approach this matter responsibly.
Damascus has many times demonstrated its readiness to openly cooperate
with the United Nations. The recent report of the Secretary-General on humanitarian
developments in Syria in March and April this year (S/2021/390) clearly indicates
that the number of permits to perform humanitarian activities issued to the United
Nations personnel is rapidly growing. These permits enable the personnel to carry
out humanitarian operations in Government-controlled areas, including through the
World Health Organization operations in the trans-Euphrates region.
Much-needed medical assistance is reaching Syria’s north-east. But now an
expanding fuel crisis is impeding the work of humanitarian staff on the ground —
and this in a country rich with oilfields. Syria, the United Nations and its partner
non-governmental organizations may end up in a conundrum — the incoming
humanitarian aid risks being stuck in warehouses because there may be no fuel to
deliver it to end-users. Ironically, the fuel in question is that which the United States
occupation authorities are extracting from the Syrian subsoils in the north-east of
the country to their own advantage. This threatens to undermine the work of mobile
medical stations, about which Secretary-General Guterres speaks unambiguously
in his report. Are we to blame the Syrians for that as well? Or will our Western
colleagues have the courage to call a spade a spade?
With respect to the fifth donor conference in Brussels, which we will certainly
hear praised today, its organizers vaunt the substantial donor contributions. But from
the previous four donor conferences, we have seen that contributions are not the
main index for assessing the value of these conferences. It could hardly be otherwise,
since these conferences completely overlook the Syrian authorities, which is why the
Syrian people receive so little of the funds raised. Indeed, these conferences pay no
attention to the enormous serious problems that the country is facing in its recovery
after 10 years of direct foreign interference. It is a pity that the statement section
of the conference’s official website does not feature the address of the president of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, who speaks about
the devastated infrastructure of Aleppo and Raqqa and the sanctions that cause
suffering for all Syrians and deprive them of access to basic services and food.
Perhaps his statement is not posted because it does not fit into the paradigm of the
tired headlines boasting about the generosity of Western donors.
Recently, Russia’s Defence Ministry rescued 44 Russian children by air from
the Al-Hol and Roj camps for internally displaced persons. Work is now under way
to repatriate another 120 children. In the light of the deteriorating security situation
in these camps, the responsibility of States for repatriation of their nationals is
growing. We call on colleagues to boost efforts on this track, ensuring appropriate
conditions for their citizens, first and foremost women and children.
For an entire year we have seen no progress in the launching of a single
humanitarian convoy from Damascus to Idlib. We consider this to be sabotage plain
and simple, and we will take that into account when developing our position on the
pending extension of the cross-border mechanism in July this year. If for political
reasons our colleagues are unwilling to open a crossline humanitarian channel and
28/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

are ready to proceed solely via the cross-border mechanism, what commitment from
the Security Council to the territorial integrity of Syria are we talking about? To be
a party to such hypocrisy is to damage the image of the international humanitarianresponse system, which is intended to coordinate efforts to save people’s lives. We
must not turn a blind eye to the fact that the terrorists in Idlib, resourced from the
cross-border mechanism, are using the civilian population of the enclave as human
shields and do not let people exit this area and head for the Government-controlled
areas via the recently opened checkpoints.

21-0581129/46

S/2021/418

Annex 14
Statement by the Counsellor of the Permanent Mission of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations,
Diani Jimesha Prince
I too wish to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under Secretary-General
Lowcock for their informative briefings.
The restoration of peace and stability in Syria can only be achieved through
a credible and inclusive political process that reflects the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people. The success of this process requires an environment conducive
to cooperation and reconciliation. Accordingly, the country’s security situation is
closely linked to the viability and advancement of the process.
We are therefore deeply troubled by the reports of continued violence and
escalating tensions, particularly in the north-west, despite the appeals for a nationwide
ceasefire. We implore parties to exercise maximum restraint and to commit to a
complete cessation of hostilities to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure
and to ensure a sustained humanitarian response. On this point, we underscore
that all acts committed contrary to international law, including in the conduct of
counter-terrorism operations, must be condemned by the international community.
Accountability must remain a high priority.
Confidence-building measures are vital to the success of the wider political
process. Consequently, the issue of missing and detained persons should be urgently
addressed to foster goodwill. Further, conditions must be cultivated for the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
These conditions naturally include the reconstruction of Syria’s devastated critical
infrastructure so as to enable access to essential services and reduce vulnerabilities.
We once again appeal for the international community’s assistance in this regard.
We remain supportive of the Special Envoy’s determined efforts to facilitate
the wider political process. We appeal to parties to engage constructively and in a
spirit of compromise on the matter of the Constitutional Committee. We also reiterate
that the meaningful participation of women in the negotiation process is imperative
to ensure fair and balanced outcomes for all.
Syria’s moribund economy has exacerbated the country’s dire humanitarian
emergency and remains a cause for concern. At the same time, the continued
application of unilateral coercive measures has served only to intensify and
prolong the anguish of the Syrian people. For this reason, we appeal again for the
lifting of all unilateral coercive measures to assist Syria in facing these seemingly
insurmountable challenges.
The cross-border mechanism remains a lifeline for millions of Syrians in
need of humanitarian aid. The Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2021/390)
reinforces this reality and emphasizes the need to preserve and scale up both the
mechanism and the cross-line modality. This will optimize the humanitarian
response and provide timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian assistance
for the benefit of the Syrian people.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further complicated the
humanitarian crisis. Those persons forcibly displaced by 10 years of war and who
now reside in overcrowded IDP camps are especially at risk of contracting the virus.
The efficient and equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccines is therefore of critical
importance. We welcome the impending vaccine roll-out.
Persons who live and work in IDP camps must be afforded protection, dignity
and access to humanitarian aid. To this end, we remind authorities that activities
30/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

aimed at maintaining security in camps such as Al-Hol, where the security situation
is worsening, must never result in a suspension of humanitarian access or violations
of the rights of residents.
We urge parties to work together to achieve a sustainable solution to the issues
surrounding the Allouk water station. Interruptions cannot continue, as they leave
hundreds of thousands without its supply each time it ceases to function. Water
should not be weaponized, and objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population must never be rendered useless.
The international community must demonstrate respect for Syria’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. This obligates the withdrawal of unauthorized foreign forces
present in the country and regard for the perspectives of the Syrian Government in
all discussions.
As this conflict rages on and the humanitarian situation deteriorates, lives
are lost and are irreparably damaged. With over 13 million Syrians now in need of
humanitarian assistance — almost half of whom are children — there is desperate
need for a political resolution to this conflict. This is the only path to ensure lasting
peace and stability and the protection of the Syrian people.

21-0581131/46

S/2021/418

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I thank you, Mr. President, Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral and Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
At the outset, Tunisia reaffirms its unwavering position that the Syrian
crisis can be resolved only by reaching a political settlement that is Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned and facilitated by the United Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015), as that will end the human suffering of the Syrian people, meet its legitimate
aspirations, preserve the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and
restore peace and stability to Syria and the region.
Tunisia looks forward to progress being achieved on the political track once
the Constitutional Committee and its small body resume meeting regularly in
Geneva, starting with its sixth round in the next few weeks, ensuring the continuity
of its work. In that connection, we express our support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Pedersen to further organize and structure the Committee’s work.
We also urge the Syrian parties to put the interests of the Syrian people first
by being flexible and seeking common ground in order to establish a solid basis for
consensus on the contents of the Constitution and pursue the broader political process,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). More will have to be done to build the Syrian
parties’ trust with the support of the Security Council and the international community.
In view of the recent increase in tensions and violence in several parts of
Syria, the establishment of a ceasefire throughout Syria remains both an urgent
necessity and a long-term goal, in accordance with resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2254
(2015) and in response to the appeals of the Secretary-General and Special Envoy
Pedersen. In this context, we once again call on all parties to mitigate tensions and
work towards the restoration of overall calm in order to bring about the conditions
needed to improve the humanitarian situation and to create the safe, neutral and
stable environment required to move the political process forward.
We are deeply concerned about the proliferation of terrorist organizations and
the rise in attacks perpetrated by those organizations in Syria in recent weeks. We
stress that it is necessary to combat terrorist organizations that are on the Security
Council lists in an effective, collective and coordinated manner and in accordance
with international law. The effort to combat those organizations, in particular, Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and the Levant Liberation Organization,
which have taken safe haven in some parts of the country, is essential to any longterm political solution to the Syrian crisis and is a prerequisite to restoring security
and stability to Syria and the region.
My country remains deeply concerned about the continued deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Syria, which has affected various aspects of Syrian
life. Over the last decade, the factors at play have become more complex and the
suffering has intensified, causing interrelated crises in the areas of food, medicine,
vital infrastructure, basic materials and living conditions.
We reiterate that it is necessary to intensify humanitarian relief efforts
throughout Syria in order to meet the growing humanitarian need, address the risks of
malnutrition and famine and contain the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
by using the various access methods available, including cross-line and cross-border
access, in accordance with international law and international humanitarian law. We
32/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

therefore urge the parties concerned in north-western Syria to be flexible and find
common ground in order to reach an agreement on facilitating the first cross-line
humanitarian convoy in this drawn-out regional conflict.
We also reiterate that the parties must commit to ensuring that civilians,
essential civilian and medical facilities and medical and humanitarian workers are
protected; facilitating the prompt and unhindered delivery of humanitarian and
medical assistance to those in need without discrimination; and accelerating the
equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.
We look forward to the promotion of efforts to recover from the crisis and the
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic by establishing links between humanitarian and
development programmes, rehabilitating hospitals, schools, roads, water supply,
electricity and sanitation, while providing decent and sustainable livelihoods for Syrians.
Lastly, Tunisia looks forward to a negotiated and consensual solution that will
help revitalize the cross-border assistance system and allow a genuine collective will
to coalesce in the Security Council, enabling it to overcome the stalemate on Syria
and to make room to cooperate, seek common ground and put the interests of the
Syrian people first, without politicizing the issue. We are convinced that reaching
understandings within the Council on the humanitarian issue would have a positive
impact on the Syrian political process and bring us closer to the settlement which
we want to see.

21-0581133/46

S/2021/418

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
I thank our briefers: Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy
Pedersen. I would like to start by focusing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.
In February, the Security Council unanimously adopted and co-sponsored
resolution 2565 (2020), on global distribution of the coronavirus disease (COVID19)
vaccine in conflict situations. We agreed on the importance of bringing the Security
Council’s full weight to bear on ending this appalling pandemic. We recognized the
vital need for equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines. And we all acknowledged
the negative impact that any impediments, including on logistics, supply and
administration, could have on efforts to ensure that all people, no matter where they
lived, have access to the vaccine.
With resolution 2565 (2021) in mind, the United Kingdom welcomes the first
delivery to Syria of over 250,000 doses of the COVID-19 vaccine via the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility last week. This is a small, but important,
first step towards realizing the ambition of resolution 2565 (2021) across Syria.
Having pledged over $700 million in support, the United Kingdom played a leading
role in setting up the COVAX Facility. It is a vital tool towards ensuring the equitable
access we all called for just two months ago.
As we heard today, over 50,000 COVID-19 vaccines arrived in north-west
Syria via the mandated border crossing at Bab Al-Hawa last week. They will provide
a vital lifeline to health workers on the front line. So we express our utmost concern
at the predicted disruption, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2021/390) and by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock today, to future vaccine
deliveries in north-west Syria should the Security Council fail to renew the Bab AlHawa mandate. Such a failure would impede the global fight against COVID-19 and
contradict the Council’s own ambition, as set out in resolution 2565 (2021).
The United Nations has told us what it needs: a cross-border response for 12
more months. The life-saving aid currently provided via the crossing at Bab AlHawa also includes World Food Programme deliveries serving millions of people
and facilitates operations by non-governmental organizations that run services in
the areas of protection, health, water and sanitation.
The United Kingdom welcomes the United Nations continued efforts to
establish access into the north-west inside Syria. But we need to heed the SecretaryGeneral’s warnings: even if deployed regularly, cross-line convoys cannot replicate
the size and scope of the cross-border operation. The experience in Al-Yarubiyah,
where needs and supply shortages have risen since the border crossing was closed
last year, has demonstrated the importance of an “all modalities” approach driven
by humanitarian needs on the ground. It is clear that the Council must heed the calls
of Syrian people and humanitarians on the ground: the provision cross-border aid
commensurate with humanitarian needs.
On the political track, we welcome the Special Envoy’s ongoing efforts to
facilitate a sustainable resolution to the conflict. We join all other Council members
in re-emphasizing that the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) is the only
path to a sustainable solution to the crisis in Syria.
The core of that United Nations-facilitated Syrian-led process is the
establishment of a new constitution, followed by free and fair elections, administered
under supervision of the United Nations, pursuant to this new constitution. This
sequence was deliberate and designed to find an inclusive way forward for Syria
34/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

based on dialogue and cooperation among Syrians. Holding presidential elections at
the end of May under the previous constitution runs counter to this process and, at a
time when the Special Envoy is attempting to convene a sixth round of Constitutional
Committee talks, risks destabilizing his efforts.
Furthermore, elections that take place in the absence of a safe and neutral
environment, in an ongoing climate of fear, when millions of Syrians depend on
humanitarian aid, are displaced or living as refugees and are prevented from voting
and running for office, do not confer political legitimacy, but instead demonstrate
disregard for the Syrian people. Instead of prioritizing vanity elections, the regime
should focus on actively and genuinely participating in the implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015).

21-0581135/46

S/2021/418

Annex 17
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings.
The United States fully supports the work of the Special Envoy and his team
to broker a peaceful solution to the conflict in Syria. Unfortunately, after five rounds
of negotiations and despite the Special Envoy’s active diplomacy with all parties, the
Al-Assad regime has blocked the drafting of a new constitution. Failing to draft a
new constitution is a sad step backward for the Syrian people.
Last month, I told the General Assembly that we knew the Al-Assad regime
would plan to hold elections in May. I warned that those elections would be neither
free nor fair and would not be representative of the Syrian people. The failure to
enact a new constitution is proof positive that the so-called election on 26 May will
be a sham. As the Security Council has unanimously mandated, elections must occur
pursuant to a new constitution and under United Nations supervision. The Al-Assad
regime must take steps to enable the participation of refugees, internally displaced
person, and the diaspora in any Syrian elections. Until then, we will not be fooled.
A new constitution, though, is only one part of the political solution the entire
Council agreed on, including Russia. We can ask that the Special Envoy continue to
brief us on his efforts towards a nationwide ceasefire and the release of arbitrarily
detained Syrians. And as a reminder, the United States will not support any
reconstruction aid that benefits the regime absent progress in achieving the political
reforms called for in resolution 2254 (2015). While the Al-Assad regime runs their
sham elections, the people of Syria, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock reminded
us today, continue to suffer.
The United States recently announced $596 million in humanitarian aid for
Syrians in Syria and the region. We encourage all to immediately fulfil their pledges
and increase their support to the Syrian people.
Unfortunately, while vitally important, funds are insufficient to alleviate
the suffering inside Syria. Right now, nothing could be more urgent to the Syrian
people than receiving life-saving aid through the cross-border mechanism. But the
Al-Assad regime continues to hinder and weaponize this delivery. And the need has
grown even more dire since the Council failed to reauthorize the crossings at Bab
Al-Salam and at Al-Yarubiyah.
Bab Al-Hawa remains indispensable to ensuring the delivery of food, shelter
and medical supplies, including as part of the United Nations vaccination campaign
for north-west Syria. Just look at the numbers: 4 million people inside north-west
Syria depend on the 1,000 United Nations trucks that use the crossing each month.
There is no alternative. Nothing can match the scope and scale of the United Nations
cross-border humanitarian mechanism. In fact, itis quite clear that one sole crossing
point is insufficient for the vast needs.
As Secretary Blinken told the Council last month (see S/2021/315), we strongly
urge the reauthorization of Bab Al-Hawa for 12 months, and for the reinstatements
of crossings at Bab Al-Salam and at Al-Yarubiyah. Should the United Nations lose
access to cross-border mechanisms, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis
in Syria will go from dire to disastrous. North-east Syria desperately needs more
COVID-19 testing kits, and the World Health Organization is struggling to get those
kits to those in need. There is simply no alternative vaccine distribution plan in
north-west Syria. The United Nations plan hinges on the use of cross-border access.
36/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Finally, we need to talk about the deep moral wrong happening in the Rukban
camp. For 16 months, the camp’s residents have been without medical aid because the
Al-Assad regime and Russia will not allow the United Nations to make deliveries to
these people in need. We urge the Al-Assad regime and Russia to allow unhindered
humanitarian access to the camp. These people are not pawns. Aid cannot be
politicized. The United States stands with these people and with all of the people of
Syria. We demand that the Al-Assad regime adhere to a nationwide ceasefire. We
call for a political resolution to the Syrian conflict. And in the meantime, we beseech
the Council to support the Syrian people and give them access to the humanitarian
aid they so desperately need.

21-0581137/46

S/2021/418

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their informative briefings. I welcome the representatives of Syria,
Turkey and Iran to this meeting.
First, on the political and security situation, we take note of the ongoing
engagement between the Syrian parties and the Special Envoy to be well-prepared
for the continuation of Constitutional Committee talks. It is important that parties
engage constructively with a view to achieving substantial progress within the
Constitutional Committee framework as well as advancing the broader political
process. In this regard, our full support for the roles of regional and international
actors, including the United Nations and the Special Envoy, remains strong. The
facilitation of relevant international interlocutors through renewed diplomatic efforts
is also indispensable.
The security situation has been relatively calm during the past year since
the ceasefire in the north-west. However, it remains fragile, as sporadic security
incidents still cause serious protection concerns, especially in the north-west,
the north-east and the south. In order to further facilitate dialogue, we call on all
parties to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from actions that could lead to
further escalation. We remind parties of their obligations under international law,
international humanitarian law and relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2573 (2021), which was just adopted unanimously yesterday.
Secondly, on the humanitarian front, while the search for a comprehensive
political solution is still ongoing, the humanitarian situation has shown no sign of
improvement. Millions of Syrian people are still struggling to afford food, fuel and
other basic goods amid the severe economic crisis and the pandemic. We therefore
stress the importance of maintaining safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access to enhance the humanitarian response in Syria, including by protecting related
personnel, essential objects and services. All efforts and all appropriate channels
need to be employed. The delivery of medical supplies, which are urgently needed in
the north-east, should be strongly facilitated. We also call for greater coordination
among parties in order to carry out the cross-line mission to the north-west.
As the coronavirus disease situation worsens, the delivery of vaccines to all
areas in Syria is crucial. We welcome the recent shipment to Damascus and the
north-west through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility. We
call for continued support for Syria in the fight against the pandemic. Our delegation
also supports the appeal of the Secretary-General for the waiving of sanctions that
hinder the humanitarian response to the pandemic. We reiterate our call for greater
contributions to the COVAX Facility and broader and more equitable distribution of
vaccines worldwide, including to populations in conflict and fragile settings.
We commend the heroic efforts of the United Nations and humanitarian and
health-care workers on the ground to address the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We welcome the financial commitments made at the fifth Brussels Conference.
The continued assistance by the international community to the Syrian people is
essential. It is also important to have coordinated international efforts in order to
achieve the desired result.
Lastly, we would like to reiterate our position that a comprehensive political
solution — led and owned by the Syrians themselves, facilitated by the United
Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full adherence with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations — is the only way forward.
38/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
After 10 years of conflict, it has become crystal clear that the Syrian crisis
has only one solution: a truly Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated
political process. This indeed was the raison d’être for formation of the Astana
format, which has promoted a peaceful settlement of the crisis, including through
supporting the establishment of the Constitutional Committee.
To that end, regular and close consultations by our Special Envoy on Syria
with Mr. Pedersen, United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, have continued. We will
encourage the co-Chairs to commence the Constitutional Committee’s next meeting
soon. The Committee’s work must continue according to its rules of procedure,
without foreign interference or externally imposed timelines.
While a political solution cannot be achieved in isolation or overnight, the
Committee’s success must not be set as a precondition for assisting in reconstruction
or the return of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs).
We express our concern over the recent reports on enhanced cooperation with
terrorists by certain foreign forces in camps under their control and call for further
efforts to uproot all terrorists and for the withdrawal of all uninvited foreign forces
from Syria.
We also strongly reject abusing counter-terrorism efforts to support any
separatist tendencies or illegitimate self-rule initiatives or violation of Syrian
sovereignty.
Iran strongly condemns the occupation of parts of Syria, particularly by the
United States, as well as Israel’s acts of aggression against Syria, in the face of which
the Syrian Government has a sovereign right to decide how and when to exercise its
inherent right to individual or collective self-defence.
As the Secretary-General recently stated, “Syria is the world’s largest
refugee crisis”. This indeed cannot be overcome only by providing humanitarian
assistance to refugees and IDPs — in the long run, that is neither sustainable nor
practicable. Discouraging the return of refugees and IDPs, as certain countries do,
will only unnecessarily prolong their suffering, and it is counterproductive, and thus
unacceptable. Instead, we applaud the approach of those countries that plan to take
practical measures to expedite the return of refugees and IDPs. We stand ready to
contribute to the success of such efforts.
Moreover, while the provision of assistance and having access to those in need
is a must, however important, it cannot substitute for the ultimate solution, that is, to
ensure durable peace, security and stability in Syria.
For several months, the debate about so-called “cross-line and cross-border
access” has unfortunately further politicized the issues related to humanitarian aids
and access. Instead, such efforts should have been used for the removal of inhumane
unilateral sanctions, which have devastating socioeconomic and humanitarian
consequences and mainly target the most vulnerable, who are already grappling with
the adverse impacts of conflict and are suffering seriously from the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Weaponizing food and medicine through sanctions is a flagrant
violation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations. They are unjust and
unacceptable and must therefore be removed immediately.
Likewise, uninvited foreign forces, which are directly involved in the
systematic looting of the much-needed oil of the Syrian people, must stop their
shameful practice.
21-0581139/46

S/2021/418

The international community has a legal and moral responsibility to ensure
the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Syria and ending the sufferings of its people.
Finally, while supporting the ongoing dialogue within the Constitutional
Committee, we note the announcement of the Syrian Government to hold, in
accordance with the current Constitution of the country, the next presidential
election on 26 May.
Iran is committed to a political resolution of this crisis and will continue
assisting the people and the Government of Syria to restore the unity and territorial
integrity of their country.

40/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bassam Sabbagh
[Original: English and Arabic]
I thank you for your initiative in organizing this meeting to jointly discuss
the political and humanitarian issues related to Syria, which serves the goal of the
Security Council properly using its time and resources.
During the past years, Western countries have burdened the Council by
holding one meeting after the other on Syria. Those meetings did not aim to address
the important issues related to Syria — such as combating terrorism on its territories,
ending the illegal foreign military presence there, lifting the unilateral coercive
measures imposed on its citizens, or facilitating the reconstruction and rebuilding
of what has been destroyed by terrorism — but rather they aimed at waging hostile
campaigns, making unfounded accusations and delivering provocative statements
filled with dictates and conditionalities.
While those countries continue to escalate their hostile campaigns against my
country, some European capitals recently witnessed many acts of manipulation of
the pillars of international law, as we recently witnessed a show that took place in
The Hague to exploit the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention to adopt a hostile and dangerous decision against Syria. Before that,
we saw another show staged in Brussels, that is, the holding of the fifth meeting of
the so-called “Brussels Conference”. That event was held under the unacceptable
exclusion of the Syrian Government, which represents the Syrian people and is
vested with the authority to work with the United Nations and other international
partners in order to meet its humanitarian and developmental needs.
It is regrettable that the United Nations co-chairs an event that perpetuates the
politicization of humanitarian work, links it to conditions that altogether contradict
its principles and ignores the real reasons behind the increasing human suffering.
How does the holding of nine donor conferences align with the continued talk of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) about the deterioration
of the living situation, the decline in food security indicators, the increasing numbers
of people in need of humanitarian aid and the suffering of the displaced and refugees?
The answer to this is found first in the failure of many donors to fulfil
their declared pledges; secondly, in the allocation of the largest amount of aid to
neighbouring countries and regions outside the control of the Syrian Government;
thirdly, in the spending of the bulk of the remaining funding on a United Nations
office in Ghazi Aintab, which has no function other than distracting attention from
the crimes of terrorist organizations and wasting time and money for purposes that
do not conform to the goals of humanitarian work; and finally, in the deliberate
disregard of the disastrous effects of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on
the Syrian people and the accompanying plunder by the American forces that occupy
the north-east of my country of Syrian wealth, foremost among that being oil and
agricultural crops, and depriving the Syrian people of benefiting from it, which
blatantly violates Security Council resolutions.
Syria has continued its constructive engagement with United Nations agencies
and humanitarian partners to improve the humanitarian situation and deliver aid to
those who deserve it. Two days ago, my Government sent two identical letters to
the Secretary-General and to the President of the Security Council containing its
detailed observations on the contents of the seventy-second report (S/2021/390) of
the Secretary-General on humanitarian affairs. In this regard, my delegation renews
21-0581141/46

S/2021/418

its position rejecting the cross-border assistance mechanism, due to its violation of
Syrian sovereignty and the grave defects that I explained in my previous statement.
Syria reaffirms its commitment to working according to the cross-line
assistance mechanism and strengthening it in a manner that takes into account what
was indicated in the report of the Secretary-General on repeated access for shipments
of the World Food Programme and the World Health Organization to north-east Syria
through that mechanism, as well as the decrease in, or stopping of, field visits and
the movement of humanitarian aid convoys and mobile clinics across the lines and
as a result of the unavailability of fuel caused by unlawful coercive measures. These
are facts that some countries ignore and deliberately attempt to obscure.
One of the main challenges facing humanitarian access is the obstructive
role of the Turkish occupation forces and their affiliated terrorist organizations.
The clearest example of this is their failure to allow a joint convoy to reach the
city of Atarib, in north-west Syria, for which the Syrian Government had granted
the United Nations approval since April of last year. What is worse is preventing
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent from operating in that area and replacing it with
the Turkish Red Crescent, which does not have any legal jurisdiction to operate
on Syrian territory. Even worse is the Turkish regime’s use of drinking water as a
weapon against civilians. This regime deliberately — 23 times — cut off drinking
water coming from the Allouk station to the city of Al-Hasakah and its vicinity, for
a period of 20 days, causing more than 1 million Syrians to suffer thirst and water
deprivation. It is unacceptable that the Security Council continues to remain silent
about these practices and ignores them. Rather, it should exert the necessary political
pressure to find a sustainable solution to them.
The hand extended by Syria in support of efforts towards humanitarian access
is matched by the blind intransigence of some countries to adhere to the crossborder access mechanism, which is clear evidence of their hidden political agendas
by exploiting and employing them for this purely humanitarian issue to serve their
anti-Syrian goals.
According to the Constitution of the Syrian Arab Republic, millions of
Syrians inside and outside the country will go to the polls next month to cast their
votes in the presidential elections, for which the application period ended today.
The list of applicants included 51 persons, among them seven women, competing
to secure the necessary endorsement of members of Parliament. The holding of
these elections within the constitutional time frame is based on the Syrian State’s
keenness to ensure the regularity of the work of its institutions and the determination
to thwart external plots aimed at creating an institutional and constitutional vacuum
and imposing what has been called “creative chaos” as an alternative, similar to what
we have seen in other countries.
These presidential elections are an important constitutional and sovereign
entitlement for the Syrian State that is consistent with its mission to ensure that
its institutions carry out their constitutional duties and to move forward towards
completing other duties, including liberating our land from the remnants of terrorist
organizations, ending the illegal foreign military presence there, restoring security
and stability to its citizens and rehabilitating its infrastructure destroyed by terrorism.
Some have been launching campaigns to disrupt this electoral process by
mixing fulfilling this constitutional requirement with some of the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015). What the statements of some countries included today is
clear evidence of this confusion or, rather, the misinformation that they practice,
which represents a flagrant violation of the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of Member States. Those countries must abide by their commitment
to respect the Charter of the United Nations, stop infringing upon Syrians’ right
42/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

to choose their President freely, responsibly and democratically and stop issuing
provocative and hostile statements that do not serve the goal of restoring security
and stability in Syria.
We are following the efforts made by Special Envoy Pedersen to organize the
work of the sixth round of the Constitutional Committee, including the consultations
that he conducted following his meetings in Damascus with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates and with the co-Chair of the national delegation to the
meetings of the Constitutional Committee. We will duly inform you of the results of
the consultations that will take place in the coming days.
In this regard, my delegation reaffirms Syria’s commitment to a Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned political process facilitated by the United Nations, as represented
by its Special Envoy, in full respect of the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. My delegation also stresses
once again that the success of the work of the Constitutional Committee requires
respecting the rules of its procedures that have been agreed upon, while rejecting any
external interference in it or attempts to impose dictates about its work conclusions
or artificial timetables.

21-0581143/46

S/2021/418

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings.
This month, together with the President of the General Assembly, I visited
Hatay, a town bordering Syria where the United Nations lifeline channels cross-border
humanitarian operations to millions of people in need. Once again, I witnessed firsthand the provision of aid items and loading and monitoring procedures, showing
the whole journey in full transparency. The United Nations has full control of the
entire operation at four distinct levels — at the border, at warehouses in Syria, at
distribution levels and after distribution.
During the visit, from the Turkish side of the border, we also observed the
dire humanitarian situation unfolding in overcrowded camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Syria. Vulnerable people struggle to survive with the aid coming
from the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point. Now they are waiting to get vaccinated,
thanks to the cross-border mechanism. Some 50,000 vaccines were transferred into
the region last week. It is estimated that, by next year, 20 per cent of the population
in the north-west will receive vaccines through cross-border aid.
said,

In Hatay, I also had an opportunity to meet and listen to Syrian refugees. They
“There is nothing left there but suffering, persecution and starvation. Unilateral
attempts by the regime under the pretext of discussing the return of refugees
are part of Al-Assad’s illusions. Syrian people ran away from death, and they
do not want to go back.”

The monitoring mechanism established by the United Nations is unique and
indispensable. It is simply not possible to replace this model. If the United Nations
cross-border operations were to stop, we would lose one of the best scrutinized and
most robust mechanisms in the world. If the mechanism were to stop, the only way
out for the 2.7 million IDPs would be to escape Syria. Inevitably, that would result in
new migration flows towards neighbouring countries and Europe.
There is no single argument that can justify the cessation of United Nations
cross-border operations. The Syrian people want to see a united Security Council
that is able to make the right decision. It is the Council’s moral obligation to renew the
United Nations cross-border mechanism, with additional crossings, for 12 months.
Again, some countries are promoting only cross-line access. While Al-Assad
is preventing aid from reaching regime-controlled areas, it is ironic to see these
attempts aiming to divert the attention of the Council from its primary responsibility
of extending the mandate of the cross-border mechanism.
Turkey continues to strongly support the settlement of the Syrian conflict
through a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The Constitutional
Committee opened a window of opportunity for a political solution. However,
despite all the efforts and warnings, the Syrian regime continues its attempts to
squander this opportunity. During the latest rounds, the regime blocked the work
of the Committee with unreasonable requests and suggestions aiming to undermine
and disregard the opposition. The fact that the regime has been making proposals
contradicting the rules of procedure shows its lack of serious engagement with the
process.
44/46

21-05811

S/2021/418

If held, the next rounds should yield concrete results. Drafting on the substance
of the constitution should commence without further delay. This is critical for the
continuation of the process. We are encouraging the opposition. If the regime is
sincere about reaching a political solution, it is time to demonstrate that concretely.
There is no other acceptable way forward for the Syrian people and the international
community to end this conflict other than through a political solution.
We support Special Envoy Pedersen’s ongoing efforts to advance the work
of the Constitutional Committee. Our Foreign Minister reiterated Turkey’s support
during the meeting that he had with Mr. Pedersen today.
Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for free and fair elections pursuant to the
new constitution. The elections announced by the Syrian regime for 26 May do
not meet any of the criteria outlined in that resolution. These elections will deny
participation to millions of Syrians inside and outside of the country. There is
no doubt that these elections will be far from being free or fair. Therefore, it is
not possible for the international community to deem these elections as being
legitimate in any way. As pointed out by the United Nations, these elections are
not part of resolution 2254 (2015).
In order for efforts in the political process to yield results, it is also essential to
preserve the ceasefire and calm on the ground. Yet ceasefire violations and attacks
targeting civilians continue in Idlib. On 21 March, civilians, including health-care
workers, were killed in and around Al-Atarib hospital. On the very same day, a
parking lot full of humanitarian aid trucks near the Turkish border was targeted
in a horrifying attack, resulting in destruction of humanitarian aid trucks. This is
unacceptable. The regime and its backers must stop all attacks targeting civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
The Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG)
continues to target Syrian civilians and Turkey from Tel Rifat, Manbij and Ayn Isa.
This terrorist organization has carried out 400 attacks since October 2019, targeting
civilians with car bombs. On 18 March, it launched rocket attacks from Tal Rifat
targeting civilian areas in Kilis, Turkey. On 7 April, the terrorist organization killed
two Turkish soldiers returning from demining operations in Afrin. The PKK/YPG
shamelessly announces these terrorist attacks through its social media accounts.
The terrorist organization PKK/YPG uses Da’esh members and their families
in Syrian camps for blackmail and extortion. The militants freed by the PKK/YPG
for financial or political reasons pose a grave danger to Syria’s neighbours. Recently,
we apprehended a Da’esh member released by the PKK/YPG from Al-Hol camp
while he was trying to enter Turkey illegally.
The PKK/YPG terrorist organization is also responsible for cutting electricity
to the Allouk water station in Al-Hasakah and obstructing its proper functioning.
As a result of the PKK/YPG’s deliberate interruptions, due to the very low level of
electricity available, only three of the 12 pumps linked with the water system can
operate. These unlawful actions, which are putting half a million innocent lives at
risk, are also impeding efforts to effectively combat the pandemic. They should be
stopped. Those who support PKK/YPG and treat this terrorist organization as a
legitimate actor are openly violating international law and undermining the unity
and territorial integrity of Syria.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
verified that, from 24 February to 23 March, at least 16 civilians were killed and 70
were injured as a result of shelling and airstrikes in north-west Syria. It is imperative
to hold accountable all the perpetrators of this decade of systematic violations against
Syrian people.
21-0581145/46

S/2021/418

We welcome the latest report of the Investigation and Identification Team
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), where it
is established that chlorine was used by the regime air force in an attack against
civilians in Saraqib on 4 February 2018. It has now been proven that the Al-Assad
regime is responsible for at least eight chemical-weapon attacks.
We also welcome the decision adopted last week at the OPCW Conference
of the States Parties. This decision was indeed a timely and necessary step towards
ending impunity in Syria. This is also a prerequisite for peace and security in the
region and beyond. We urge the international community to stand behind the Syrian
people in their quest for justice and accountability.
As to the statement made by the representative of the Syrian regime, I repeat:
I do not consider him as my legitimate counterpart. His presence here is an affront
to the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the hands of the
regime, and therefore I will not honour his delusional remarks with a response.

46/46

21-05811
