Reeolutlom adopted on the report, of the Sixth Committee

4. Declares further that the unlawful detention of
,passengers and crew in transit or otherwise engaged in

civil air travel is to be condemned as another form of
wrongful interference with free and uninterrupted air
travel;
S. Urges States to the territory of which a hijacked
aircraft is diverted to provide for the care iuid. safety
of its passengers and crew and to enable them to continue their journey as soon as practicable, and to return the aircraft and its cargo to the persons lawfully
entitled to possession;
6. Invites States to ratify or accede to the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed
on Board Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on 14 September
1963,12 in confornuty with the Convention;
7. Requests concerted action on the part of States,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
towards suppressing all acts which jeopardize the safe
and orderly development of international civil air
transport;
8. Calls upon States to take joint and separate
action, in accordance with the Charter, in co-operation
with the United Nations and the International Civil
Aviation Organization to ensure that passengers, crew
and aircraft engaged in civil aviation are not used as a
means of extorting advantage of any kind; 1
9. Urges full support for the current efforts of the
International Civil Aviation Organization towards the
development and co-ordination, in accordance with its
competence, of effective measures in respect of interference with civil air travel;
10. Calls upon States to make every possible effort
to achieve a successful result at the diplomatic conference to convene at The Hague in December 1970
for the purpose of the adoption of a convention on the
unlawful seizure of aircraft, so that an effective convention may be brought into force at an early date.

1914th plenary meeting,
25 November 1970.
2669 (XXV). ProgreHive development and codlficadon of the rules of internadonal law
relating to international watercourses

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1401 (XIV) of 21 November 19S9, by which it considered that it was

11'7

RecalUng that despite the great number of bilateral
treaties and other regional regulations, as well as the
Convention on the Regime of Navigable Waterways
of International Concern, signed at Barcelona on 20
April 1921,14 and the Convention relating to the Development of Hydraulic Power affecting more than
one State, signed at Geneva on 9 December 1923,111
the use of international rivers and lakes is still based
in part on general principles and rules of customary
law,
Noting that measures have been taken and valuable
work carried out by several international organs, both
governmental and non-governmental, in order to
further the development and codification of the law of
international watercourses,
Convinced of the necessity to promote, in accordance with Article 13 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the work on the progressive development and
codification of the law of international watercourses
and to concentrate this work within the framework
of the United Nations,
1. Recommends that the International Law Commission should, as a first step, take up the study of
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses with a view to its progressive development and codification and, in the light of its scheduled
programme of work, should consider the practicability
of taking the necessary action as soon as the Commission deems it appropriate;
2. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue the study initiated by the General
Assembly in resolution 1401 (XIV) in order to prepare a supplementary report on the legal problems
relating to the utilization and use of international
watercourses, taking into account the recent application in State practice and international adjudication
of the law of international watercourses and also intergovernmental and non-governmental studies of this
matter;
( b) To forward to the International Law Commission the records of the discussion on the item at
the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the
report prepared by the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 1401 (XIV), as well as the text of the
present resolution and all other documentation necessary for the Commission's work.
1920th plenary meeting,
8 December 1970.

desirable to initiate preliminary studies on the legal
problems relating to the utilization and use of international rivers, and as a result of which useful legal
material was collected in the report submitted by the
Secretary-General on 15 April 1963,18
Considering that water, owing to the growth of
population and the increasing and multiplying needs
and demands of mankind, is of growing concern to
humanity, that the available fresh water resources
of the world are limited and that the preservation
and protection of those resources are of great importance to all nations,
Conscious of the importance of legal problems
relatinf to the use of international watercourses, inter
alia With regard to international water resources de-

velopment,

12 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704 ( 1969), No. 10106.

llA/5409.

2697 (XXV). Need to consider au11estion• regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolutions 992 (X) of 21 November
1955 and 2285 (XXII) of 5 December 1967 on the
procedure of reviewing the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling further its resolution 2S52 (XXIV) of
12 December 1969 entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations",
H League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. VII (1921-1922),
No. 172.
111 League of Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. XXXVI (1925),
No. 90.5.
