A/55/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

84th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 12 December 2000, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Sixth Committee on agenda
items 154 to 165, 171, 172 and 184.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Drahoslav Štefánek of Slovakia, to introduce in
one intervention the reports of the Sixth Committee
before the General Assembly.
Mr. Štefánek (Slovakia), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: I have the honour today to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Sixth Committee
on the 15 agenda items allocated to it, namely, items
154 to 165, 171, 172 and 184.
I will start my introduction of the reports of the
Sixth Committee with agenda item 154, entitled
“Progressive development of the principles and norms
of international law relating to the new international
economic order”. The relevant report of the Committee
is contained in document A/55/604, and the draft
decision recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is found in paragraph 6 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft decision, the General
Assembly would decide to resume consideration of the
legal aspects of international economic relations at its
fifty-eighth session.

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will do
the same.
I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 155, entitled “Status of the Protocols Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the
protection of victims of armed conflicts”. The relevant
report of the Committee is contained in document
A/55/605, and the draft resolution recommended to the
General Assembly for adoption is found in paragraph 8
thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would in particular appeal to all States
parties to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 that have
not yet done so to consider becoming parties to the
Additional Protocols at the earliest possible date; call
upon all States that are already parties to Protocol I, or
those States not parties, on becoming parties to
Protocol I, to make the declaration provided for under
article 90 of that Protocol; and call upon all States
which have not yet done so to consider becoming
parties to the 1954 Convention for the Protection of
Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict and
its two Protocols and to other relevant treaties on
international humanitarian law.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is hoped that the Assembly will
do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 156, entitled
“Consideration of effective measures to enhance the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-79164 (E)

*0079164*

A/55/PV.84

protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives”. The relevant
report of the Sixth Committee is contained in document
A/55/606, and the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee to the General Assembly for adoption
is set out in paragraph 8 thereof.

Law on the work of its thirty-third session”. The
relevant report of the Sixth Committee on this item is
contained in document A/55/608, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is found in paragraph 8 thereof.

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, strongly condemn the
recent acts of violence against diplomatic and consular
missions and representatives, as well as against
officials of intergovernmental organizations, and would
urge States to take all necessary measures at the
national and international levels to prevent any such
acts of violence and to ensure, with the participation of
the United Nations where appropriate, that such acts
are fully investigated with a view to bringing offenders
to justice.

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, commend the
Commission for the progress made in its work, reaffirm
the mandate of the Commission to coordinate legal
activities in the field of international trade law, and
stress the importance of bringing into effect the
conventions emanating from the work of the
Commission. The Assembly would also request the
Secretary-General to submit to it at its fifty-sixth
session a report on the implications of increasing the
membership of the Commission, and would invite
Member States to submit their views on that issue.

It is hoped that the Assembly, like the Sixth
Committee, will adopt the draft resolution without a
vote.

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. The Assembly may wish to do so as
well.

I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 157, entitled “Convention on jurisdictional
immunities of States and their property”. The relevant
report of the Sixth Committee has been issued under
the symbol A/55/607. The Sixth Committee
recommends the draft resolution found in paragraph 11
of its report to the General Assembly for adoption.

I now turn on agenda item 159, entitled “Report
of the International Law Commission on the work of its
fifty-second session”. The relevant report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/55/609, and the
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is contained in paragraph 10 thereof.

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, decide to establish
an ad hoc Committee on Jurisdictional Immunities of
States and Their Property, open also to participation by
States members of the specialized agencies; and to
further the work done, consolidate areas of agreement
and resolve outstanding issues with a view to
elaborating a generally acceptable instrument based on
the draft articles on jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property adopted by the International Law
Commission at its forty-third session, and also based
on the discussions of the open-ended working group of
the Sixth Committee established under resolutions
53/98 and 54/101 and their results. The ad hoc
Committee would meet for two weeks in March 2002.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will do
the same.
I turn now to agenda item 158, entitled “Report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade

2

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, inter alia, express its appreciation to
the International Law Commission for the work
accomplished at its fifty-second session, in particular
with respect to the topic “State responsibility”, and
would encourage the Commission to complete its work
on that topic during its fifty-third session. The
Assembly would also reiterate its invitation to
Governments to respond to the questionnaire on
unilateral acts of States circulated by the Secretariat,
and to submit the most relevant national legislation,
decisions of domestic courts and State practice relevant
to diplomatic protection. The General Assembly would
furthermore decide that the next session of the
Commission shall be held at the United Nations Office
at Geneva from 23 April to 1 June and from 2 July to
10 August 2001. It would recommend that the
International Law Commission continue its work on
the topics in its current programme.
Noting with appreciation the work done by the
Commission on the topic “International liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not

A/55/PV.84

prohibited by international law”, the Assembly would
also request the Commission to resume consideration
of the liability aspects of that topic as soon as the
second reading of the draft articles on the prevention of
transboundary damage from hazardous activities is
completed.
The draft resolution was adopted without a vote.
It is hoped that the Assembly will adopt this draft
resolution without a vote as well.
I now turn to agenda item 160, “Nationality of
natural persons in relation to the succession of States”.
The report of the Sixth Committee on this item is
contained in document A/55/610, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is found in paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, express its
appreciation to the International Law Commission for
its valuable work on this topic. It would also take note
of the articles on nationality of natural persons in
relation to the succession of States, presented by the
International Law Commission in the form of a
declaration, the text of which is annexed to the draft
resolution. It would further invite Governments to take
into account, as appropriate, the provisions contained
therein in dealing with issues of nationality of natural
persons in relation to the succession of States and
recommend that all efforts be made for the wide
dissemination of the text of those articles.
It is hoped that the General Assembly will, like
the Sixth Committee, adopt the draft resolution without
a vote.
Let me now turn to agenda item 161, “Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.
The report of the Sixth Committee on this item is
contained in document A/55/611 and Corrigendum 1,
and the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is found in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would, in particular, endorse the
recommendations and conclusions of the Host Country
Committee, request the host country to continue to take
all measures necessary to prevent any interference with
the functioning of missions and express its appreciation
to the host country for its efforts. Furthermore, the
Assembly would request the host country to consider
removing the travel controls previously imposed on

staff of certain missions and staff members of the
Secretariat of certain nationalities. It would also
request the host country to continue to take steps to
resolve the problem relating to the parking of
diplomatic vehicles.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. It is hoped that the Assembly will be in
a position to act likewise.
I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
under agenda item 162, “Establishment of the
International Criminal Court”. The report is contained
in document A/55/612. The draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly is found in
paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, call upon all States
to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. The
Assembly would also welcome the important work
accomplished by the Preparatory Commission in the
completion of the part of the mandate relating to the
draft texts of the rules of procedure and evidence and
the elements of crimes and request the SecretaryGeneral to reconvene the Commission, in accordance
with resolution F adopted by the Rome Conference,
from 26 February to 9 March and from 24 September
to 5 October 2001, to carry out the mandate of that
resolution.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote and it is hoped that the Assembly will
be in a position to do the same.
I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 163, “Report of the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization”. The relevant report of
the Sixth Committee is contained in document
A/55/613 and Corrigendum 1, and the two draft
resolutions which the Sixth Committee recommends to
the General Assembly for adoption are contained in
paragraph 14 thereof.
By draft resolution I, entitled “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, the General Assembly would, inter alia,
request the Special Committee, at its next session from
2 to 12 April 2001, to continue its consideration of all
proposals concerning the question of the maintenance

3

A/55/PV.84

of international peace and security in all its aspects in
order to strengthen the role of the United Nations. It
would also request the Special Committee to continue
to consider on a priority basis the question of the
implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations related to assistance to third States
affected by the application of sanctions under Chapter
VII of the Charter.
The Assembly would further request the Special
Committee to continue its work on the question of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States.
Moreover, the Assembly would request the Special
Committee to continue to consider proposals
concerning the Trusteeship Council and to continue to
consider, on a priority basis, ways and means of
improving its working methods and enhancing its
efficiency.
By draft resolution II, entitled “Implementation
of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
related to assistance to third States affected by the
application of sanctions”, the General Assembly would,
in particular, renew its invitation to the Security
Council to consider the establishment of further
mechanisms or procedures, as appropriate, for
consultations as early as possible under Article 50 of
the Charter with third States affected by the application
of sanctions under Chapter VII. It would welcome the
measures taken by the Security Council since the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 50/51, most
recently the note by the President of the Council
concerning the establishment of an informal working
group to develop general recommendations on how to
improve the effectiveness of sanctions.
Furthermore, it would welcome the report of the
Secretary-General containing a summary of the
deliberations and main findings of the ad hoc expert
group meeting on developing a methodology for
assessing the consequences incurred by third States as
a result of preventive or enforcement measures, and
would request the Secretary-General to present to the
Assembly any further views that he may have, as
appropriate, on the deliberations and main findings,
including the recommendations, of the ad hoc expert
group.
Furthermore, the Assembly would decide to
consider, within the Sixth Committee, or a working
group of the Committee, at its fifty-sixth session,
further progress in the elaboration of effective

4

measures aimed at the implementation of the
provisions of the Charter related to assistance to third
States affected by sanctions.
These two draft resolutions were adopted without
a vote by the Sixth Committee. The Assembly may
wish to do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 164, “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”. The report of the
Sixth Committee is contained in document A/55/614.
The draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is set out in paragraph 11
thereof.
Under the terms of draft resolution, the Assembly
would, inter alia, strongly condemn all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
wherever and by whomsoever committed. Furthermore,
the Assembly would decide that the Ad Hoc Committee
established by resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996
would continue to elaborate a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism and would
continue its efforts to resolve the outstanding issues
relating to the elaboration of a draft international
convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear
terrorism. The Ad Hoc Committee would also keep on
its agenda the question of convening a high-level
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to
formulate a joint organized response of the
international community to terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. The Assembly would further
decide that the Ad Hoc Committee would meet from 12
to 23 February 2001 and that the work would also
continue during the fifty-sixth session of the General
Assembly, between 15 and 26 October 2001, within the
framework of a working group of the Sixth Committee.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
by a recorded vote of 131 votes in favour to none
against, with 2 abstentions.
I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
under agenda item 165, “Review of the Statute of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal”. This report is
contained in document A/55/615. The draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly is set out in
paragraph 6 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
Assembly would introduce amendments to the Statute
of the Tribunal with effect from 1 January 2001, in
relation to the qualifications of its members and the

A/55/PV.84

length of their terms of appointment, consideration of
cases raising significant questions of law and other
issues, such as the use of the six official languages of
the Organization.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. It is hoped the Assembly
will do the same.
I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda
item 171, “Observer status for the Inter-American
Development Bank in the General Assembly”. The
relevant report of the Committee is contained in
document A/55/616. The draft resolution recommended
to the General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in
paragraph 7 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the InterAmerican Development Bank to participate in the
sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the
capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. I hope that the Assembly
will be in a position to do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 172, “Observer status
for the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly”. The
relevant report of the Committee is contained in
document A/55/617. The draft decision recommended
to the General Assembly for adoption is found in
paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft decision, the General
Assembly would decide to resume its consideration of,
and defer a decision on, the request for observer status
for the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance in the General Assembly to its
fifty-sixth session.
The draft decision was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. I hope that the Assembly
will do the same.
I finally turn to agenda item 184, “Observer
status for the Economic Community of Central African
States in the General Assembly”. The relevant report of
the Committee is contained in document A/55/648. The
draft resolution recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 thereof.

Under the terms of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would decide to invite the Economic
Community of Central African States to participate in
the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in
the capacity of observer. It would also request the
Secretary-General to take all the necessary action to
implement the present resolution.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. I hope that the Assembly
will do the same.
This concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. On behalf of the Committee, I
wish to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
the guidance and assistance you accorded to the Sixth
Committee throughout its work during this session. Let
me also thank the Legal Counsel of the United Nations,
Mr. Hans Corell, for his assistance and leadership
provided to the Committee.
I also wish to thank the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, Professor Mauro Politi of Italy, as well as
the Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Kenjika Ekedede of Nigeria,
Mr. Salah Suheimat of Jordan and Mr. Marcelo
Vázquez of Ecuador, for their valuable advice, support
and friendship given to me.
I wish to also express my gratitude to the
Secretary of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Václav Mikulka,
as well as to the other members of the Secretariat of the
Sixth Committee, in particular Ms. Sachiko KuwabaraYamamoto, Mr. Manuel Rama-Montaldo, Mr. Serguei
Tarassenko, Mr. Vladimir Rudnitsky and also other
officers, for their assistance throughout the session and
in the preparation of the various reports of the Sixth
Committee.
Before concluding, in order to submit indeed a
comprehensive report, I should like to mention that a
very popular draft resolution was submitted by
Australia and several other co-sponsors. Under the
terms of that draft, the members of the Sixth
Committee and the Secretariat participated in the social
gathering after the completion of the work of the
Committee on 22 November. Since that draft resolution
was implemented in the nearby Mica Bar within the 24
hours since its introduction, there was no need to
incorporate the draft into a formal report. I would like
to express my wish in this regard that all draft
resolutions would be implemented in such a speedy
manner, though not necessarily in the terms of the same
substance.

5

A/55/PV.84

The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Sixth Committee which are before the Assembly
today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Sixth Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
the Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. This
means that where a recorded vote was taken, we will
do the same. I should also hope that we may proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 154
Progressive development of the principles and norms
of international law relating to the new international
economic order
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/604)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The draft
decision was adopted by the Sixth Committee without a

6

vote. May I consider that the Assembly too wishes to
adopt the draft decision?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 154?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 155
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection
of victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/605)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Sixth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/148).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 155?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 156
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/606)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Sixth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/149).

A/55/PV.84

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 156?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 157
Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/607)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. The
draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth Committee
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly
likewise wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/150).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 157?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 158
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirtythird session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/608)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The draft
resolution was adopted by the Sixth Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly too wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/151).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 158?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 159
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-second session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/609)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. The
Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution without a
vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/152).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 159?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 160
Nationality of natural persons in relation to the
succession of States
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/610)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The draft
resolution was adopted by the Sixth Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly also wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/153).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 160?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 161
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/611 and
Corr.1)

7

A/55/PV.84

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The draft
resolution was adopted by the Sixth Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly also wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/154).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 161?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 162
Establishment of the International Criminal Court
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/612)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The draft
resolution was adopted by the Sixth Committee without
a vote. May I consider that the Assembly likewise
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/155).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 162?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 163
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/613 and
Corr.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by
the Sixth Committee in paragraph 14 of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”. Draft resolution I was adopted by the

8

Sixth Committee without a vote. May I consider that
the General Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
55/156).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations related to assistance to third States
affected by the application of sanctions”, was adopted
by the Sixth Committee without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly also wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
55/157).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 163?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 164
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/614)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Sixth Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao

A/55/PV.84

People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
None.
Abstaining:
Lebanon, Syrian Arab Republic.
The draft resolution was adopted by 151 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions (resolution 55/158).
[Subsequently the delegations of Botswana and
Mozambique informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote.
Mr. Gomaa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have
asked for the floor to explain my delegation’s vote on
the resolution just adopted by the General Assembly on
measures to eliminate international terrorism. It is an
honour for me to inform the Assembly that all the Arab
delegations have endorsed this statement.
All the Arab States condemn terrorism in all its
aspects and forms, whether committed by individuals,
groups or States. All the Arab delegations, therefore,
cooperated in a positive and serious manner with the
coordinator of the resolution that has been adopted and

with other delegations, demonstrating great flexibility
in reaching a balanced resolution.
The
Arab
delegations
reaffirm
their
understanding of the second preambular paragraph of
the resolution, which refers to all relevant General
Assembly resolutions on measures to eliminate
international terrorism, including resolution 46/51 of
1991, paragraph 15 of which states that the General
Assembly
“Considers that nothing in the present
resolution could in any way prejudice the right to
self-determination, freedom and independence, as
derived from the Charter of the United Nations,
of peoples forcibly deprived of that right referred
to in the Declaration of Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, particularly
peoples under colonial and racist regimes or other
forms of alien domination, or the right of these
peoples to struggle legitimately to this end and to
seek and receive support in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, the above-mentioned
Declaration and the relevant General Assembly
resolutions”.
In this context, the Arab delegations would like to
reiterate that what has been taking place in the
occupied Arab territories, especially in recent weeks —
the missile attacks, bombings and other military actions
by land, air and sea by the occupying Israeli forces
against the unarmed people of Palestine — is the
embodiment of terrorism in all its aspects. In this
context, the Arab delegations reiterate the right of the
Arab peoples under the yoke of occupation to use all
legitimate means to achieve their independence and
self-determination, including armed struggle.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Before
explaining my delegation’s vote, I should like to take
this opportunity to thank the representative of Australia
for submitting this resolution to the members of the
Sixth Committee. I congratulate her on the adoption of
the draft resolution in the Committee on 22 November.
I should like to express my deep regret that unforeseen
circumstances prevented my being present on that
occasion.
We endorse and support the statement made by
the representative of Egypt with regard to the

9

A/55/PV.84

resolution on measures to eliminate international
terrorism.
The delegation of the Sudan has closely followed
the progress of the resolution on measures to eliminate
international terrorism up to its adoption by the
General Assembly just a few minutes ago. Not only has
the Sudan supported all resolutions under this item in
the past, but we also took part in bilateral and other
contacts conducted to elaborate the draft of the present
resolution and to overcome the difficulties encountered
with regard to certain paragraphs.
My delegation is pleased that the resolution
contains a paragraph in which the General Assembly
expresses its appreciation and satisfaction that, during
the past session, a number of States ratified or acceded
to international conventions to eliminate international
terrorism. We also take pride in the fact that the Sudan
now features prominently on the list of those States
that have ratified or acceded to such conventions, in
compliance with and in adherence to Sudan’s
international commitments and in response to the
appeals of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, as reiterated in its recent statement of
6 December 2000.
The delegation of the Sudan would like to take
this opportunity to call upon all States Members of the
United Nations to respond favourably to General
Assembly resolutions in this connection and to abide
fully by the letter and spirit of such resolutions with the
objective of eliminating terrorism and on the
understanding
that
terrorism
cannot
be
compartmentalized. As we have seen, the United
Nations cannot tolerate any form of State terrorism,
which is the major cause of civilian suffering and
social chaos in many parts of the world. We certainly
believe that the most dangerous form of State terrorism
is the recognition of and the material and political
support rendered to rebel movements that seek and
endorse violence as a means of achieving their political
ends.
We are confident that all members of the
Assembly agree that no democracy, no civilized nation,
would accept bloodshed as one of its political tools.
Mr. Rodríguez Parilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): The resolution that has just been adopted by
the General Assembly is extremely important. It
reaffirms the need for the General Assembly fully to
exercise its functions in taking effective and strong

10

action in the struggle against international terrorism,
including the negotiation of a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism containing a
precise definition of the crime of terrorism, and the
convening of a high-level conference on this issue.
The resolution strongly condemns terrorism in all
its forms, considering it to be unjustifiable under any
circumstances. It emphasizes the need to strengthen
cooperation between States and international
organizations and agencies in order to prevent, combat
and eliminate terrorism.
The resolution’s call for all Member States to
adopt further measures in accordance with the Charter
and international law to prevent terrorism is
particularly important. It reiterates the General
Assembly’s appeal to States to refrain from financing,
encouraging, providing training for, or otherwise
supporting, terrorist activities.
Our delegation would also like to reaffirm the
validity and soundness of all resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly on this issue, especially resolution
46/51, which establishes the difference between
international terrorism and the peoples’ struggle for
self-determination and against foreign occupation.
Cuba wishes to reiterate its strong condemnation
of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
committed, including State terrorism or terrorism
prompted or tolerated by States. At the same time, we
will always oppose double standards and political
manipulation of the issue through selective and
discriminatory expressions of alleged condemnations.
The terrorist activities against Cuba continue to
exist. Last 17 November, a plot to murder President
Fidel Castro was dismantled in Panama after being
revealed by Cuba. The Cuban American National
Foundation arranged this plot through Posada Carriles,
a well-known international terrorist who was the
perpetrator of the 1976 bombing of a Cuban Airline
jetliner flying over Barbados, which killed 73 people.
Posada Carriles is responsible also for terrorist actions
against 28 countries.
Posada Carriles is now detained in Panama,
together with other terrorists from Miami and Central
America. They were seized with twenty kilograms of
C-4 and 50 packs of Semtex and the blueprints of the
central hall of the University of Panama, as well as

A/55/PV.84

other evidence proving that they were going to bomb
the site during a meeting between President Fidel
Castro and thousands of students. They could also have
committed acts against other events at the IberoAmerican Summit and could seriously have
jeopardized the lives of other Presidents.
On 18 November, Cuba initiated an extradition
process for the terrorists. On 29 November, Cuba made
a formal request to, and is still awaiting a decision
from, the Panamanian authorities, to whom Cuba
reiterates its respect and confidence.
Cuba has guaranteed that due process will be
carried out for the terrorists, that they will neither be
put to death nor convicted to terms longer than
20 years and has also proposed that an international
Latin-American court of law try them in Havana.
Meanwhile, the Government of the United States
exerts great pressure on Panama to prevent extradition.
This does not surprise us because United States
Administrations have for decades organized, financed
and carried out numerous terrorist acts against Cuba by
using mercenaries such as these, because their policy
of aggression, subversion and economic war against
Cuba constitutes a direct incentive to terrorism against
our country and also because they deliberately and
openly allow, on American territory, the existence and
actions of the Cuban American National Foundation
and other terrorist organizations which continually
finance, organize, provide the means for, and carry out,
terrorist acts against Cuba.
Posada Carriles is a terrorist who knows many
secrets. He was trained by the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA). As an officer of the CIA, he worked to
bring together the most aggressive anti-Cuban
mercenary groups. After the bombing of the jetliner in
Barbados, he walked out of a Venezuelan prison while
he was being tried and showed up again, receiving
salaries from the CIA and State Department and as one
of the ringleaders of the Contragate conflict with
regard to Nicaragua under Oliver North’s command.
After that he worked for two Central American
Presidents and orchestrated dozens of terrorist acts
against Cuba and attempted to murder President Fidel
Castro at the Cartagena Ibero-American Summit.
In 1997, Posada Carriles organized a campaign
consisting of planting bombs in Havana hotels. He
travelled to the United States several times and granted

interviews to the New York Times and to Miami’s
TeleNoticias channel from El Salvador.
The behaviour of the United States does not
surprise us, because it is in Miami that the other
perpetrator of the jetliner bombing, Orlando Bosch,
freely resides and carries out his political activity. Nor
are we surprised because it is also in the United States
penal courts that anti-Cuban terrorists are historically
absolved, as was the case in December 1999 in Puerto
Rico with the organizers of an attempt to murder
President Fidel Castro on the occasion of the IberoAmerican Summit meeting in Margarita Island.
The people of Cuba do not want revenge, but
rather a just process and severe sanctions. They wish to
act in accordance with the letter and spirit of the
resolution we have just adopted. Anything that departs
from it will inexorably be an incentive to terrorism
against Cuba and a threat to the security of all Member
States.
Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
country wishes first and foremost to support the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Arab States regarding measures to
eliminate international terrorism.
The delegation of the State of Qatar has provided
all information regarding efforts made during
consultations in the Sixth Committee in order to
introduce a draft acceptable to all Member States that
could be in agreement with the General Assembly
resolutions relating to measures to eliminate
international terrorism, in particular the second
preambular paragraph of resolution 46/51 of
9 December 1991.
The resolution repeats the rights of countries to
free themselves from hegemony and occupation and
their right to self-determination, as well as the
legitimate struggle of countries to be liberated from
colonialist and racist regimes. This should, of course,
apply to all legitimate resistance activities of the
Palestinian people against Israel.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone supported
the resolution just adopted on international terrorism.
Our support, however, does not mean that we agree
entirely with all its paragraphs.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone supported
the resolution on international terrorism which has just
been adopted. Our support, however, does not mean

11

A/55/PV.84

that we agree entirely with all the paragraphs contained
in that resolution.
Sierra Leone’s position is that any document or
convention on international terrorism must contain a
comprehensive and clear definition of what we are
trying to eliminate. My country, Sierra Leone, has been
a victim of both regional and international terrorism.
Therefore, we support all measures to eliminate
international terrorism in all its manifestations,
wherever and by whomsoever committed.
It is the understanding of my delegation that the
second preambular paragraph of the resolution we have
just adopted includes resolution 46/51. Even though we
have indicated that we do not agree with all of the
paragraphs of the resolution we have adopted, it is our
conviction that half a loaf is better than none.
Therefore, bearing in mind our experiences on this
matter, Sierra Leone decided to support the resolution
without any equivocation.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish speak in exercise of the right of reply.
May I remind members that statements in the
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Jacob (Israel): My delegation totally rejects
the baseless allegations made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of some other States.
Egypt graciously hosted the Sharm el-Sheikh
summit, at which an Israeli-Palestinian agreement was
reached on ending the violence — an agreement which
are working hard to implement. The summit recognized
that neither side in this conflict has a monopoly on the
status of victim and that both sides must act to bring
about an end to the violence. Indeed, President
Mubarak of Egypt spoke there of the need for both
sides to return to the peace process in order to end the
cycle of violence.
In this light, the words of the representative of
Egypt, which seek to misrepresent Israel and terrorism,
seems at the very best unreflective of Egypt’s
pronounced and greatly appreciated role as a supporter
and facilitator of the Middle East peace process. Such a

12

political manipulation of the resolutions of the United
Nations serves only to undermine this Organization,
which enjoys the respect of all parties in the region.
Certain States, while engaging in political
accusations against Israel, continue to maintain that an
act of terrorism — a car bomb in a crowded
marketplace, for instance — is not to be regarded as
terrorism if it is claimed to be in the cause of national
liberation. Such a position, of course, ignores
international law and repeated United Nations
resolution, which clearly maintain that terrorism,
whatever its form or motivation, is unjustified.
Terrorism is defined by what one does, not by
what one does it for. Indeed, defending the bombing of
innocents in the name of freedom fighting is simply
incomprehensible. The perverse logic of these States
would have us believe that those who target crowded
buses or marketplaces are not terrorists, while those
who seek to stop them are. In so doing, these States do
a grave injustice to legitimate liberation movements.
I did not intend to engage in a polemic debate
here. However, I was compelled to respond to the harsh
statement made by the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Rosenstock (United States of America): The
delegation of Cuba was out of order when it explained
its vote, if that is the word for the diatribe of false
accusations to which we have been subjected twice in
the Assembly in explanation of vote. Such behaviour
already occurred in the Sixth Committee, therefore
under the rules that govern us it should not have been
repeated. Repetition does not enhance its credibility.
We will decline to dignify such out-of-order,
irresponsible behaviour beyond saying we reject the
accusations as false and regret that Cuba has seen fit
twice to subject us all to such a diatribe.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have not heard a single valid argument. We
have little time, but many truths must be told. I will
refute what has been said with several examples.
First, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
organized and carried out hundreds of acts of
aggression and terrorism against Cuba, including the
invasion of Girón — Bay of Pigs — and organized
dozens of assassination attempts against President
Fidel Castro. This was stated by the United States
Congress itself in related investigations and has been

A/55/PV.84

proved by dozens of declassified United States
documents.
Without the encouragement and support of the
United States policy of aggression against Cuba, there
would be no terrorism against Cuba. If mercenaries had
not been recruited, trained and employed for decades,
they would not exist today.
Secondly, if the United States prosecuted
terrorism against Cuba, this would not be happening.
The United States is able to listen to conversations
throughout the world and to photograph events
anywhere on the planet. The CIA alone is investing
more than $26 billion in this respect. The United States
can trace funds to even the most secret banking
accounts. How then can we believe the representative
of the United States when he says that his country does
not have the knowledge or the ability to do this?
Thirdly, those responsible for the in-flight
explosion of a Cuban aircraft coming from Barbados
were Orlando Bosch and Posada Carriles. What did the
State Department say in a statement that was
distributed in the Security Council? It said that the
United States did not support or condone the illegal
activities of Orlando Bosch. In fact, the opposite is
true.
Here are the facts. Bosch is free in Miami today,
carrying out political activities and writing for
newspapers. In 1968 he was sentenced to 10 years in
prison for a terrorist attack against a Polish vessel and
for having threatened to destroy aircraft and ships
belonging to Mexico, Spain and the United Kingdom.
The North American authorities granted him
conditional freedom in 1972. In 1976, he masterminded
the in-flight explosion of a Cuban airliner. In 1988, he
returned to the United States, where he was arrested.
The Department of Justice ordered his deportation,
saying it had information indicating that the bombing
of a Cuban aircraft had been a United Revolutionary
Organization (CORU) operation led by Bosch. But that
decision, supported by a Miami court, was later
modified by a higher authority — that is to say, by
President Bush. Bosch was given his freedom and
allowed to live in the United States. According to The
New York Times and the Boston Globe, this was the
result of lobbying on the part of Senator Connie Mack,
Congresswoman Ileana Ross and Jeb Bush, later a
Republican leader in Florida, all of whom remain on
the scene.

Fourthly, I can speak in greater detail about the
other person, Posada Carriles. He was trained by the
CIA in demolition and guerrilla warfare, was an
informant of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
in Miami, was used by the CIA to bring together the
most aggressive anti-Cuban terrorist organizations, was
responsible for numerous terrorist acts, including a
bombing at the Permanent Mission of Cuba to the
United Nations, was the organizer of the bombing
campaign against Havana hotels and was involved in
an assassination attempt against President Fidel Castro
on Margarita Island.
After the sabotage of the Cuban plane, he
resurfaced in Central America and was identified by
the American pilot Hasenfus, who was shot down in
Nicaragua as being his immediate boss in Contragate.
According to the Tower Commission Report, President
Reagan was informed of this by then National Security
Adviser McFarlane. In subsequent Senate hearings, the
CIA official Felix Rodriguez, one of the assassins of
Che Guevara, stated that he had participated in
organizing Posada’s escape from the Venezuelan prison
and in his inclusion in Oliver North’s group.
According to United States Senate records,
Posada also collected a salary in San Salvador as
Support Director of the Nicaraguan Humanitarian
Assistance Office — in other words, the State
Department. A memorandum directed to Oliver North
that was signed by Owen and Posada Carriles still
exist. Posada Carriles was working for the White
House in illegal activities and for the State Department
in legal activities.
In 1996, Posada travelled freely to Miami. In
June 1998, The New York Times published extensive
information showing that the Cuban American National
Foundation (CANF) financed the bombing campaign
against Havana hotels through the Cuban-American
Chávez Abarca, a New Jersey resident, using Posada
Carriles and Central American mercenaries.
In addition to abundant evidence, the CubanAmerican National Foundation issued a statement
indicating that it supported unreservedly incidents of
internal rebellion that had occurred in recent weeks at
the island’s hotels.
Shortly thereafter, four men travelling by boat
were detained by the United States Coast Guard upon
leaving Puerto Rico. The group leader, Angel Alfonso
Alemán, a New Jersey resident, stated that he was on a

13

A/55/PV.84

mission to kill President Fidel Castro. United States
police officials noted that the vessel was registered in
the name of a member of the Executive Board of the
CANF, that one of the rifles found on board belonged
to the President of that Foundation and that the vessel
set sail from Coral Gables, Florida, from the private
mooring of another Foundation member whose
commercial partner is also the treasurer of the Mafia
group.
The proceedings were also held in Union City,
New Jersey. The owner of the vessel confirmed that the
weapons were to be used to kill Fidel Castro, and he
boasted about having visited the White House on four
occasions: once with Reagan, once with Bush and
twice with Clinton. He showed a photograph of him
with Mr. Clinton, in which he appears with Senator
Robert Torricelli. The photograph was taken a year ago
at the Helms-Burton legislation signing ceremony.
These are the facts. What does the United States
say in the Security Council? In response to the
annoying assertions that my Government is hiding
Posada Carriles, as far as we know, Posada Carriles is
not in the United States. We believe that he is
somewhere in Latin America.
In the Special Committee on Terrorism in 1999, it
was said that the unfortunate reference — meaning to
the Cuban delegation — is a matter of public domain
and that the United States Government has repeatedly
requested the Cuban Government to provide detailed
information that could be referred to the authorities
responsible for enforcing the law. It is not true. On 3
May 1997, a document was sent to President Clinton
by former Senator Gary Hart that contained detailed
and sensitive information on a number of terrorist acts
against Cuba carried out from the United States
between 1992 and 1997.
In June 1998, the United States Government sent
a delegation to Cuba, led by a high-level FBI official,
which received detailed information. In May 1998,
President Clinton was sent a message with detailed
information on the plans of the CANF to use Central
American mercenaries to attack aircraft flying to Cuba.
To date the United States has not taken any practical
steps. The United States representative at the Special
Committee said, referring to those detained in the
attempt on Margarita Island, that those four individuals
had been charged and the United States intended to
follow the proceedings closely. That was not what

14

happened. In December 1999, a federal court in Puerto
Rico shamelessly absolved the terrorists. The New York
Times published photographs of the celebration that
followed announcement of the verdict at a nearby
restaurant, which was attended by the accused and
several jurors.
In conclusion, some of those detained in Panama
are United States residents. Pedro Remón Rodríguez,
who lives in Miami, killed an official of the Permanent
Mission of Cuba to the United States. Guillermo Novo
Sampol, a United States resident, fired a bazooka at the
United Nations in 1964 and was involved in the murder
of Orlando Letelier. Gaspar Jiménez Escobedo, a
Miami resident, one of those closely involved with the
CANF, participated in the murder of a Cuban official in
Mexico, in an assassination attempt against the
Ambassador of Cuba to the United Nations and in
many attempts against the Cuban President.
More recently, the United States Congress,
through its law on assisting victims of terrorism in
effect ...
The President: I have to interrupt the speaker,
but the 10-minute period is up.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke
Spanish): I would like to finish. I need 30 seconds.

in

The President: I ask the representative of Cuba
to be kind enough to conclude his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba): I was saying
that the funds used for alleged compensation payment
to families of perpetrators of terrorist acts against Cuba
constitute direct encouragement of those operations.
The next President of the United States — when we
finally know who he is — will have the dilemma of
maintaining the impunity or of implementing this
resolution and pursuing and eliminating all terrorism
against Cuba from his territory.
Mr. Gomaa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply to
respond to the Israeli representative’s accusation that
Egypt and the Arab countries have submitted false
claims on the events in the occupied Arab territories.
However, we wish to confirm that the accusations we
have spoken of have been documented and recorded
and have been the subject of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, as well as those of other
international organizations and organs.

A/55/PV.84

The Israeli representative forced the peace
process — in which Egypt cherishes its central role —
onto the question we are considering: combating
terrorism. This has nothing to do with the subject
matter and removes the question of terrorism from its
appropriate perspective.
Mr. Obeid (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation asked for the floor to reply to the allegations
made by the representative of the Israeli occupation a
little while ago. Our delegation fully supports the
statement made by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Arab Group and also the reply and the
explanations made by Egypt just now.
We would like to add that the claims of the
representative of the Israeli occupation in his reply —
that he knows international law — are baseless. Israel’s
claims regarding peace are just lies and have been
exposed as such during the recent bloody days on
which hundreds of martyrs — including children,
women, the elderly and unarmed young people — have
been deliberately killed.
Is this the international law of which the Israeli
representative speaks, and claims that he understands?
I do not think so, because this is not international law.
International law does not allow the occupation of the
land of others by force, nor the perpetration of the most
heinous crimes against people under occupation.
International law does not allow the innumerable
atrocities and massacres that have been perpetrated by
Israel in the occupied Arab territories since 1967 —
atrocities and massacres that are documented in United
Nations reports, General Assembly resolutions and
Security Council resolutions. These are not allegations.
Rather, the reports of the Secretariat provide proof of
the crimes that have been committed by Israel.
Israel is the country that must be in the Guinness
Book of World Records in this regard. Twenty-five
Security Council resolutions have mentioned that Israel
is the occupying Power, and yet the representative of
Israel is still in this room. He should not be here at the
United Nations. International law and the Charter of
the United Nations require that every country that is a
Member of the United Nations be peace-loving. This
condition is not respected by Israel and has not been
applied to Israel, which, since its inception via a
Security Council resolution, has been occupying by
force the land and territories of others, namely, the
territories of Lebanon, Syria and Palestine.

Were we to apply international law, then the
highest penalties should be imposed on Israel to force
it to respect international legitimacy and to implement
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Among other
things, Israel should immediately, completely and
unconditionally withdraw from all the occupied Arab
territories to the lines of 4 June 1967. In addition, the
establishment of settlements and the arming of settlers
to kill the Arabs who own the land, whose land has
been occupied by force, is a war crime and a flagrant
violation of international law and the Geneva
Conventions.
The international community should act promptly
to intervene to protect unarmed Palestinians who are
being killed daily by planes, missiles and rockets and
are being subjected to genocide. There are daily
assassinations and sniper attacks, and all sorts of
weapons are being used to kill people. Confronted by
this, the international community should establish a
criminal court to bring the Israeli war criminals to
justice and should send international troops to protect
the Palestinian people.
The staff of Mrs. Mary Robinson — the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights who
was asked to investigate the crimes committed by
Israel — have been subjected to aggression by Israeli
settlers. There have been attempts to kill her and to
prevent her from doing her job.
The international community knows full well that
Israel is the one that lies and commits crimes and that
the Arab people, who are subjected every day to
genocide, are the ones who need protection and who
need the international community to apply international
law.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
not have asked for the floor were it not for the
allegations made by the representative of Israel —
allegations that, as usual, distort the facts. This is why
the Lebanese delegation would like to express its
support for the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Arab Group.
Lebanon also wants to confirm the explanation of
vote it delivered in the Committee after voting on the
draft resolution. In it Lebanon emphasized that it fully
condemns all acts of terrorism that are part of
organized violence. Such acts include killings,

15

A/55/PV.84

assassinations, the taking of hostages, bombings, the
hijacking of planes and other acts against civilians.
The appeal made to the international community
by this resolution to combat terrorism in accordance
with the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations does not conform with the policy of
occupation and killing followed by Israel. This appeal
supports the position of Lebanon, which calls for
making a distinction between State terrorism practised
by Israel against civilians and resistance to the forces
of occupation, which is protected by international laws
and conventions.
I would like to remind the representative of
Israel, just as an example, that in April 1996 the Israeli
occupation forces intentionally bombed a United
Nations camp where more than 106 people were
seeking protection, including children, the elderly and
women. Israel killed these people on purpose. This has
been documented and confirmed by a representative of
the Secretary-General after an investigation he
conducted at the time.
We would also like to remind the Israelis of the
bombing of the infrastructure of Lebanon at the
beginning of this year. This bombing coincided with
threats from more than one Israeli official, such as
David Levy, the Foreign Minister, who threatened to
burn the Lebanese territories and who threatened the
Government, and the Israeli Chief of Staff, Saul Mofaz,
who threatened to attack civilians if the Lebanese
resistance continued its work against the occupation
forces. Israeli aggression and threats against Lebanon
and its civilians and its aggression against Palestinians
and intentional killings of children — now having
exceeded 300 people — expose the true uncivilized
character of the Israeli policy of occupation and of
attacking civilians. This is the real terrorism.
This policy is regrettable, since Israel is a
Member of the United Nations and thus should be
committed to respecting the United Nations Charter in
its laws and in its actions. However, Israel speaks about
international law while it allows the killing of civilians
and violates the norms of international law and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as all basic ethical
and moral laws. It is true that, as the representative of
Israel said, terrorism is defined by what one does and
not by what one does it for.
Mr. Jacob (Israel): I deeply regret the tenor of
the intervention made by the Syrian representative,

16

which is inappropriate in this Assembly. Although we
truly wish to achieve a just, comprehensive and durable
peace with our neighbours to the north, we have no
delusions regarding the true character of the Syrian
Government.
I, like my Syrian colleague, could also use
undiplomatic language. I could remind the members of
the Assembly that Syria is a dictatorship; Syria is a
police State; Syria is a military occupier of almost half
of the territory of a neighbouring State; Syria is the
exploiter of this neighbouring State’s economy and
resources; Syria is a cultivator and trafficker of
narcotics; Syria is a State that sponsors terrorism; Syria
harbours in its capital terrorist organizations and
activity that actively and violently oppose the peace
process in our region. I could say that Syria brutally
murders entire neighbourhoods — tens of thousands of
its own citizens — in order to silence political dissent.
However, I choose not to do so.
Yet, any statement voiced by the delegation of
Syria should be considered in the light of these facts,
which, although known by all, are diplomatically left
unmentioned. It would suffice to say, however, that any
Syrian representative’s interpretation of the meaning of
terrorism is inherently a contradiction of the term. As a
matter of fact, when a regime such as that in Syria
denigrates any other State for not complying with its
view, I would interpret that as a compliment. I would
therefore like to thank the representative of Syria for
his comments because, coming from him, this
unrestrained attack reassures me that Israel is indeed a
nation that respects peace, justice and human dignity.
With regard to the statement made by the
representative of Lebanon, I am bewildered. In the last
six months, a radical change has occurred on the IsraelLebanon border. Israel has withdrawn from Lebanon,
fulfilling its responsibilities under Security Council
resolution 425 (1978). The Secretary-General
confirmed this complete withdrawal in his report to the
Security Council, and the Council endorsed this report
and also adopted a resolution to this effect.
Why then does the Lebanese representative
continue to express his anger and frustration over the
occupation of his country and the violation of its
sovereignty as if nothing has happened? Could it be
that these Lebanese sentiments have very little to do
with Israel and its actions? Israel has never harboured
any aspirations towards Lebanese territory or resources

A/55/PV.84

and has always taken action with the sole purpose of
maintaining security along its northern border and
providing for its own self-defence. Perhaps these
Lebanese feelings could be explained by the fact that
there is another State neighbouring Lebanon that
occupies its soil and violates its sovereignty.
Mr. Obeid (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Our delegation abstained from the vote on the
resolution just adopted. We abstained because we
condemn terrorism in all its manifestations and forms
and because this resolution does not contain a clear
distinction between the kind of terrorism that we
condemn as a crime and the right of people to resist
foreign occupation in accordance with international
law, international legitimacy and the United Nations
Charter.
As for the crimes committed by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories, they are examples of
international terrorism. The lies of the representative of
the Israeli occupation are totally baseless. There is a
saying: lie, lie, lie — maybe it works.
Syria entered Lebanon by request of the Lebanese
Government in order to protect Lebanese civilians from
Israeli attacks and to apply the resolutions of the Taif
Agreement regarding security in Lebanon. This is an
internal matter between Syria and Lebanon, and there
are brotherly treaties between them, implemented in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
international legitimacy. This has nothing to do with
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and the
massacres perpetrated by Israel against the Arab people
under its occupation.
The representative of the Israeli occupation has
told lies about Syria, accusations that are not
documented or true. We fully reject them. It shows that
they have no arguments to submit. They talk only to
cover up their own daily crimes in the occupied
territories. The United Nations resolutions prove their
crimes; the Charter of the United Nations is clear;
international law is clear. Israel is the one that occupies
Arab territories, and the United Nations resolutions
should be applied to force Israel to withdraw from
these territories.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): We truly
regret the interventions of the Israeli representative,
who attacks States. We were under the impression that
we were discussing the question of terrorism, and we
gave examples of Israeli terrorism against civilians.

We have cited examples of Israeli terrorism over
the 22 years of its occupation of Lebanon’s territory
and its murder and maiming of Lebanese civilians and
children with a variety of prohibited and unprohibited
weapons. We had thought that this was the question
under consideration, but when we gave our supporting
arguments, the representative of Israel chose to discuss
another issue, since he had no answer to our rightful
accusations.
First, I would remind him that his country
occupied Lebanon for 22 years, in contravention of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which Israel
flouted all that time. Secondly, we would ask what the
Israelis are doing in the Sheba’a farmlands, which they
continue to occupy and where they have increased their
military presence. Does this military escalation in an
occupied territory demonstrate a desire for peace or for
war? Finally, we would remind the representative of
Israel that the relationship between Lebanon and Syria
is that of brothers. There is a cooperation and
coordination agreement between the two countries; it is
not a relation based on occupation, as the
representative of Israel has depicted it.
Here, we would inquire about the fate of the
19 Lebanese civilian hostages kidnapped by the Israeli
forces from their homes and currently held as hostages
in Israeli prisons, a fact acknowledged by the Israeli
Supreme Court. Is this not terrorism?
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
164.
Agenda item 165
Review of the Statute of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/615)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/159).

17

A/55/PV.84

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 165?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 171
Observer status for the Inter-American Development
Bank in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/616)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/160).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 171?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 172
Observer status for the International Institute
for Democracy and Electoral Assistance in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/617)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The draft decision was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 172?
It was so decided.

18

Agenda item 184
Observer status for the Economic Community of
Central African States in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/648)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/161).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 184?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Sixth Committee before it.
Announcements
The President: Before we take up the items on
the agenda for this morning, I would like to make an
announcement concerning the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process on the Law of the
Sea.
Members will recall that the General Assembly,
by its resolution 54/33 of 24 November 1999, decided
to establish an open-ended informal consultative
process, in order to facilitate the annual review by the
General Assembly of developments in ocean affairs by
considering the Secretary-General’s report on oceans
and the law of the sea. It also decided that the meetings
of this process would be coordinated by two cochairpersons, who would be appointed by the President
of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member
States and taking into account the need for
representation from developed and developing
countries.
In this regard, the first meeting of the Consultative
Process was held at United Nations Headquarters from 30
May to 2 June 2000. The meeting was co-chaired by the
Permanent Representative of Samoa to the United
Nations, Ambassador Tuiloma Slade, and Mr. Alan

A/55/PV.84

Simcock of the United Kingdom, who were appointed by
my predecessor.

would postpone the date of recess of the fifty-fifth
session to Friday, 15 December 2000.

Members will further recall that the General
Assembly, by its resolution 55/7 of 30 October 2000,
requests the Secretary-General to convene the second
meeting of the Consultative Process, to be held in New
York from 7 to 11 May 2001.

However, I have been informed by the Chairman
of the Fifth Committee that the Committee will still not
be able to conclude its work before 20 December 2000.
The Assembly will therefore not be able to conclude its
work by that date. I would like, therefore, to propose to
the Assembly that it postpone the date of recess of the
current session to Friday, 22 December 2000.

With regard to the co-chairpersonships of the
second meeting of the Consultative Process next year, I
have conducted extensive consultations, both through
the chairs of regional groups and through a significant
number of individual delegations, representing all
regions. During these consultations wide support was
expressed for the co-chairpersons of the first meeting
of the Consultative Process. Both of them were highly
praised for their excellence as mediators and
consensus-builders.
It is therefore my great pleasure to announce my
decision to re-appoint Ambassador Tuiloma Slade,
Permanent Representative of Samoa to the United
Nations, and Mr. Alan Simcock of the United Kingdom
as the two co-chairpersons of the second meeting of the
Consultative Process. However, some Member States
also expressed the view that there may be a need to
consider rotating the co-chairpersonship of this
process. Thus, I should like to urge interested Member
States to consider the issue of rotation as early as
possible and to submit distinct nominations, through
the appropriate channels, in regard to the cochairpersons of the third meeting of the Consultative
Process.
As delegations will have noted from this
morning’s Journal, and while on the subject of
appointments, I would also like to indicate that — in
the Working Group, after the plenary meeting is
adjourned — I will be making an announcement of a
similar nature concerning the Vice-Chairpersons of the
Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
Related to the Security Council. The meeting of the
Working Group will take place in this Hall immediately
following the adjournment of this meeting.
Postponement of the date of recess
The President: Members will recall that at its
73rd plenary meeting, on 28 November 2000, the
General Assembly decided that the General Assembly

If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to this proposal?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President: I would now like to inform
members about some changes and additions to the
programme of work of the General Assembly.
On Thursday morning, 14 December 2000, the
General Assembly will resume consideration of agenda
item 20 and its sub-items (a), (b) and (c), relating to
humanitarian assistance. This will be to take up draft
resolutions that will be ready for consideration.
On the same day the Assembly will also take up
the following agenda items: agenda item 54,
“Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity on
the aerial and naval military attack against the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the present United
States Administration in April 1986”; agenda item 55,
“Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security”; agenda item 56, “Consequences of the Iraqi
occupation of and aggression against Kuwait”; agenda
item 57, “Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations”; and agenda item 58, “Launching of
global negotiations on international economic
cooperation for development”.
In addition, I would like to inform members that
agenda item 17 (h), “Appointment of members of the
Committee on Conferences”, and agenda items 20 (d)
and 46, relating to Afghanistan — originally scheduled
for Friday afternoon, 15 December 2000 — are
postponed to Tuesday, 19 December 2000.
The meeting rose at 12 noon.

19
