S/2004/642

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 August 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 11 August 2004 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) and taking
note of the letter from the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee dated
6 August 2004 (annex I), I am pleased to inform you that the Security Council has
endorsed the organizational plan of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate that you submitted to the Counter-Terrorism Committee on 29 July 2004
(annex II).
(Signed) Andrey I. Denisov
President of the Security Council

04-45829 (E) 130804

*0445829*

S/2004/642

Annex I
Letter dated 6 August 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the
President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) (para. 5), I am pleased to
inform you that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has endorsed the attached
organizational plan of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Consistent with that resolution, this plan was submitted to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee by the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, in consultation with and through the Secretary-General.
I am now submitting this plan for the Council’s endorsement.
As provided in both Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) and the report of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee on its revitalization (S/2004/124), the Committee
looks forward to a close and cooperative relationship with the Executive Director
and his staff with the goal of enhancing the Committee’s ability to monitor
effectively the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all Member States. In
particular, and in the near term, the Counter-Terrorism Committee considers that
further discussions are needed between the Executive Director and the Committee,
as appropriate, concerning the job descriptions for the positions in the Executive
Directorate reflecting all areas of expertise covered by resolutions 1373 (2001) and
other relevant provisions of the declarations annexed to resolutions 1377 (2001) and
1456 (2003), as well as his plans for organizing the Executive Directorate, in
particular the Assessment and Technical Assistance Office.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee welcomes the fact that all posts in the
Executive Directorate would be open to nationals of all United Nations Member
States and that proper attention would be given to ensuring the closest cooperation
and coordination with the Committee’s Monitoring Team, in accordance with
resolutions 1455 (2003) and 1526 (2004), as well as with the Committee’s work
programme as approved by the Security Council.
(Signed) Andrey I. Denisov
Chairman
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism

2

S/2004/642

Annex II
Letter dated 29 July 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
I have the honour to refer to paragraph 4 of resolution 1535 (2004) in which
the Security Council “requests the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, within 30 days of taking office, in consultation
with and through the Secretary-General, to submit to the plenary, for its
endorsement, an organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, consistent with the Committee’s report (S/2004/124) and
United Nations rules and regulations”.
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached organizational plan for the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to the attention of the members
of the Committee.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

3

S/2004/642

Enclosure
Organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate
I.

Introduction
1.
In paragraph 4 of its resolution 1535 (2004) of 26 March 2004, the Security
Council requested the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, within 30 days of taking office, to submit to the plenary for
its endorsement, in consultation with and through the Secretary-General, an
organizational plan for the Executive Directorate. The present plan is submitted in
response to that request.
2.

The resolution provides that the plan is to cover:

(a) The structure of the Executive Directorate, its staffing requirements,
budget needs, management guidelines, and recruitment procedures, recognizing in
particular the need for an effective, cooperative management structure for the new
body;
(b) Staffing with suitably qualified and experienced personnel, who would be
international civil servants subject to Article 100 of the Charter of the United
Nations, securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity and
paying due regard to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical
basis as possible.
3.
The present plan aims, first of all, to secure for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate the capacity, staffing and management that will
enable it to fulfil the tasks mandated by the Security Council. At the same time, it
endeavours to keep the structure effective and lean, in the sense of keeping the
staffing level no higher than is strictly necessary for the performance of its
responsibilities.
4.
According to paragraph 2 of resolution 1535 (2004), the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is to be established as a special political mission
under the policy guidance of the plenary of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1535 (2004), in which the Security Council
endorsed the report of the Committee on its revitalization (S/2004/124), the
Executive Directorate, headed by an Executive Director, will consist of two bodies,
the Assessment and Technical Assistance Office and the Information and
Administrative Office.
5.
The plan seeks to provide the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate with an effective, lean and flexible structure designed to enhance the
ability of the Counter-Terrorism Committee to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Among the priorities of the Executive Directorate will be:
(a) To ensure the collection of information for monitoring the efforts of
Member States in their implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), including through
visits with the consent of the State concerned;

4

S/2004/642

(b) To strengthen the facilitation of technical assistance aimed at increasing
the capabilities of Member States in the fight against terrorism and ensuring that its
provision is adjusted to the countries’ needs;
(c) To enhance cooperation and coordination among international, regional
and subregional organizations in the fight against terrorism, as well as among other
United Nations bodies;
(d) To ensure consistency among all the activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee while maintaining a tailored approach to each State Member of the
United Nations and with regard to every subject under resolution 1373 (2001);
(e) To provide adequate and complete follow-up of all the Committee’s
decisions;
(f) To ensure the correct exchange of information at the proper level, from
the Offices (Assessment and Technical Assistance Office and Information and
Administrative Office), the Executive Directorate itself and between the latter and
other relevant bodies of the United Nations.
6.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate is established as an
integral part of the Secretariat. Its Executive Director reports directly to the
Secretary-General, and the Executive Directorate is under the policy guidance of the
Committee’s plenary. The Executive Directorate is established for an initial period
ending on 31 December 2007 and subject to a comprehensive review by the Security
Council by 31 December 2005.
A.

Management structure
7.
The plan seeks to bring about an effective cooperative management structure.
For the fulfilment of the tasks assigned to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, it is indispensable that the different parts of the structure
complement each other and cooperate. A weekly meeting led by the Executive
Director and comprising senior and key staff is envisaged as an important means of
ensuring cooperative management, mutual assistance and a sense of unity of
purpose. A similar approach will be followed within both the Assessment and
Technical Assistance Office and the Information and Administrative Office. The
heads of the Offices will have the duty to ensure cohesion within their respective
Offices and cooperation with other offices.

B.

Staffing
8.
The paramount consideration in the appointment of all staff of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate will be the necessity of securing the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, in accordance with Article
101 of the Charter. Both staff and consultants will be drawn from the broadest
possible geographical base and a special effort will be made to hire duly qualified
women. Staff appointments will be limited to service within the Executive
Directorate. The Executive Director, in order to ensure that the expert posts in the
Assessment and Technical Assistance Office are advertised promptly and filled
expeditiously, will consult with the Office of Human Resources Management.
9.
The staff will be paid by the United Nations and will serve under the
established conditions of service applicable to fixed-term staff. Rosters will be

5

S/2004/642

compiled of candidates with special skills and expertise. All United Nations
Member States may be asked to put forward candidates with the necessary
qualifications to fill the expert posts. On a temporary basis ad hoc experts from
international, regional and subregional organizations could also be engaged
following arrangements by the Executive Directorate and those organizations.
Reviews of the organizational structure and staffing will naturally have to be
undertaken in the light of developments and future needs, with flexibility in mind.
10. The present plan envisages that staff will be United Nations employees subject
to Article 100 of the Charter, which requires that they shall neither seek nor receive
instructions from any other authority external to the Organization.

II.

Responsibilities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate
11. The main task of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
its Executive Director is to support and advise the Committee’s plenary and its
Chairman in all their functions. The Executive Directorate is entrusted with carrying
out the day-to-day work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee while, at the same
time, advising the Chairman and the plenary with suggestions concerning courses of
action to monitor effectively the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Special
care will be taken to facilitate the provision of assistance programmes to States by
strengthening contacts with States, other bodies of the United Nations system,
including the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations.
12. The concrete functions of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate as described in the report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on its
own revitalization (S/2004/124), endorsed in paragraph 1 of resolution 1535 (2004),
include a wide range aimed at enabling the Committee to monitor effectively the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

III.

Outline of the organizational structure of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate
13. The Executive Director will be assisted by a Special Assistant, a Public
Information and Communications Officer, responsible for implementing a proactive
communications policy, as is foreseen in the report on the revitalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and a Personal Assistant.

A.

Assessment and Technical Assistance Office
14. The Assessment and Technical Assistance Office will have a head of office
who will replace the Executive Director during his absence and ensure the proper
coordination of its work. The Office will be composed of 20 experts, who will be
organized by the Executive Director, in close and continuous consultation with his
team, in a manner to ensure the effective implementation of the Executive
Directorate’s mandate, taking into account the geographical and functional needs,
and the interaction with the subcommittees of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. As

6

S/2004/642

the work evolves, the structure should be open to be adapted to meet new
challenges.
15. The Assessment and Technical Assistance Office will have expertise in every
area covered by resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant provisions of the
declarations annexed to resolutions 1377 (2001) and 1456 (2003), representing all
main legal systems. Recruitment of staff will follow the requirements established in
Article 100 of the Charter and other relevant United Nations rules and regulations.
Specific job descriptions, as required in consultations with the Office of Human
Resources Management, will be prepared by the Executive Director to cover every
area of resolution 1373 (2001).
16. The Executive Director will ensure that every relevant international, regional
and subregional organization will have a contact point within the Assessment and
Technical Assistance Office, including the need to liaise with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other organizations
competent in matters related to human rights and counter-terrorism.
B.

Information and Administrative Office
17. The main responsibility of the Information and Administrative Office is to
provide assistance to the Executive Director, to the Assessment and Technical
Assistance Office, and to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The Information and
Administrative Office will have a head assuring the proper coordination of its work.
18. Furthermore, the staff of the Information and Administrative Office will ensure
the necessary administrative needs of the directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, taking into account, among other things, the keeping of centralized files,
registry and database, editing of the reports and support staff.

IV.

Outline of the cost forecast for the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate
19. The financial requirements of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate will be submitted in the report of the Secretary-General to the General
Assembly for its consideration.

A.

Personnel costs
20. The personnel that will work for the Executive Directorate will be in
accordance with the needs identified in the report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on its revitalization, endorsed in paragraph 1 of resolution 1535 (2004).

B.

Premises
21. The Executive Directorate would be accommodated in suitable premises,
taking into account all relevant functional and security considerations.

C.

Travel
22. According to the report of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on its
revitalization, among the Committee’s priorities through the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is to strengthen the facilitation of technical

7

S/2004/642

assistance to States and to enhance cooperation and coordination among
international, regional and subregional organizations. To comply with this task the
Committee, through the Executive Directorate, must continue and reinforce its
presence in action-oriented international and national conferences, seminars,
workshops etc. In addition, as established in resolution 1535 (2004), the Committee,
through the Executive Directorate, would conduct visits to States, where appropriate
and with the consent of the State concerned.
23. The Executive Director will report to the plenary of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee on the travels carried out by him personally or authorized by him to
members of the staff of the Executive Directorate.
D.

Temporary arrangements
24. In paragraph 7 of its resolution 1535 (2004), the Security Council stressed that,
to ensure that the Counter-Terrorism Committee continues to operate effectively
during the consolidation of the Committee’s support structure into the Executive
Directorate, the Committee would continue to operate with its present support
structure until the Committee, in consultation with the Secretary-General,
determines that the Executive Directorate is operational. In this regard, the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
while following the United Nations Financial and Staff Regulations and Rules, will
make the necessary arrangements to comply with the provisions of the Security
Council resolution as the process to formalize the structure of the Executive
Directorate progresses.

8
