UNITEDNATIONS

S
0
.YP’
TWENTY-EIGHTH

Y

YEAR
SEP 2 4 19

1
NEW

th MEETING: 18 APRIL 1973
YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1709) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . . .
Adoption of the agenda

Puge
1

. .. . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913) . . * . . . . . . . . * *. . * *. . . . . *. . . I.. . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

SJPV. 1709

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINTH

Held in New York on Wednesday, 18 April
President: Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR

(Peru).

MEETING
1973, at 10.30 a.m.

3. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, allow me
first to congratulate you most warmly and sincerely on
your assuming the leadership of this Council during this
month of April, and to assure you that, on the basis of the
existing excellent relations between Kenya and your great
country, Peru, my delegation will fully co-operate with you
in ensuring the most speedy, equitable and businesslike
despatch of the work of the Council during this month.

,?esent: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l709)

4. My congratulations go also to Mr. Aquilino Boyd of
Panama, President of the Council for the month of March,
for his democratic leadership during his tenure of office.
My delegation sincerely thanks him, his Government and
the people of Panama for the most warm hospitality
extended to us during the Council meetings in Panama City.
The memories we carried back with us will help consolidate
the existing excellent relations between the people of
Panama and Kenya.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)
The meeting was called to order at 11.5 a.m.

5. I recognize with pleasure the presence in our midst of
the Foreign Minister of Egypt, a person who was our
colleague here at the United Nations, and whose ability as a
diplomat has been aptly and positively demonstrated in this
Council and in various other international forums.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

6. May I end these introductory remarks by welcoming
the newly appointed Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Schevchenko. My delegation will work closely with him to ensure
that the functions and purposes of the Council are fulfilled.

Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 109 13)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council [I 705th
meeting], and with its consent, I shall invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel and Egypt to take places at the
Council table,

7. Kenya is a small, non-aligned country, a country
dedicated to peace, and, as we stated in Panama last month,
cL. . . we must be partisans of peace and progress rather
than enemies or allies of this or that country, ideology or
philosophy, [We hold the view that] It is not sufficient to
desire peace, To vindicate peace, we must work for it; we
must pledge that those who are our adversaries today will,
ultimately, be our friends and good neighbours in the
years to come.” [I 700th meeting, para. 23.1

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. H. El-Zayyat (Egypt)
tookplaces at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Again
in accordance with the previous decisions of the Council
[I705th,
1706th and 1708th meetings], I invite the
representatives of Saudi Arabia, Algeria, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Tunisia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding
that they will be invited to be seated at the Council table
when they wish to make additional statements.

We believe that, in order to contribute effectively to the
vindication of international peace and security, our appreach to international issues, such as the one before the
Council, should be based on equity and on vigorous
examination of the merits of the case before US.Justice and
peace dictate that settlements should be reached based
firmly on the basic principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab
Republic} and Mr. R. Driss (nnisia)
took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,

8. The item of which the Council is seized, namely the
complaint by Lebanon contained in the letter dated 12
1

April 1973 from the representative of Lebanon (S/ll?913],
regrettably shows a further worsening of the Middle East
situation. During the last 25 years, the spiralling cycle of
violence, fed by the lack of a basic solution to the Middle
East problem, has compounded an already complex and
dangerous situation. The untold human suffering in the area
is almost taken for granted. This bleak situation has
attracted the interplay of international intrigue, machinations and the rapacity of world imperialist forces. Within
the last 25 years, this Council and the General Assembly of
the United Nations have adopted numerous resolutions on
the intractable Middle East problem, and almost all of them
have remained unimplemented. We cannot but regret the
human suffering that has ensued as a result of this situation.
We thus strongly condemn all acts which aggravate the
situation and all acts of terrorism and counter-terrorism; we
passionately condemn these in the name of human dignity
and in the name of peace. Terrorism is not a commodity for
export.

other States. We can abandon the Charter only at grave risk
to ourselves. My delegation repeats that it is opposed to
acts of violation of the sovereignty of other States, whether
that be through incursions such as the. recent Israeli
incursion into Lebanon, or through acts of subversion alld
incursions into other States by groups or individuals trailled
and encouraged by other States. Such acts of aggression and
incursion, and interference with the sovereignty of other
States, cannot be justified by any excuse whatsoever.
13. We have a sad and ugly situation on our hands. This
Council cannot sit idly by while the Charter is daily
violated and trampled upon. We could yet turn this dark
hour in the Middle East to a positive use. My delegation har
listened attentively to previous speakers and we sense a
determination on the part of many here to try yet againto
go to the root cause of the Middle East situation. The
machinery is already there in the form of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). In the view of my delegation,the
Council could help advance the causeof peace in the
Middle East only by reactivating the whole machinery
already set up by the Council. In order to ensureactive
involvement for peace,the Council must call upon the big
Powers to ensure that the specialrepresentative of the
Secretary-Generalis given a chance to bring the patties
togetherin order to achievepeacein the Middle East.

9. To give an illustration of our total commitment to
peace and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations,
Kenya was amongst the foremost to condemn the coldblooded murder of Israeli athletes in Munich last year.
Equally, we did not hesitate to condemn in a forthright
manner the almost unprecedented shooting down of the
Libyan civil aircraft by the Israelis a few weeks ago which
resulted in the unnecessary loss of over a hundred innocent
civilian lives. The records of the ICAO meeting held here in
New York a few months back will bear this out.

14. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President,we are glad that WC?
have reverted to the customary calm and decorum of the
Council debates,and it givesme greatpleasureto beginthis
statementwith our congratulationsto you on your presidency this month. We extend to you our friendliest
co-operationin your vital task, as I hope we did to your
predecessor,Mr. Boyd, who did so much for the work of
the Council, both here and in Panama,during the wholeof
March. Wealsooffer to Mr. Shevchenkoour felicitationson
his new post and we aresurethat he will be a great success.

10. It is the view of my delegation that the complaint by
Lebanon cannot be treated outside its basic Middle East
context, because that would amount to the CounciI’s trying
to treat only the visible symptoms of a malignant cancer
without recognizing the basic causes of the disease. The
complaint by Lebanon cannot be isolated from the question of the basic human rights and future of the Palestinians; it cannot be treated in isolation from the question
of’ the occupied Arab territories. It cannot be dealt with
without taking into account the position of the State of
Israel and the reIations between the State of Israel and its
Arab neighbours.

15. The problem we are discussingis not new, but its
manifestationshave become more complicated and more
dangerous.Israel exists. In 1947, when Palestine was
partitioned and Israel established,many did not agreeto
this solution, asit appearedwrong to them in variousWays
and wasparticularly unfair to the Arabs inasmuchasthey
were made to pay the penalty for other people’s crimes.
However, the United Nations decidedto create the Stateof
Israelandit becamea Member of this Organization.

11. In the Middle East today the violation of the
sovereignty of States is an everyday practice. This is
counter to the precepts of the Charter, which we all declare
we adhere to. My Foreign Minister, speaking in London last
month, said:

16. We do not believethat anyone canseriously havethe
desireto disturb that decisionafter somany years and WC
recognize that Israel has the rights and obligations of a
sovereignState exercising its jurisdiction within its ten%
torial limits as determinedby the United Nations. Therefore, it seemsto uslargely irrelevant andindeed undesirable
to quote from different Arab and Israeliand other leaders
on what they thought of Israel or its establishmentduring
the last 2.5 years. Indeed, somespeakerswent further back
into history and gave their own views on it. We doubt if
these theories and dissertations,fascinatingin themselves.
areof muchusefor our presentpurpose.

“Kenya is also deeply committed to the principles of
peaceful co-existence as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. More specifically, they require peaceful
settlement of all disputes, non-use of force in inter-State
relations, self-determination
in colonized Territories,
sovereign equality of States, non-interference in internal
affairs of States, and fulfilment in the good faith of
Charter obligations.”
12. The Charter of the United Nations is the bed-rock on
which a just, fair, stable and lasting peace can be built. We
exhort all those who sit around this table, and other
Members of the United Nations, to treat and use the
Charter as their guide in the conduct of their relations with

1’7. I should like to mention and disposeof two points
which severalspeakerstook painsto elaborate.First, maw
speakersbecameeloquent on the dutiesand responsibilities
2

of the United Nations, and particularly of its Security
Council. Many of the critics of the United Nations, ignoring
the basic nature of this Organization and the various
evolutions international politics have undergone during the
last 27 years, emphasize none the less that this Organization
is becoming ineffective, if not irresponsible, and is failing to
do its duty-duty being defined, of course, according to the
speaker’s view of what solution a particular problem
requires.

them support, sustenance and sympathy in different
degrees and in different ways, Therefore, to eradicate this
terrorism, Israel thinks it is necessary to teach the guilty
Arab States so bitter a lesson that they will not dare extend
any co-operation to the terrorists and, as a consequence,
their activities will cease and their movement collapse. All
that Israel has done or wishes to do is to bring about this
happy end.
22. On the other hand, the Arab representatives have
repeatedly pointed out that what Israel describes as
terrorism by the Palestinian people is directly due to their
sense of injustice and frustration, and unless the basic
cause-the illegal occupation of Arab lands by Israel-is
removed and the refugees are allowed to enjoy their
inalienable rights and return home in accordance with the
United Nations resolutions,, this mass movement cannot be
suppressed and any attempt by anyone to suppress it will
not only fail but will bring about greater tension and
unforeseen and unforeseeable difficulties and complications. And if such attempts to suppress the Palestinians
were to be made by any Arab Governments, they would be
simply unable to do so as the sympathy of their’people is
with the Palestinians and they themselves-the Governments and the people alike-cannot indefinitely tolerate the
occupation of their lands by Israel and suffer silently all the
consequences which have followed from such occupation.

18. May I simply say that many of these critics belong to
those groups who were elated by the creation of Israel, and
one might ask them if this fact alone, the fact of Israel’s
birth, should not be a sufficient indication, at least in their
eyes, of the great achievement of the United Nations and so
command, at least from them, unflinching loyalty and
unlimited support. Unfortunately, one does not see much
evidence of these sentiments. Secondly, much has been said
about cause and effect, but surely when we come to discuss
concrete problems, it is nearly impossible to consider this
chain of causation from any particular link, conveniently
chosen by one protagonist or another.
19. We are therefore compelled to look at the picture as a
whole. In June of last year I said before the Council:
“The problem of the Middle East, like many other
problems of international concern, has to be viewed in its
totality. It is not enough to cite the principle of
self-defence, without
at the same time taking into
account the principle of non-admissibility of acquisition
of territory by force of arms and the principle of the right
of dispossessed people to be restored to their . . . lands.”
(1649th meeting, pm. 126.1

23. The Israeli policy, if logically followed, will lead to
intolerable Iawlessness and absurdities. The Arabs may
consider, for instance, that there are States which support
Israel to such an extent that it feels encouraged and
strengthened enough to continue its illegal activities in
occupying Arab lands and in increasing its control and
domination over such lands. If the Arabs took such a view,
as indeed they do, and followed Israeli logic-which
fortunately
they do not-they
might feel justified in
carrying out raids, killing people, innocent and guilty alike,
destroying property and razing to the ground towns, cities
and villages and undertaking any revengeful and malicious
activities until the States friendly to Israel have publicly
and privately, directly or indirectly, given up their support
and sympathy for Israel. Surely, this is a totally indefensible doctrine of international lawlessness, and no one-least
of all the Security Council-can brook it and far less accept
it, It is irrelevant and, if not irrelevant, dangerous for our
purpose, to take into account the fact that Arab countries
do not have the resources and arms to carry out such a
policy. Israel has these arms, or, more accurately, has been
provided with them, and now uses them for executing its
ill-conceived mission. This could not possibly be the
intention of the donors, but it is how much of the help
Israel has received is being utilized. In any event, if these
arms and resources are basic to Israeli policy, then we must
deny Israel their use. This is for immediate determination
and consequent action by the Council.

I have carefully listened to and read the statements made
by the various delegations, including those made by the
representative of Israel, but I did not see any mention of
these latter principles in his analysis. I wonder why.
20. Israel naturally has the right, like all other sovereign.
States, to defend its own territory and its own citizens in its
own
State. But who is a citizen of Israel? How can anyone
accept that a Jew, wherever he may be and to whatever
country he may belong, is somehow or other a citizen of
Israel or that Israel has any rights over him or legal duty
towards him? If, however, a citizen of Israel, whether he is
a Jew or a non-Jew, is put in jeopardy in a foreign country
or by a foreign country, Israel has of course every right ta
seek redress for such a citizen through the usual process of
bilateral arrangements or such international law as may
apply in any particular instance. But does it have the right
to protect its citizens in another country by force of arms
or by similar violent methods?
21. It seems to us that any claim to such right or rights
flatly contradicts both the Charter of the United Nations
and the usual rule of international law. As we understand it,
the Israeli case or policy is simply this: that terroristsPalestine or Arab or whatever other description one may
give them-are
creating much trouble for Israel and,
through their activities, taking innocent lives and damaging
property and creating many other hazards. Israel charges
that, in these activities, the Arab Governments are giving

24. We condemn and whole-heartedly deplore terrorism
wherever it takes place and by whomsoever it is perpetrated. We do so not merely on humanitarian and moral
grounds, but also because terrorist movements often forfeit
much sympathy even in their worthy causes and make
peaceful and just solutions to problems more difficult. At
the same time, we realize that jf these solutions are greatly
3

delayed, and if there is no progress, people suffering from
injustice and frustration
will fall back on desperate
measures, which often mean death and injury to innocent
victims. We do not condone even these desperate measures
and we extend our fullest sympathy to their victims and to
their friends and relatives.

28. We have heard much about the evil of terrorism and
the need for international action to prevent it. This is being
studied separately, and we hope some solution to this
problem, which unfortunately but at times inevitably has
been a feature of many worthy struggles in the past, will be
found. Meanwhile, I am not aware of any country which
has called for outside help in order to eradicate this
menace. Israel, like all other countries, has every right to
suppress terrorism or any other kind of lawlessness inside
its own State, but cannot exercise such a right outside it,
and particularly to the detriment of the rights of other
States.

25. But, if this vicious circle is to be avoided, the solution
must surely lie in finding an equitable and just end to the
problem. This is what was attempted in the Council’s
resolution 242 (1967) which unfortunately has not been
implemented for reasons given earlier in Ambassador
Jarring’s report. We agree with the Foreign Minister of
Egypt [I 707th meeting/ that the time has come to ask for
a full report from the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative. With oral and written presentations by
them, the Council will be in a much better position to
decide how progress can be made in carrying out resolution
242 (1967), what other efforts should be undertaken to
solve the problem and the reasons for their failure and,
lastly, but no less important, what future mechanism, if
any, the Council should establish and what new decisions it
should take to bring about a just solution in this turbulent
area. Meanwhile, it would certainly be a welcome development if the permanent members could renew their discussion.

29. The representative of Israel gave a long list of terrorist
activities by the Palestinians. Similar lists of terrorist
activities by the Government of Israel were forthcoming
from the Arab delegations. I do not intend to examine all
these instances cited by both sides for the simple reason
that the facts in many cases are far from clear. Claims,
counter-claims, the presence of agents provocateurs and
many other factors confuse the picture. If Israel had come
to the Council with specific complaints and on time, it
would at least have received a good hearing before it
decided to strike aggressively and brutally into Lebanon
again and again.
30. I shall not take much notice of the various old
quotations, sometimes from newspapers, with which the
speakers have adorned and supported their case. In the
tense and warlike atmosphere of the Middle East it is but
natural that many statements have been made in response
to events at a particular moment and in special circumstances. Nor can we assess if newspapers and editors always
speak with official authority, In any event, digging into past
reports and quotations will not help us move forward.

26. On the specific complaint of Lebanon before the
Council, the representative of Israel said that Lebanon was
the centre of many terrorist organizations and that the
Lebanese authorities were in many ways involved in them.
He said that on 12 April [I705th meeting/. The next day,
13 April (1706th meeting], he accused the Syrian Arab
Republic of being the hotbed of terrorism with 9,000
terrorists out of 14,000-those are his calculations-being
concentrated in the Syrian Arab Republic. On 16 April
[2707th meeting/, he described Egypt as the political
centre of terrorism and implied that Libya was a principal
financial backer of much of these terrorist activities. Are we
to assume from those statements that Israel will raid and
ravage all these countries until they behave in a manner
satisfactory to Israel and that, if Lebanon has been chosen
as the first place to strike in, it is simply because it is the
weakest? Or, is it possible that, if Lebanon can be taught a
lesson at a comparatively cheap price, the calculation is that
the other neighbouring countries will have drawn their own
conclusions and therefore the problem of “pacification” in
other countries would to that extent be simplified?
Whatever might be the calculations, these raids, deaths and
destruction certainly do not betray any great desire on the
part of Israel to live in peace and justice with the Arab
countries. The raids on Lebanon or, rather, a succession of
raids into that country, hardly open the way for such
peaceful coexistence.

31. I hope, Mr. President, that I have kept in mind your
appeal to speak on the agenda. I have indicated briefly our
attitude towards any action the Council may contemplate
taking. I may speak again. I have avoided noisy rhetoric,
ancient history and false analogies. Many questions have
been asked in the course of our debate and not all of them
have been answered. This is perhaps just as well, for we
have had enough exchanges on matters on which differing
views continue to be held-always
passionately but not
infrequently without much respect for facts.
32. I cannot conclude this statement without expressing
some doubt if New York is the right place for an objective
debate on the problem of the Middle East. I need not
elaborate, but one has simply to keep one’s eyes and ears
open both inside and outside the Council Chamber to
realize to what extent the atmosphere is tilted and stilted in
favour of Israel. We are therefore all the more grateful that
the Foreign Minister of Egypt travelled a long distance in
his search for a just solution to this problem, which has
brought infinite soriow and distress to the Arab lands and
which has made 1.5 million Palestinians homeless, hopeless
and perpetual victims to all possible horrors which human
beings are heir to.

27. The representative of Israel, in explaining the death of
many innocent civilians in the latest raids at Beirut and
Sidon, said that this was incidental to punishing the
criminals. There are, however, other statements which
indicate that in future it may not be possible to confine
action or punishment to those dubbed as criminals only.
The time may come when the distinction between the
criminal and the innocent will be overlooked and a kind of
collective punitive action may be undertaken.

33. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, Xhave the greatest respect and admiration for
my colleagues around the Security Council table, but may I
4

say that the greatest pleasure of all is to see you in the high
office of President of the Security Council. You are a great
~,ath American and a distinguished son of Peru, with whose
people and Government Panama maintains fraternal relations and your human qualities, your experience and your
training give us the most complete guarantee of efficiency
in the conduct of our debates.

41. Without going into the ‘substance of the question in
the study of cause and effect, it is very difficult to
determine who are the patriots and who are the terrorists,
In general terms, international terrorism is a scourge which
afflicts all the world and which, in our opinion, deserves to
be studied as a separate problem. What we have before us
now is the specific complaint of Lebanon.

34. My delegation wishes to welcome most cordially the
new Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Security
Council Affairs, Mr. Arkady Shevchenko, and we offer him
our enthusiastic co-operation in the discharge of his delicate
functions.

42. In our desire to be fair, we have been concerned that
Israel has carried out its attacks against Lebanon in open
violation of very clear standards of international law, such
as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
State Member of the United Nations. Since my country
cannot condone such acts, we must pronounce ourselves
categorically and unequivocally in favour of Lebanon, for
we believe that its territorial integrity and political independence should be respected.

35. Before going into the substance of the question before
us, I should like to express my gratitude for the kind
congratulations expressed by my colleagues for the way I
conducted the debates during the month of March both in
New York and in Panama. It has been a source of great
satisfaction to us that the representatives on the Security
Council paid tribute to my country and Government for
the way it organized the meetings in Panama and also that
they mentioned the hospitality and courtesy of my people
during those meetings. On behalf of the Government and
people of Panama, I wish to say once again to the members
of the Council that it is we who are grateful to you, to the
Secretary-General and to all those who laboured so hard
both here and there for the success of that series of
meetings away from Headquarters.

43. The argument of Israel that it proceeds in this manner
because the Government of Lebanon has taken no measures
against the terrorist organizations established on its territory to put an end to their activities does not seem to us to
be sufficient justification for the action taken. Panama
furthermore considers that it is deplorable that excessive
action allegedly taken in self-defence has had as a consequence the loss of innocent human lives.
44. The Charter of the United Nations, in Article 51,
recognizes the right of individual or collective self-defence
if an armed attack occurs against a State Member of the
United Nations until the Security Council takes the
measures necessary to maintain international peace and
security, However, the acts which we have been considering
have every indication of being a punitive operation, and this
is contrary to the precepts and principles of the Charter.

36. Without going into a political analysis of the results of
that series of meetings, which we have done on other
occasions, may I say in all sincerity that we are convinced
that all of us who participated in the meetings in Panama
gained valuable experience, that the United Nations enhanced its prestige in the world and that mankind now has
greater faith in the United Nations.

45. Once again we are confronted with regrettable incidents that have taken place between Israel and Lebanon,
despite the fact that the Security Council has appealed on
many occasions for peace in that region of the world.

37. We have been meeting since last week to consider the
complaint of aggression presented by Lebanon against Israel
/S/10913] of 12 April 1973.

46. The delegation of Panama would like to see a lasting
peace established in the Middle East through strict compliance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967). But,
at the same time, we wish to express our fear that, if these
acts of violence which we condemn today continue, there
may be another conflict in the region, once again with
unforeseeable consequences for mankind.

38. In the course of the debate-it has been established
that, in the early hours of 10 April 1973, a group of
Israelis, made up of some 60 commandos, attacked certain
predetermined places in Beirut, the capital of Lebanon,
causing the death of about 50 people, among them three
well-known leaders of the Palestinian Liberation Organization. The Israelis themselves acknowledge that, for their
part, their losses were two soldiers killed and another two
wounded. The Israeli incursions against Lebanon on 10
April 1973 followed upon the attacks of an Arab group
upon the residence of the Israel Ambassador in Cyprus and
upon an El Al aircraft which was in the Nicosia airport on
9 April 1973, in which three of the Arab attackers were
wounded.

47. For the reasons I have mentioned, my delegation will
support any draft resolution which reaffirms respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and is
aimed at bringing peace to the area.
48. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, permit me first of all to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency of the
Council. There can be no doubt that, under your experienced leadership, our discussions will take place with all
the necessary tranquillity and effectiveness. I should also
like to congratulate your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Panama, whose presidency was marked by a historic
meeting of our Council, which was held in the capital of his
country and over which he presided with talent and

39. It is obvious that Israel has connected these events and
wishes to present its latest attack on Lebanon as a new
reprisal because of what happened in Cyprus.
40. The Government of Panama is greatly concerned at
the recurrence of these acts of violence in the last month,
and we condemn them today as emphatically as we did
yesterday.
5

authority. I should also like to bid welcome to our new
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Shevchenko, whom many of
us know well. I am sure that he, like his predecessor,
Mr, Kutakov-and I should like to say how much we regret
his departure-will
provide our Council with the most
competent and effective assistance.

52. The Beirut affair, following so many others, has
widened even more the gulf between Israel and its Arab
neighbours. Attacks such as this, which nothing can justify,
can only jeopardize the efforts of all those who do not
despair of seeing a just and lasting peace between the Arabs
and the Israelis being established in that region.

49, I now come to the subject of our discussion, the
examination of the complaint by Lebanon following the
raid carried out at Beirut on the morning of 10 April by
Israeli commandos.

53. Are we to believe that, in Israel’s view, the maintenance of the status quo based on military supremacy in the
final analysis constitutes a solution more acceptable than
the difficult, precarious path of negotiation within the
framework of resolution 242 (1967)? I do not think so.
54. In expressing his sympathy to Lebanon, the spokcsman of the French Government, on 13 April, stated that
the Middle East conflict and the chain of violence could
only worsen if there was no progress towards a settlement
in keeping with the resolutions of the United Nations that
would take account of the situation of the Palestinian
people. That declaration is in keeping with the decisions
taken in 1967 and 1968 by the French Government to
place a total embargo on the supply of arms to countries
which participated in the 1967 conflict, which were for the
purpose described as the “battlefield countries”. We do feel
that the supply of arms to any of the parties can only sewe
to delay the restoration of peace in the Middle East.

50. As my predecessors and I myself have repeatedly
stated in recent years in the Council in such circumstances,
France attaches particular importance to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon, a small country that
is more than usually devoted to peace, a country with
which we have always enjoyed special bonds of friendship.
As soon as it was informed of the attack of 10 April, the
French Government hastened to express its complete
sympathy with the Lebanese Government in this new time
of trouble. I shall not go back over the circumstances of the
raid. The representative of Lebanon has given us all the
information we need about it. It was an inadmissible
infringement of the sovereignty of the Lebanese State, a
State making praiseworthy efforts to maintain a minimum
of stability and equilibrium in an area which for so long has
been the scene of such grave conflict. In an attempt to
justify its act of aggression, Israel has declared that, in order
to ensure its own security and that of its nationals, it must
combat Palestinian terrorism, the most recent manifestations of which were the incidents of 1 March at Khartoum
and, more recently, in Cyprus. We as much as any deplore
and condemn all acts of violence, particularly the taking of
hostages, which nothing can justify. I am thinking now of
the Khartoum incident, the brutality and blindness and
attendant circumstances of which revolted the conscience
of mankind. I do not think the Palestinian cause gained
anything from such an infringement of the most elementary
human rights.

55. Nor can we accept the idea that the consolidation of a
de facto situation makes less likely the hope for true peace
based upon the principles of law and the resolutions of the
United Nations, That true peace, to which all the peopIes of
the area aspire so much, will, we know, first of all require
of the parties to the conflict firm determination to
negotiate. It will also require that every party examine
carefully the views of the adversary, that the Arab countries
recognize the existence of Israel as an independent sad
sovereign State, and that Israel, for its part, concede that it
cannot indefinitely remain in possession of territories which
do not belong to it.
56. That is why we continue to believe that the principles
contained in resolution 242 (1967) must finally be applied,
and that is why we believe that the Secretary-General and
Mr. Jarring should continue their efforts to that end no
matter what difficulties have already been encountered and
in spite of the difficulties that will surely arise in the future.
That is why we feel that, if circumstances justified.
meetings of the permanent members of the Security
Council could be useful, and I wish to add that if it
appeared possible, I should be prepared to call such a
meeting. For the time being, I think we should reply to
Lebanon’s justified request and, as we have done 011
previous occasions, condemn the Israeli attack of which
it
has just been the victim. But it is in the light of the more
general considerations I have just expressed that we shall
finally take our stand on this case.

51. We should, however, draw a distinction between, on
the one hand, Palestinian terrorism, which is the result of
more or less uncontrollable elements, even if they do derive
from openly avowed political movements, and, on the other
hand, Israeli counter-terrorism organized and controlled by
a State recognized by the international community, a
Member of the United Nations and hence bound to respect
the norms of international law and the rules of our
Organization. No matter how effectively it is used, force
can never resolve the problems of the Middle East. Never in
the course of history has force been successful in putting
down resistance movements which reflected authentic
national aspirations. The well known reactions in the Arab
world to the Israeli raid on Beirut are a convincing
demonstration that the sympathy which exists towards the
Palestinians will give their organizations increased weight
with Governments, and it is really asking the impossible to
expect that Lebanon, with its modest resources, should
itself be able to control the legitimate aspirations of some
300,000 refugees it accepted into its territory as a result of
the events of 1967.

57. I very much hope that the efforts at present under
way to draw up a draft resolution acceptable to all
members of the Council will be concluded rapidly. If that is
so, our unanimity will be proof that in this affair of the
Middle East, which has been on the agenda for so long, the
United Nations continues to play an important and even
essential role.
6

58. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): If no
member of the Council wishes to speak, 1 shall now make a
statement as representative of PERU.

put forward by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
[1707th meeting] -whom, as the representativeof Peru, I
welcomemost warmly-and this I amsurecould be done at
acarefully consideredopportunity.

59, The Security Council is meeting to consider another
complaint by Lebanon against Israel, this time concerning
the expedition sent by the latter to Beirut to liquidate
leaders of the Palestinian movement there. As we well
know, the incursion has caused personal damage and loss of
human lives even exceeding the political objectives of its
authors. According to most information, the action was
deliberate and premeditated.

64. But let us concentrate on the tragic incident which is
the specific subject of our debate. Without isolating the
incident from its background, we must considerthat the
expedition sent by Israel to Beirut has no element which
could enabIeus to characterizeit asan act of self-defencein
the senseof Article 5 1 of the Charter. The Government of
Israelitself hasnot tried to concealthat this wasa carefully
planned operation, and, as though that were not enough,
high officers of the Israeli army declaredalarmingly, after
the attack on Beirut, that other expeditionswould follow.
We must therefore consider this matter and the persistence
of Israel in this policy urgently and in the light of the
normswhich should govern the conduct of Stateswithin a
civilized international community. While we condemn, asI
have said, isolated acts of violence, we cannot fail to
condemn the open violation by one country of the
sovereignty of another. Lebanonhad not usedforce against
Israel, nor had it threatened to use it, so that the
Government of Israel can adduce no other reasonfor its
action than the discretionary use of force. Can mere
material force give it the right t’o apply sanctionsasit sees
fit and ignore the mandatory character of the purposes,
principles and rules of the Charter of the United Nations of
which that State is not only a fruit but alsoa contracting
party? This openly illegal action is, furthermore, counterproductive, if we observe that the result of similar actions
by the Government of Israel hasbeenthe exacerbation of
the Palestinianmovement andits desperaterecourseto ever
moreextremist methods.

60. The representative of Israel, furthermore, has not
attempted to justify it; rather, he has told us that it does
not require justification. This is a punitive act of reprisal, in
keeping with the heedless, age old Mosaic Law of an eye for
an eye, a tooth for a tooth, whereby it is sought to
eliminate and eradicate the authors and instigators of the
attempted attacks, which are certainly condemnable, in
various parts of the world against Israelis and Israeli
property, under the alleged inspiration and direction of
Palestinian liberation movements.
61. On this occasion I should like to reiterate what was
said some months ago in the general debate at the
twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru, General de la Flor
ValIe.1 The Minister clearly stated that Peru repudiated
violence perpetrated both by individuals or agents of
non-governmental organizations, and that committed by or
on behalf of States Members of the international community. We condemn acts against innocent victims and, at
the same time, arbitrary and unilateral reprisal, because
both affect the legal order.

6.5. Almost six years have elapsedsince the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967) and, in the meantime,many others
have been adopted both here and in the GeneralAssembly,
but there is not a glimmer even of a real solution. The
status
quo is not the solution, not even a partial one,
becauseit is neither just nor peaceful,What is needed,in a
way, is a new type of cease-fire,and that is the decision
which the Council must now take. Wemust, therefore, on a
priority basis, urge Israel, a State Member of the United
Nations, to refrain from actions such as those now being
considered by the Council, Such restraint would be a
positive step towards leaving the spiral of violence and
would pave the way for more long-rangemeasures
which we
hopewill be taken in the near future.

62. To put an end to violence we believe that what is
needed is an international agreement, within a logical
climate of serenity and with the essential purpose of not
proposing palliatives but finding remedies which will take
into account the causes of the evil, which in this case are,
ijlter olia, the frustrated aspirations of a people.
63. It is not possible to separate the Beirut events from
the context of the situation of the Middle East, which has
given rise to those events, Indeed, their deeper roots are in
the historical and political problems of the living together
of the Arab States with the State of Israel and the
Palestinianpeople in a tenseareaof the Levant. HOW can
we ignore the plight of the people of Palestinewhich
remainsremoved from its ancestralhome, which lives in
poverty and despair, a situation which can only lead to
violence? The Security Council very justly perceivedthe
indivisibility of this complex problem when, in resolution
242 (1967), it took an integral approachto the questionof
the Middle East, including the Palestine tragedy, and
provided what continuesto be the only possibleframework
for a just and lastingpeacein the region.Wewere therefore
very interestedto hearthe idea of reviewingthe situationin
the Middle East in its entirety, an idea which wasinitially
presentedby Yugoslavia [1706th meeting] and then later
1 See Official
Session,

Plenary

Records

of the General

Assembly,

66. .Now, speaking again as PRESIDENT, I call on the
representativeof Egypt.
67. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Mr. President,I have asked
to speak, having heard all the membersof this august
Council, to thank you and to thank all the membersof the
Council, especially those who were so courteous and so
kind as to mention my presence-indeed, to allow my
presence-in this Council. I am grateful alsobecause,having
now heard the voices of the five continents, I am surethat
those voices are being heard too by 35 million Egyptians
and severa more million Arabs, aswell asinhabitantsof the
third world, and that they rejoice in knowing that, at least
morally, no one is going to condonesuch actions as those
which have brought us to the Council.

Twenty-seventh

Meetings.2054th meeting,para.194.
7

68. I have come to the Council for two reasons. The first
is to show how concerned and disturbed we are about this
latest unique, unprecedented assault on Lebanon. The
second is because we know that this is only a symptom and
that the main problem of aggression and occupation, of
expansion and colonization, must be treated by the
Council, We thought that it should be prepared and that the
members of the Council should have all the data, the
reports and testimony, before them, and therefore we are
going to ask for that at a future meeting. If the Council will
have patience, after we finish this item, I will ask
permission to make this request officially-tomorrow,
I
hope.

Beirut; the capital of terrorism is Damascus; the capital of
terrorism is Cairo; the capital of terrorism is Tripoli !
Therefore what was good for Beirut is good for Cairo !
Moreover, I think I have seen an intelligent leader writing in
Ma ‘urif’ that they have already gone away from the so-called
gentleman’s agreement that persons would not be killed.
From now on Israel has decided that personsalsocanbe
murdered.That is how we understandit,
72. As we areonly a developingcountry, we shouldlike to
ask Sir Colin Crowe what the moralsof a big, advanced
country are. Should we now create anotherGhadaboAllah
organizationin Egypt, another “Wrath of God”, or whatever it may be called? Are those the rules of the game?
There areno moralsin politics. If thoseare the rulesof the
game,let us know. If they arenot, let usknow that thereis
some international order. Therefore, when you try to
confusethe question of actions committed by individuals
with questionsof state actions undertiken as a foreign
policy, we should like to know what isgoing to be our own
foreign policy and yours, distinguishedmembersof the
Council. If we really want to make a comparisonbetween
actionsat Khartoum and other things of the kind, there is
no lack. We can seewhat was the organization of the
personswho killed Kanafani in Beirut. Whenhe openedthe
door of his car he wasblown up. We should like to know
who was the personwho killed Hamshariin Pariswith that
novel electronic device. You answer your telephone and
you are blown up immediately. Many experts havetold me
that there are very few personsin the world who canmake
the device by which Hamshariwaskilled. Those personsare
availablesomewhere.This is the conventionalway in which
people worked before. Governments would wash their
handsand would declarethat they had nothing to do with
it, and you cannot really make accusationsuntil you can
lay your hands on someproof, which is always elusive.IT
you want to have comparisons,comparewhat happenedin
Khartoum with what happenedto Mr. Hamshariin Paris.
There are other cases.I do not want to go into them,
because1 do not want to get away from the subject at
hand,that is, the assaulton Beirut.

69. To return the courtesy of many of my colleagues, and
in particular Sir Colin Crowe, I want just to make some
remarks and humbly bring them to their attention. We have
come here to consider a complaint by a Member State of
the United Nations about a specific action which happened
eight days ago, in which agents of a Government, its
military forces and its gunboats, all made an assault to
commit common-law crimes, to murder, to knock at
doors-as I have heard the expression-at one o’clock in the
morning and to greet the people opening their bedroom
doors by gunning them down, gunning down their wives
and gunning down their neighbours. That is what happened
to Mrs. Morelli, the poor 64-year old Italian woman who
had the bad luck to be an easy target for the people who
assaulted Beirut on 10 April. This is the complaint, This is
an operation prepared by a Government which declared
that it had indeed done that, and for the purpose had
forged passports of Sir Colin Crowe’s own country, as well
as of Belgium, which now is protesting against that forgery,
70. Can we now say that this must be compared to other
acts of individual violence? These criminals whb were sent
to Beirut are known. This would be the first murder in
history where the murderers are known and those who sent
them are known by name and no one anywhere is even
going to question them. On the contrary, they are being
declared heroes about whom shining pages will be written. I
quote Mrs. Meir: “Shining pages are going to be written
about this act which was undertaken by our boys.” There
were a Mr. Gilbert Lirnbert or someone who went by that
name, Andrew Witchlow, 47, with a British passport,
George Elder, 31 years old, with a British passport, and
Andrew Maisy, also with a British passport. These persons
must have some real existence, if these are false names, and
it is known who sent them. Who is going to punish them?
Who is going to ask that they be hanged? In other
cases--although I do not accept that there is any parailelthere were cries from capitals like. Washington that persons
must be hanged. Who is going to ask that these persons be
hanged now and who is going to hang them? What are the
rules of the game? As a Foreign Minister, I think it is my
duty to find out the rules of the game,

73. If we want to discussalso this question of violencein
the future, we must bring here those who are accused.The
representative of Tunisia suggestedyesterday /I 708rlr
meeting/ that the Palestiniansbe brought here, Why not?
After all, the United Nations divided Palestineinto two
parts, and therefore it considersthat Palestinianshave a
country. You can invite here people from a country that is
not a Member of the United Nations. They will comehere.
They will be polite. They will not bangon the table with
their pipes.They will give the Council their point of view.
So this is somethingthat can be dealt with separateIy, if the
Council desires,But what we have here before the Council
is the specific assaultwhich was prepared, executed and
praised by the Government of a Member State of the
United Nations. We should like to know-all of us shoufd
like to know-what the rulesof the gameare.

7 1. Is there an international body that cannot be confused
and conducted into a maze of comparisons, with the
question of violence being brought up? In this case-and I
am grateful to the representative of India, because he has
also put his finger on a very important point-we
have
declarations, we hear them, we understand them. We are
not as dumb as we might look. The capital of terrorism is

74. The secondpoint-and I should like to ask indulgence
for a few minutes tomorrow to enableme to put it before
the Council for consideration-is this. I think that the time
hasnow come to tell you not only that 33 months have
elapsedsince the cease-fire,which perhapsis a matter of
8

rejoicing for some countries but not a matter of rejoicing
for us-those
33 months of occupation, protected and
perpetuated. We will tell you that there have been not only
33 months of occupation and cease-fire, but also six years
of occupation which now can be described very modestly as
simply intolerable-and it will not be tolerated.

81. I listened attentively to the Indian representative’s
views on history and on the United Nations and its
activities. I should like to make only one observation
regarding his odd theory about Israel’s birth. According to
him, and to some other speakers, it was a United Nations
resolution that gave birth to Israel. Now, come, come: I am
certain that the representative of India is better versed in
historic movements and developments than to believe that
bizarre idea. Israel’s independence and sovereignty is no
more due to a United Nations resolution than the liberty
and sovereignty of other States, of Asia, Africa and Latin
America, that have attained their independence in recent
decades in developments accompanied by debates and
resolutions in this Organization. Israel’s restored freedom
was born from centuries of struggle, of longing, of
resistance to persecution, of perseverance, of preservation
of Jewish national identity, of an endless strife for equality
and human rights in the lands of dispersion, of a struggle
carried on in the Jewish people’s homeland when it was still
under foreign administration. And nothing could better
illustrate the double standard resorted to by, unfortunately,
a significant number of speakers than the references by the
Indian representative to Israel’s action on 10 April against
the terrorist bases in the Beirut area.

75. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on my list is that of the representative of Israel,
on whom I now call.
76. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): At our meeting on 16 April
/1707th meeting] 1 said that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt had flown across oceans and continents to
tell the world that Egypt supported international terrorism,
that Egypt backed the savage outrages of Arab murder
gangs, We heard this today, with specific names of assassins,
of murderers, of people who organized the Munich killings,
the Lod massacre, the slaughter of diplomats at Khartoum,
all being defended as heroes.
77, The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt went
further: he once again asked the Security Council to give
approval to the continuation of the campaign of these
savage outrages that is being carried on by Arab terrorist
organizations.

82. Now, the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi, in a speech made at Bonn on 11 November 1971,
stated: “Indian security is more important than other
people’s irritation.” In the Indian Prime Minister’s words I
shall answer her representative in the Security Council:
Israel’s security also is more important than other people’s
irritation,

7X. I do not think it is the duty of the Security Council to
assist Egypt or any other Arab Governments supporting
Arab terror in their policies or in their condemnable
attitude. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt has
shown concern about the facts submitted by me to the
Security Council regarding the role played by his capital,
Cairo, by Beirut and by Damascus in the barbaric campaign
of atrocities that is being waged by Arab terrorist organizations against innocent civilians-men, women and childrenin Israel and in all parts of the world. He is right in showing
that concern, It is contrary to international law and a
flagrant breach of the Charter of the United Nations to
harbour and assist murder groups engaged in such criminal
activities. It is also dangerous to allow them the use of one’s
territory. As I pointed out yesterday, it is dangerous
because the presence of those terrorist organizations at
Cairo, at Beirut or at Damascus might bring the house down
upon those who live there.

83. I havenot commentedthus far on statementsmadeby
representativesof African nations, but have listened to
them attentively and with great respect. I should like on
this occasionto say to them and to other friends in Africa:
take heed of Arab propaganda;it has tried to make Africa
forget the role played by the Arab world in spreadingthe
scourgeof slavery throughout your continent; it has tried
to make Africa forget the Arab conquestof the continent’s
northern part and the subjugation of the indigenous
population. Today, Arab propagandais trying to portray
Arab outrages directed against the people of Israel as a
struggle for liberty. It is a struggleagainstliberty, against
the right to freedom and independence of the Jewish
people.

79. If one wants peace and if one wants tranquillity in the
area, one should act in accordance with the interests of
peace and tranquillity. One should remove, one should
eliminate, definitely and finally, the terrorist bases which
continue to exist on Lebanese soil and on Syrian territory
and the political centres and training camps which still
remain in Egypt.

84. Indeed, as you know, the Jewishpeople’sstrugglefor
freedom and equality, and Israel’semergenceto independence, has inspired and strengthened the struggle for
independenceof the African nations. The founder of the
world Zionist movement, Theodor Herzl, wrote more than
70 years agoin his book on Israel’srebirth:

80. The representative of India expressed displeasure at
our meeting here at United Nations Headquarters. He is
apparently not happy with the atmosphere in New York: it
seems to be too enlightened to suit his liking; it is too
critical of Arab barbarism; it is too understanding of Israel’s
struggle to protect its people from continuous murderous
attacks. I should like to assure the representative of India
that our case is clear and strong enough to be aired at Cairo.
I wonder whether the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
would invite us there, together with the Security Council.

“There is still one problem of racial misfortune unsolved. Only a Jew can fathom the depthsof this problem
in all its horror. I refer to the African problem. Now that
I have lived to see the restoration of the Jews, I should
like to pave the way for the restoration of the black
people.”
85. The resurrection of Israel, of the Jewish people, has
inspired other national liberation movements. William
9

Dubois, the inspirer of the Pan-African Movement, had this
to say on this matter: “The African movement has for us
the same essence as the Zionist movement has for the
Jews”. And George Padmore, well-known to all of US here,
the theoretician of Pan-Africanism, states in his book
Pan-Africanismor Communism:

commit such acts, to fulfil in particular the duty States
have undertaken under the Charter of the United Nations
to refrain from organizing, instigating, assistingor partici.
pating in acts of civil strife or terrorist acts or reprisals
againstpopulationsor innocent personsin another State, or
acquiescingin organized activities within their own territory directedtowardsthe commissionof suchacts.

“A self-evidentparallel exists between Zionism and the
Pan-African movement. At the outset eachhassoughtthe
restoration of the dignity of individual freedom, of Jews
and blacks, on the way to focusingtheir political aimsto
gain national independenceand sovereignty.”

89. On 3 November 1972, the following statement was
issuedby the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions:

86, At yesterday’s meetingseveralrepresentativesreferred
to the obligations of Arab States under the Charter and on
the United Nations resolutionsto prevent terrorist operations on and from within their borders.Today I shouldlike
to draw the Security Council’s attention to a number of
resolutionsand statementsadopted by various international
organson the problem of Arab terrorism.
87. On 23 October 1972, the Consultative Assembly of
the Council of Europe adopted a resolution which stated,
inter alia:
“The Assembly,
“1. Denouncing the increasein Europe and throughout the world of terrorist activities, of which the Munich
tragedy is a particularly horrifying example;
“2. Noting that such acts, which are in utter conflict
with the traditions and practices governing international
relations, raise,in entirely new terms the question of the
responsibility of governmentsto put an endto them;

90. On 13 December 1972, the Political Affairs Cornmittee of the Consultative Assembly of the Council of
Europeadopteda declarationstating, inter alia:

‘l . . .
“6. Deploring the fact that the political and material
support of a certain number of governmentsand organisations permits, or facilitates directly or indirectly, the
preparation of terrorist outbreaks, or offers refuge to
their authorsor instigators;
“7.

Recommendsthat the Committee of Ministers:

“.. .
(c) invite the governmentsof memberStates to use
all their political and economic influence to dissuade
the States concerned from pursuing a policy which
allows terrorists to prepare their acts or to reside or
find asylumon their territory.“2
88. The sixtieth Inter-Parliamentary Conference, held at
Rome between 21 and 29 September 1972, appealedto
parliaments of all nations to exert influence on their
Governments, to take ail appropriate measureswithin their
jurisdiction to deter and prevent hijacking, terrorism, and
kidnapping, including measuresto deal with those who
2 See Council of Europe,ConsultativeAwxnbly, twenty-fourth
ordinary session(SecondPart), 17-24 October 1972, Vorkirzg
Papers,

“In a cable addressed
to the United Nationstoday, the
International Confederation of Free Trade Unions gave
notice that Governments which failed to prosecute
aircraft hijackers or to tackle the letter-bomb menace
would face international trade union action. Otto Kirsten,
the ICFTU GeneralSecretary, who is conferring with the
International Transport Workers Federation and the
Postal Telegraph and Telephone International, has sent
the following cable to the United Nations Secretary
General, Kurt Waldheim: ‘Dismayed at the state of
hijacking and letter-bomb outrages,ICFTU urges you to
insist on immediate ratification and implementation of
international agreementagainstair piracy by all United
Nations Member States and on measuresto halt mailing
of letter bombs. Thesecowardly acts, which cannot be
tolerated, endangerinnocent lives and threatenin the first
place aircraft personneland postal workers.The United
Nations should insist that all Governments undertake
more effective measuresto protect the public and the
workers. International Free Trade Union Movement is
planning action againstGovernmentswhich condonesuch
actsor fail to prosecutetheir perpetrators’.”

vol. VI, document 3201.

10

“The Political Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary
Assemblyof the Council of Europe, meetingin Parison
13 December1972, took note with disappointmentof
the resolution passedtwo days earlier by the Legal
Committee of the United Nations General AssembIy
concerninginternational terrorism. It deeply regretsthat
the initiative taken by the Secretary-General of the
United Nationshasresultedmerely in a text which makes
no provision for any concerted, concrete and effective
measureat intergovernmentallevel.”
91. This statement was one of many expressionsof
concern with the manner in which the problem of Arab
terrorismwasbeingdealt with in the United Nations- As far
back asMay 1970hundredsof Christianleaders,Protestant
and Catholic, including Bishops and other high clergy,
editors, scholars,educators,publisheda statemententitled
“A ChristianResponseto Arab Terrorism”. It said:
“We note with sorrow that the United Nations are
regrettably quick to censureIsrael for retaliatory acts
while remainingconspicuouslysilent about Arab violence
which hasclaimedmany innocent victims. Little hasbeen
said about holding the Arab nations responsiblefor the
actsof terrorist groupsthey harbour, nurture and finance.

One is reminded of the Reverend Dr. Martin Niemoller’s
searing judgement about the Christian guilt in the rise of
Nazi madness: ‘In Germany they first came for the
Communists, and I did not speak up because I was not a
Communist. Then they came for the Jews, and I did not
speak up because I was not a Jew. Then they came for the
trade unionists. Then they came after me-and by that
time there was no one left to speak up.’ ”

own, The fate of the Arab leaderswho lived by proudly
proclaimed violence was also covered by ancient writ.
And this will probably go on for as long as a realistic
political settlement is refused and Arab Governments
condone a campaign of indiscriminateviolencefomented
in refugeecamps.”
97. TheMelbourne Age of 16 April writes:

92. The world expects the Security Council to speak up
on Arab terrorism as clearly and firmly as other international organs have. The world press has left no doubt what
enlightened public opinion thinks of Arab atrocities and
Israel’s defence against them, such as the action taken by
the Israeli defence forces on 10 April against terrorist bases
in the Beirut area.

“There can be no end to this guerrilla warfare with
Israel’s neighbouring Arab States unlessthey adopt the
tough tactics of King Husseinof Jordan and turn against
their troublesome guests. In the United Nations the
tediousargumentsresumeafter eachincident.”
98. The Austrian Salzburger Nackrichten, of 11 April,
wrote:

93. An editorial of 12 April in the Gorkkapatra, the
largest Nepal daily-a neutral State, a neutral newspaperstates:

“Whatever the reasonsmay be, only a smallminority of
PalestinianArabs listens to their militarily unsuccessful
leaders politically discredited by the civilized world.
Israel’sanswer is consequently not wanton terror but a
selective strike against the leading brains, an act of
well-aimed and offensive protection of its own vital
interests.”

“The murder of innocent sportsmen at the Munich
Olympic Games and the previous as well as subsequent
attacks by Palestinians in several capitals of the world,
including London, Bangkok and Khartoum, have sufficiently alerted Israel and in addition brought about a
decline in the world’s sympathy for the Arab terrorists.’
The latest incident in Lebanon may inspire the Arabs to
review their plans for terrorist operations.”
94. The Copenhagen daily, Pditiken,
of 12 April:

99. Le Figaro of Paris wrote in an editorial of 11 April
about Israel’saction on the precedingday:

wrote in an editorial

“It demonstrates that terror is a double-edgedsword
and that this sword is more effective whenit isits victim
that decidesto useit.”

“The action of the IsraeIis in Beirut shows how they
have been forced to fight the Palestinian terrorists in their
headquarters in the Arabic States. In nine out of ten cases
in Western European countries the police chose to banish
caught terrorists. Therefore, one must also allow the
Israelis the right to defend their national interests. Israel
has no other way left but to fight the terrorists in their
Arab bases. This is war.”

100. The following is a quotation from the editorial of the
prestigiousPanamaCity daily, Matutino, on 11 April:
“While helplesswomen, innocent children, nursesand
civilians were mowed down by machine-gunsfired by
Arab terrorists in the fields, in hospitals, in schools,
theatres and supermarkets, the leadersof great Powers
were keeping irresponsibleindifference. As soon as the
blind wave of violence affected the interests of the
international community, only then rose world public
opinion in indignation, only then were voiced the most
violent epithets againstthe assassins,
againstthe criminals,
againstthe terrorists, who only a short while before were
known in those countries as the ‘guerrillas’ and the
‘freedom-fighters’, Never hasan Israeli bullet beenaimed
at a women or child or a civil functionary, against a
diplomat of the hostile countries.The blow of the Jewish
commandoshas been dealt at thosewho have committed,
as it has been proven without shadowof a doubt, the
most atrocious crimes, the most horrible assaults,the
most savageoffences committed againstinnocent people.
This is the only defence againstterrorism and this is the
great difference between the right of Israeli self-defence
and the blind fanaticism of the criminal Palestinian
gangsters.”

95. The London Daily Telegraph commented, on 11 April,
that:
“The Israeli answer to the charge that they are violating
Lebanon’s sovereignty is that sovereignty cannot be
honoured since Lebanon affords complete freedom in its
territory for the terrorists to operate their bases and
command structure. From these bases and through this
command the terrorists organize and carry out their
attacks on a world-wide basis. This is a harsh dictum, but
it is hard to fault the Israeli logic. The various terrorist
groups operating under El Fatah leadership are no
respecters of sovereignty. The tragedy and pathos of the
whole business is that the terrorists are quite unrepresentative of the Arab peoples as a whole.”
96. The Herald of Canberra stated on 11 April:
“The bungled Arab guerrilla attack on Israelis in
drew a classicIsraeli commandoraid that used
hostile Beirut ascoldly and cleverly asif it were a training
ground. A Beirut crowd shouting for vengeancemay
reflect that, when it comesto ‘an eye for an eye’ and ‘a
tooth for a tooth’, the Israeliscan more than hold theil
Cyprus

101. In an editorial of 12 April, The WashingtonPost
writes:
“The Arab efforts in Cyprus on Monday were closeto
the worst. The intended victims were diplomats and
11

civilians. The Israeli raid Into Lebanon was close to the
best. The intended and actual victims, though not all the
victims, were Palestinian officials, including those associated with Black September. And this is the group which
took credit for the murder of the American diplomats at
Khartoum and the massacres at Munich and Lod airport.
No one seriously pretends any more that Black September is anything other than a covert operational arm of
other supposedly moderate Palestinian groups.”
102. The New York Times of 11 April said:
“The latest guerrilla fiascos, like the June 1967 disasters
in Sinai and on the Golan Heights, should prompt at least
some Arabs, certainly the hapless Lebanese, whose
Premier has just resigned, to question the fanatical
terrorist leadership that heaps successive humiliations
upon them.”
103. Some representatives have referred to concepts of
international law. I have already stressed in previous
statements that principles of international law must apply
to all States alike, that the Arab Governments are duty
bound, just like anyone else, to prevent the criminal
activities of terrorist organizations on their soil, in their
capitals, in their towns and villages. Israel is entitled, just
like any other nation, to defend itself against armed attack,
especially in view of the barbaric character of such attacks
which are aimed against innocent civilians and in view of
the absence of effective United Nations action to curb these
attacks.

109. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I do not have any
prefabricatedreplieslike thosepreparedby Mr. Tekoah and
his aides. However, I feel constrainedto refute certain
argumentsjust adducedby Mr. Tekoah that are not based
on logic or historical facts.
110. Mr. Tekoah spoke of the national liberation move.
ment and went back to the time when therewere two small
tiny Statesin Palestine,none other than Judaeaand Israel.
But he forgot to mention that the original Jews, the
Hebrews,originated in Ur of the Chaldees,which is today
Western Iraq. Palestinewas populated by the Canaanites
before the Jews, our Jews, cameto that region. However,
the mere fact that sometime in history there were what we
call two JewishStatesinsidethe bordersof Palestine-and
that wasbetween 2,000 and 3,000 years ago-does not give
the right to the promoters of the political Zionist movement which started in easternand central Europe to claim
Palestineon the groundsthat 2,000 years ago there were
Jewsthere.

“The claim made by the Arabs that they have the right
to support the guerrillas and at the same time to
repudiate all responsibility for them is an astonishing one.
Israel is entitIed to take the necessary counter-measures
for its self-preservation.”
L. Oppenheim

107. The question is inevitable: can the deliberations of
the Security Council be divorced from law and public
opinion? Can international law, can the Charter of the
United Nations, can the principle of self-defence enshrined
in the Charter be interpreted arbitrarily according to the
political whims of Governments which happen to be sitting
around this table? Can public opinion, outraged at the Lod
massacre, the Munich murders and the Khartoum slaughter
be simply ignored or brushed aside? Only a specific and
unequivocalcondemnationof Arab terrorist organizations
and a call on Arab Governmentsto terminate them canhe
an adequateresponseto the threat to all mankind posedby
the Arab campaign of savage murder directed against
innocentcivilians.
10X. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakersis that of the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place at the
Counciltable and to makehis statement,

104. A renowned authority on International law, Professor
A. L. Goodhart, has written the following on this question:

105. On this point
stated the law thus:

between, on the one hand, these fundamental precepts of
international law, the resolutions and declarations adopted
by international bodies and groups as quoted by me today,
how great the distance between public opinion which
justifies Israel’s position and, on the other hand, some of
the statements delivered today, yesterday and at previous
meetings!

and H. Lauterpacht

“When, to give an example, a State is informed that a
body of armed men is being organised on neighbouring
territory for the purpose of a raid into its territory, and
when the danger can be removed through an appeal to the
authorities of the neighbouring country, no case of
necessity has arisen. But if such an appeal is fruitless or
not possible, or if there is danger in delay, a case of
necessity arises, and the threatened State is justified in
invading the neighbouring country and disarming the
intending raiders.“3

111. Mr. Tekoah spokeof human rights and said that the
Jewshad alwaysbeenin the vanguardnot only of observing
but also of disseminatingand promoting human rights.
There are 6 million Jews here in this host country, and
before Christopher Columbuscame to this country it was
populatedby what are known as the Red Indians. Why do
not you, Mr. Tekoah, mobilize the 6 million Jews in this
country to wrest this land from the United States and
return it to the Red Indians-we hear of them now in
Wounded Knee, in Iowa or some distant place? Why do
you not do that on a premisesimilarto your other premise,
which is false,that at one time the Hebrewsdisplaced the
Canaanitesand existed in Palestineunder the name of Israel
and Judaea3,000 years ago? The Red Indians have been
here since time immemorial. Why, since you are such a

106. It is well known that there is no greater authority on
international law than the works of Oppenheim and
Lauterpacht. They serve as basic sources in all countries
represented in the Security Council, including I think the
countries of the socialist world. How great the distance
3 L. Oppenheim, fnrernational
Law: a treatise, 8th ed., H. Lauterpacht, ed. (London, Longmans, Green and Co., 1955). vol. 1,
part v, p. 298.
12

promoter of human rights talking for the Jews, do you not
try to restore the right of the Red Indians to the American
continent? Come, now, this argument of yours is fallacious.

to go back to Palestine in order to have the motivation for
their movement-because “we were there 3,000 years ago”.
All right, there were people there before you, the
Canaanites, who were your brothers and your cousins. They
were not your brothers, Mr. Tekoah; I always consider you
a European. You are a Jew by religion. As I have said the
British were converted to Christianity in the sixth century
A.D. by St. Augustin, Christianity is a Semitic religion, like
Islam and like Judaism, but that does not make of our
friend, Sir Colin Crowe, a Semite, and you are no more a.
Semite, except that you want to force people to claim that
they are Semites. Why do you want to go there? It is in
order to be at the crossroad of three continents-not
you
personally, but those behind you-and to exploit Asia,
Europe and Africa. You are clever and you have skills.
There is nothing wrong. You would have succeeded had
you come quietly and not raised the flag beforehand, These
are the facts and you should know them. I come from the
region there. You come from a different region and you go
by hearsay and read out reams of quotations of what a
certain Catholic or Protestant Minister has said against
nazism. All right, many of us were against nazism-not only
the Europeans, But that is no argument.

112. The second point which really surprised me was that
the United Nations had nothing to do with the creation of
Israel. I am paraphrasing. Mr. Tekoah said that this struggle
had continued before Israel came into being for many many
years, since the Jews were expelled by the Remans. I
mentioned the other day the Babylonian Diaspora, or the
exile into Babylon.
113, Today I shall not dwell at length on this subject, but
I do want to recall to Mr. Tekoah the Roman Diaspora or
dispersal, Who left Palestine after the destruction of the
Temple? The wealthy and influential among the Jews.
Many were afraid, no doubt, and left, but the bulk of the
population remained there. And, as I have mentioned time
and again, later many of them embraced Christianity, and
subsequently some embraced Islam. And for your information, Arabism is not racial. There is no such thing as
Arab blood, inasmuch as there is no such thing as Jewish
blood. There are Arab peoples and there are Jewish peoples,
in the plural. You know very well, Mr. Tekoah-I suppose
you are a learned man-that a lot of the North African
Arabs ethnologically at one time were Berbers. They
embraced Arabism and they became Arabs. A State in
Africa, none other than the Sudan, is made up of black
people, but they are Arabs because they adopted Arab
culture and the Arab way of life.

+

117. It was not the United Nations alone which paved the
way for your creation; the Zionists resorted to all kinds of
persuasion,
methods-subterfuge,
pressure,
cajoling,
bribery. You might say that everything is fair in love and
war and that that was a war which you waged in order to
establish yourself in that part of the world. Now you want
to equate the so-called terrorist acts of frustrated people
with what you allege to be connivance inside Arab lands
with the Palestinians who are frustrated to try to overthrow
Israel. Have you forgotten that you resorted to terrorism
throughout your history there? We do not condone either
your terrorism or Palestinian terrorism, because, as has been
said unanimously and repeatedly, innocent lives become the
victims of terrorism. But, unfortunately, when people
cannot fight pitched battles they resort to all sorts of
methods to try to regain their homeland.

114. You cannot say that the Americans here are a race.
But there is what we call an American culture and an
American way of life, There are common interests among
the various strains of population. And you tell us that the
Jews are one people on account of religion. That is a very
dangerous concept for the Jews themselves who do not
want to identify themselves with your political movement.
115. Let us set the record straight. Mr. Tekoah said that it
has been a war of liberation for 2,000 years and the United
Nations had nothing to do with it, But I shall tell you the
genesis of Israel. It started with the Balfour Declaration.
Secondly, the movement was intensified by the deplorable
persecution of the Jews by Hitler. Thirdly, there was the
political, economic and other mobilization by the Zionists
all over western Europe and, in fact, everywhere, through
the mass information media, propaganda and indoctrination
of Jews themselves, of Jews who did not want to be
Zionists. Fourthly and last, but not least, there was force
and conquest. Those are the four factors that contributed
to the creation of Israel. But who put the stamp on it? The
United Nations. Where were you in 1947? I was there. I
saw the machinations concerning what happened. Now you
say that the United Nations had nothing to do with your
creation. And you try to quote our African brothers and
colleagues here.

118. And let me tell you one thing: your whole argument
is based on the premise that, wherever there may be
Palestinians, the secret agents of Arab States should worm
themselves into the Palestinians’ communities and go into
their homes to find out what they are doing, whether or
not they are conspiring to overthrow Israel, or whether
they even have a hostile attitude towards Israel, and you
want those Arab Governments, basing their policies on the
information they get from secret agents, to crush those
Palestinians.
119. I have told you time and again that there will be
rebellion and anarchy if the Arab Governments resort to
such clandestine methods to find out what every Palestinian, inside the Arab world or outside it, is doing. And I
repeat that the new generation is on the side of the
Palestinians-whether
we like it or not, whether you like it
or not. “Never mind. Let all those Arab Governments be
brought down so that we may live,” We tell you that is not
the way, because then those who support you will stand to
lose, and then they may turn about and some of those who
now support you may make a scapegoat of you. That
would not be the first time the Jews had been made a

116. You mentioned the late Theodor Herzl as the
architect of political Zionism. But you have forgotten that
at one time those early Zionists wanted to establish a
homeland for the Jews in Uganda, They wanted it
anywhere, but then they needed a motivation. They wanted
13

scapegoat. You have mentioned how, throughout history,
the Jews have been maltreated. We tell you that we
consider you human beings and do not want you to be
hurt. And I tell you that your policy, misguided as it is,
seems to be blind, and you do not take into account how
the youth of 18 Arab countries-and
I dare say of many
Moslem countries and of non-Moslem countries, Asian and
African, which are neither Moslem nor Arab-are on the
side of the Palestinian people and their right to self-determination.
120. Yesterday my colleague from Lebanon mentioned
something I think was very fair. He said let there be a
Passover of the 300,000 Palestinians; let them go, and they
will go not with white handkerchiefs but with flowers,
saying, “Take us back to our homeland”. Do you dare do
that? And you say that you are against racial discrimination. Why do you not take them in? There is a custodian
for their assets, for their bank accounts, for their orchards,
for their homes. You might say it is not practical because
many of their homes were destroyed in the war and others
are now in possession of those orange groves and homes.
Well, I think Palestine has space enough to take in those
300,000, or those among them who would like to leave-we
do not want to coerce anyone into returning to his
homeland if he does not want to leave. But how can you
talk about racial discrimination and human rights when you
discriminate against the Palestinians and do not allow them
to go back to their homeland? As I have said, if you dig
back into history you will find that many of those
Palestinians were the original Jews.

123. And those who support you-have they not in their
statement said that they are supplying you with the most
sophisticated weapons? I have heard that some NATO
members are now jealous of you, because you are receiving
more sophisticated weapons than are the members of
NATO from a major State-I shall not use the term
“super-Power” because it has been a bone of contention
here; I shall say a major State, a highly industrialized State.
124. You claim that the Arab neighbours of Israel are
supplying the fedayeen, the commandos, the terrorists-call
them what you will-with
arms and money, encouraging
them to break up Israel. But why do you not see what a
great Power is doing-giving you the latest aircraft, giving
you aid. Through propaganda you are enlisting material aid
through the floating of bonds and I know not what other
instrumentalities. And we should keep silent, say nothing,
not be afraid of expansionism, not be afraid that one day
you will be the masters not of the region but of the whole
of Western Asia, building up a militawindustrial
complex
in the Middle East, making of Jerusalem-a Holy City for
the three sects-the capital of that military-industrialcomplex State, Palestine becoming a banking clearing-house
for the continents of Asia, Africa, Europe, expanding far
beyond the Atlantic to the New World?
125. That is your scheme. You want every Jew everywhere to become a Zionist and citizen of the usurping State
of Israel. And you wonder why the Arab people are afraid.
Now, bear in mind that there will be no peace in the Arab
world, in the Middle East or in the world at large as long as
you blind yourself to basic facts.
126. You cannot live for ever in a fortress. Any peace that
may be made between you and your neighbours which is
not based on the satisfaction of the Palestinian people will
be like a peace built on sand; it will totter and fall, to the
sorrow of all of us, including you as human beings. Satisfy
the Palestinian people. Let the major Powers not bring
pressure but persuade you of what I am saying: that there
will be no peace unless the Palestinian people are given their
right of self-determination, How? We will not go into
detailsat this stage.But it can be done. But you are afraid
if you do that that there will be many Palestiniansand then
you are perhapsafraid of intermarriageand that you will
be assimilated.So what? Let there be assimilationone way
or the other. These are the facts that you, Mr. Tekoah,
shouldbearin mind with your Government.

121. Then there is something my colleagues here should
take into account. You want all Jews all over the world to
be Zionists and to emigrate to Israel. I do not know how
many Jews there are-some say 16 million, some 20 million.
I hope you will proliferate further; maybe larger numbers
will end your frustration as a minority in the world, You
have the challenge of being a minority in the world. Why
not increase? Maybe your complex concerning being
exclusive will fade out if your numbers increase. Why do
you not think of the fears of the Arab peoples surrounding
Palestine, which you now claim is the land of Israel-and it
is, by dint of force. And you are a Member State of the
United Nations, though you now deny that the United
Nations had anything to do with your being a Member
State,

127. God is our witness. We do not want anyone to
suffer-Jew or Gentile. You are human beings: We want
peacein the area;not peaceon termsemanatingfrom force
and power, but peacebasedon justice, ajustice that should
be recognized by those Powers, member States of the
Security Council, peaceand justice that should be the aim
of the Council. Otherwise, there will be turmoil and
conflict which may end in a world war.

122. Why should the neighbouring Arab States and other
Arabs not be afraid that if you succeed-and I am sure you
will not-in ingathering 80 per cent of the Jews, you will
want to expand? With 80 per cent of the Jews in Palestine,
you will want to expand and say “Ah, Abraham, the
patriarch of the Jews, came from as far north as Iraq, and
Moses traversed Sinai, and at one time we were in Egypt”.
And therefore parts of Egypt may perhaps be sanctified by
some Jewish theorist, saying “Well, we were there for so
long, and it should be part of Israel”. Then you might say
“Before and after the Diaspora some merchants settled in
Khayber in Saudi Arabia, and therefore Saudi Arabia
should be part of the State of Israel”. This expansion
becomes an ipso facto occurrence if you use power and
might.

128. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanishl: 1
call on the representativeof Egypt.
129. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretation front
fienchj: Mr. President, it is with great hesitation that 1
speakat this late hour in exerciseof my right of reply, but I
am sureyou will realize why I am impelledto speak now.
14

130. The representative of Israel, with his customarily
cynical, arrogant attitude, suggested that the Security
Council meet in Cairo after Addis Ababa and Panama. I
need hardly tell you that the people of Egypt and the Arab
peoples and, indeed, the peoples of the entire world, are
following our deliberations with the utmost attention.
Cairo is and will for ever remain a political, cultural and
intellectual centre for a very large number of countries.
Cairo, too, gives a welcome to all liberation movements,
without distinction, and we are proud of this, however
distasteful it may be to the representative of Israel.

134. On 6 November 1944 Lord Moyne was assassinated
in Cairo. On 1 October 1946 the British Embassy in Rome
was dynamited.
[The speuker continued in English)
On 31 October 1946 British ambulances were mined in
Palestine. Hostages were whipped in public on 29 December
1946 in Tel-Aviv, and British soldiers were victims. British
were again taken as civilian hostages on 27 January 1947.
Letter bombs were used outside Palestine in June 1947, and
the victims were British. There was the murder of hostages
on 12 June 1947 in Tel-Aviv, and the victims were British.
There was the dynamiting of village houses with their
inhabitants in Safad district in December 1947. There was
the mortaring of urban quarters on 20 February 1948 in
Haifa, in which Palestinian Arabs were victims. There was
the blowing up of apartment blocks with residents on
3 March 1948 in Haifa, and Palestinian Arabs were victims.
There was the deliberate psychological warfare to induce a
civilian exodus from February to May 1948, and the
Palestinian Arabs were victims. There was the infamous Dir
Yassin massacre on 9 April 1948, and Palestinian Arabs
were the victims. There was the looting of cities in April
and May 1948, including Jaffa, and Palestinian Arabs were
the victims. There was the assassination of United Nations
personnel on 17 September 1948 in Jerusalem. On that day
Count Bernadotte was assassinated. There was the mass
expulsion of its own citizens from villages on 5 November
1948. That occurred in Galilee in the village of Iqrit, which
was later completely destroyed by the Israelis. There was
the mass expropriation of refugee and absentee property
from 1948, and the Palestinian Arabs were the victims.
There was the machine-gunning of tribal communities and
their herds and their mass expulsion from the country, and
the Palestinian Arabs were the victims. There was the
deliberate blowing up of schools across the border, which
occurred in the Qibya incident on 15 October 1953. There
was the bombing of Western concerns in Arab countries,
outside Palestine, and there was the Lavon affair which
happened in Egypt in 1954, in which United States and
British consulates and concerns were the victims. There was
the mass execution of its own civilians during curfew in
Kafr Kassem, Israel. There was the use of napalm against
hospitals in Jerusalem on 6 June 1967. Even the crops have
not been spared. There was the punitive destruction of
crops with chemical defoliants at Akraba, West Bank of
Jordan, on 28 April 1972.

131. The representative of Israel made so bold as to speak
about international law and order in international relations
and about legal rules. He dares to speak about the Charter
of the United Nations when we all know that he respects
neither international order nor the Charter nor the rules of
international conduct. Perhaps his memory is short-lived.
He must know that there is a Palestinian people and that
that Palestinian people, whether he likes it or not, does
exist. That people will wage its legitimate battle and it will
be assured of our complete support. And it is not only the
representative of Egypt who so declares. This is also heard
from the voices in the United Nations which, in the General
Assembly and here, yesterday and today, have declared that
the Palestinians have a legitimate and sacred right. The
representative of Israel must heed those voices even if they
sting his ears.
132. Let us see how he tries to falsify the facts. He tries to
avoid the very substance of the problem and to divert the
attention of the Council to other subjects. This falsification
of facts is certainly nothing new to us. It is exactly this
falsification which we found in the forgery of British,
Belgian and German passports. Today I have seen that the
Government of Belgium has published a communique.
Allow me to read the contents of the communique:
“The Secretary-General of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium has declared that the Government of
Belgium considers that such falsification of passports is
incompatible with international rules to which the
Government of Belgium is attached. Thus it requests the
Government of Israel to give it an assurance that this will
not be repeated.”
This is observance for international law and international
rules which the representative of Israel tries to indicate to
US. The representative of Israel is obsessed with talking
about everything except the core of the problem. If he
wishes to talk about the crimes in Beirut, we shall talk
about the crimes in Beirut. If he wants to talk about
terrorism, we are prepared to talk about terrorism even
though the Council is not seized with the item of
international terrorism, as has been frequently stated. His
country has one of the most brilliant records in the annals
of terrorism. It has been mentioned here, day after day,
that on 9 April 1948 the Dir Yassin massacre occurred.
Well, Dir Yassin was preceded and has been followed by
other massacres and other acts of terrorism.

[The speaker resumed in Frenchf
135. Those are only some of the cases. I have the full
report in this book, but I think 1 do not need to present it
to the members of the Security Council. If the representative of Israel wants to speak about terrorism, it would be
better for him to think twice before bringing it before this
Council. I apologize for having taken the floor, but I think
it will be fully understood why I have done so.
136. Mr. ODERO-JOWI
(Kenya): In the course of his
statement, the representative of Israel, Mr. Tekoah, advised
African nations to beware of Arab propaganda. In the
course of the same statement he quoted the late George
Padmore, the author of the book on Pan-Africanism. He

133. I shall read a list which I believe to be very significant
of examples of terrorism outside Palestine carried out by
the Israelis.
15

also mentioned that the Arabs or the Arab nations were
responsible for slave trade. I should like the record to be
put right, because in the first place the slave trade was an
international tragedy and crime for which Arabs alone
cannot be held responsible. I am sure the representative
knows that there were many other participants in the
international slave trade. I am sure he knows that among
the participants were gangsters from a number of Western
European nations. I think it is absolutely unfair to mention
the Arabs in this context, falsifying the historical facts. I
am sure Mr. Tekoah knows that there is ample evidence in
this country to point to the fact that thousands and
thousands of black Africans from mother Africa were
imported into this hemisphere not by Arabs but by other
nations, by other slave traders.

139. I should like to say again that we are capable of
judging things for ourselves and of making friends; we do
not want others to appoint themselves as our spokesmen,
particularly in a Council like this.
140. Mr. SEN (India): The representative of Israel paid
some special attention to me and made three comments on
my statements, and I want to dispose of those three
comments.
141. First, he found the atmosphere of New York
enlightening and enlightened. I am not surprised. I find it
dark and gloomy, as far as Middle East problems are
concerned, and I would say that most people who are as
much in need of enlightenment as I am, would find that my
views were correct.

137. If this distortion of historical facts was calculated to
cause animosity between Africans and the Arab nations, I
should like to advise Mr. Tekoah to put his oratory-he is a
good orator, and we admire him for his oratorical
capacity-to a better use, If the objective of this historical
distortion was to cause ill-will between the Arabs and the
Africans, he must know that we Africans are capable of
speaking for ourselves. We do not invite or want selfappointed speakers like the Ambassador of Israel to speak
for us. We are capable of speaking for ourselves and
defending ourselves and determining our own objectives.
We are capable of making friends for ourselves. We do not
want other people to make friends and enemies for us.

142. Secondly, he mentioned some statement which our
Prime Minister, Mrs, Gandhi, was supposed to have made on
11 November 1971. I have here a book containing Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi’s speech delivered at the German
Society for Foreign Policy in Bonn on 11 November 197 1.
She had been asked a question the purport of which was
that some people had been irritated by certain speeches our
Defence Minister had made; and to that she gave a reply
covering close to SO printed lines, including that sentence in
which she said, “Indian security is more important than
other people’s irritation”. I accept the Israeli view that
Israel’ssecurity is more important than other people’s
irritation. But there is a great difference betweenirritation
andinvadingother people’slands.

138. The representative of Israel quoted from the book
written by the late George Padmore on Pan-Africanism and
mentioned a paragraph in which the author drew a parallel
or an analogy between Pan-Africanism and zionism. But
Ambassador Tekoah ignored the fact that in his introduction to the book the late George Padmore took all pains
to demonstrate and to illustrate how different the PanAfrican movement was from any other movement, including Zionism. The late George Padmore made it clear
that the Pan-African movement was a movement of the
world’s underdog, the world’s discriminated-against black
people-which
the Zionists are not. The author made it
quite clear that the movement was one of a people that had
a certain perspective arising from the fact that over the
years it had been oppressed, enslaved and colonized. There
is very little parallel between Zionism and Pan-Africanism.

143. Thirdly, he said, “Come, come: you are more
knowledgeablethan that; you shouldrealizethat Israelwas
born in the hearts of men 6,000 years ago.” I do not know
what wasin the hearts of men. All I can sayis this. Just as
he said,“Come, come,you aremore knowledgeable”, I will
say: “Go, go: look up your records and see what your
friends said when the resolution on Israel was adopted”.
And I would alsosay, in conclusion, that, in spite of that
dreamin the heartsof many millions for 6,000 years, many
peopledo not seemto havegoneback home.It seemsthey
aremoreinterestedin enlightenment.
The meetingroseat 1.45 p.m.

16

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite 1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adresses-vous
A : Nations
Un%es. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

IIOJlYUHTh

MJA~HHR

NIAAHWI

OPrAH&i

CONSEGUIR

06-beAuneHHbrx

3AQHN

OE%E&HHEHHhIX

HAlWtr

MO~HO nynu~b
B KHUXWLIX MW&3~Hax
u &PeHTCTBaX
Bo Bcex
pahOHRX
Mupa.
Haaogwre
cnpasau
06 m~a~nnx
B
BaLDeM KHAXHOM
MEL~-~~HH~ unu nHmH~e no aflpecy : Oprarnrsau~n
06%eAHHeErHbrX
HtUWri,
CeKI.WR
II0 “pOAWfO3
HJAaHHfi,
Hhro-Ffop~
nna )KeHeBa.
COMO

OD~SLHH~~~WW

PUBLICACIONES

Haqut?

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin en venta en librerfas
y casas distrihuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82001-April

1979-2,260
