United Nations

A/RES/66/71

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 51

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2011
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/66/425)]

66/71. International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010 and
65/271 of 7 April 2011,
Recognizing the extraordinary achievements made over the past fifty years in
human space flight and space exploration for peaceful purposes, and recalling the
unique platform at the global level for international cooperation in space activities
represented by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 1 (Outer Space Treaty),
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as
_______________
1

11-46308

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.

*1146308*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/71

an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Recognizing also that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of further
developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in this field,
Convinced of the need to promote the use of space technology towards
implementing the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 2
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3
Desirous of enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global
level in disaster management and emergency response through greater access to and
use of space-based services for all countries and facilitating capacity-building and
institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in developing
countries,
Deeply convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as telehealth, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection and other Earth observation applications contribute to
achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that
address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, particularly
poverty eradication,
Taking note, in that regard, of the fact that the 2005 World Summit recognized
the important role that science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-fourth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its fifty-fourth session;5
2.
Agrees that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, at its
fifty-fifth session, should consider the substantive items recommended by the
Committee at its fifty-fourth session, 6 taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries;
3.
Notes that, at its fiftieth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, 7 as mandated
by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/97;
4.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its fifty-first session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by

_______________
2

See resolution 55/2.
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
4
See resolution 60/1, para. 60.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20).
6
Ibid., para. 304.
7
Ibid., chap. II.D; and A/AC.105/990.
3

2

A/RES/66/71

the Committee, 8 taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those
of developing countries;
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
5.
governing the uses of outer space 9 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties in accordance with their domestic law, as well as incorporating them
in their national legislation;
Notes that, at its forty-eighth session, the Scientific and Technical
6.
Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its
work, 10 as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 65/97;
Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-ninth
7.
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 11 taking into account the concerns of all countries,
in particular those of developing countries;
Notes with appreciation that some States are already implementing space
8.
debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national mechanisms and
consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Inter-Agency Space
Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 12 endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 62/217;
Invites other States to implement, through relevant national mechanisms,
9.
the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space;12
10. Considers that it is essential that States pay more attention to the problem
of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power sources, with
space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the continuation of national
research on this question, for the development of improved technology for the
monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and dissemination of data on
space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible, information thereon should
be provided to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and agrees that
international cooperation is needed to expand appropriate and affordable strategies
to minimize the impact of space debris on future space missions;
11. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
_______________
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20),
paras. 215–218.
9
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843);
Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574); Convention on International Liability for
Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on
Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020);
and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1363, No. 23002).
10
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20), chap. II.C;
and A/AC.105/987.
11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20),
paras. 164–167.
12
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), paras. 117 and 118, and annex.

3

A/RES/66/71

12. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2012,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by
the Committee; 13
13. Welcomes the continuous progress made by the International Committee
on Global Navigation Satellite Systems towards achieving compatibility and
interoperability among global and regional space-based positioning, navigation and
timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global navigation satellite systems
and their integration into national infrastructure, particularly in developing
countries, and notes with satisfaction that the International Committee held its sixth
meeting in Tokyo from 5 to 9 September 2011;
14. Notes with satisfaction the progress made within the framework of the
United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and
Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER) in the implementation of the workplan of the
UN-SPIDER programme for the biennium 2010–2011, 14 and encourages Member
States to provide, on a voluntary basis, the programme with the necessary additional
resources to ensure that greater support could be provided to Member States by
UN-SPIDER and its regional support offices;
15. Notes with appreciation that the African regional centres for space
science and technology education in the French and English languages, located in
Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, as well as the Centre for Space Science and
Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific and the Regional Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education for Latin America and the Caribbean, affiliated
to the United Nations, have continued their education programmes in 2011, and
agrees that the regional centres should continue to report to the Committee on their
activities;
16. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
achievement of the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration2 and to that
end requests relevant regional organizations to offer the assistance necessary so that
countries can carry out recommendations of regional conferences;
17. Recognizes, in this regard, the important role played by conferences and
other mechanisms in strengthening regional and international cooperation among
States, such as the African Leadership Conference on Space Science and Technology
for Sustainable Development, the Asia-Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum, the
Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the Space Conference of the
Americas;
18. Notes with satisfaction that the Sixth Space Conference of the Americas
was hosted by the Government of Mexico and held in Pachuca, Mexico, from 15 to
19 November 2010, welcomes the adoption of the Pachuca Declaration, and also
notes with satisfaction that the Government of Mexico has assumed the pro tempore
secretariat of the Conference for the period 2011–2013; that the fourth meeting of
the Council of the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization was held in Pattaya,
Thailand, on 26 and 27 January 2011; that the Fourth African Leadership
Conference on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development was
_______________
13
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20), para. 80; and A/AC.105/980, sects. II and III
and annex III.
14
See A/AC.105/937.

4

A/RES/66/71

hosted by the Government of Kenya and held in Mombasa, Kenya, from 26 to
28 September 2011; and that the eighteenth session of the Asia-Pacific Regional
Space Agency Forum will be jointly organized by the Singapore Space and
Technology Association, the National University of Singapore and the Government
of Japan and held in Singapore from 6 to 9 December 2011;
19. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, and agrees that during
its consideration of the matter the Committee could continue to consider ways to
promote regional and interregional cooperation and the role space technology could
play in the implementation of recommendations of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development;
20. Recognizes that space science and technology and their applications
make important contributions to economic, social and cultural development and
welfare, as indicated in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium: Vienna
Declaration on Space and Human Development”, 15 and its resolution 59/2, and notes
with satisfaction that a number of the recommendations set out in the Plan of Action
of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III) 16 have been implemented and that
satisfactory progress is being made in implementing the outstanding
recommendations through national and regional activities;
21. Urges all Member States to continue to contribute to the Trust Fund for
the United Nations Programme on Space Applications to enhance the capacity of the
Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat to provide technical and legal
advisory services in accordance with the Plan of Action, while maintaining the
priority thematic areas agreed by the Committee;
22. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in developing countries;
23. Reiterates that the benefits of space technology and its applications
should continue to be brought to the attention, in particular, of the major United
Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural development
and related fields and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and summits and for implementing the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;
24. Welcomes the increased efforts to strengthen further the Inter-Agency
Meeting on Outer Space Activities and urges entities of the United Nations system,
particularly those participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting, to continue to examine,
in cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and their
applications could contribute to implementing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration on the development agenda, particularly in the areas relating to, inter
alia, food security and increasing opportunities for education;

_______________
15
See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19–30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I, resolution 1.
16
See A/59/174, sect. VI.B.

5

A/RES/66/71

25. Calls upon the United Nations University and other institutions of the
same nature, within the framework of their mandates, to provide training and to
carry out research in the areas of international space law and, in particular, matters
relating to disasters and emergencies;
26. Agrees that the Committee and its subsidiary bodies at their respective
sessions in 2012 should elect their officers nominated for the period 2012–2013; 17
27.

Decides that Azerbaijan shall become a member of the Committee; 18

28. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant permanent observer
status to the Association of Remote Sensing Centres in the Arab World; 19
29. Notes that each of the regional groups has the responsibility for actively
promoting the participation in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies
of the States members of the Committee that are also members of the respective
regional groups, and agrees that the regional groups should consider this
Committee-related matter among their members;
30. Notes with satisfaction that a panel discussion was held at United
Nations Headquarters on 11 October 2011 on the topic of the contribution of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development, 20 to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2012, with
attention given to the use of space-derived geospatial data for sustainable
development and taking into account the previous panel discussions held on climate
change, food security, global health and emergencies;
31. Invites the Group on Earth Observations to contribute to the preparatory
process for the 2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development by
addressing issues related to the use of space-derived geospatial data for sustainable
development;
32. Requests the entities of the United Nations system, other international
organizations and the Secretary-General to continue and, where appropriate, to
enhance their cooperation with the Committee and to provide it with reports on the
issues dealt with in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, and to
address the issues covered by the panel discussions held in conjunction with
sessions of the General Assembly;
33. Recalls the fact that the General Assembly, by its resolution 65/271,
declared 12 April the International Day of Human Space Flight;
34. Notes with satisfaction the commemorative segment of the fifty-fourth
session of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the occasion of
the fiftieth anniversary of human space flight and the fiftieth anniversary of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, held at Vienna on 1 June 2011; 21

_______________
17
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20),
para. 286.
18
Ibid., para. 290.
19
Ibid., para. 292.
20
See A/AC.105/993.
21
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/66/20),
annex I.

6

A/RES/66/71

35. Adopts the Declaration on the Fiftieth Anniversary of Human Space
Flight and the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, set forth in the annex to the present resolution.
81st plenary meeting
9 December 2011

Annex
Declaration on the Fiftieth Anniversary of Human Space Flight
and the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space
We, the States Members of the United Nations, in commemorating the fiftieth
anniversary of human space flight and the fiftieth anniversary of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
Recall the launch into outer space of the first human-made Earth satellite,
1.
Sputnik I, on 4 October 1957, thus opening the way for space exploration;
2.
Also recall that, on 12 April 1961, Yuri Gagarin became the first human
to orbit the Earth, opening a new chapter of human endeavour in outer space;
3.
Further recall the amazing history of human presence in outer space and
the remarkable achievements since the first human spaceflight, in particular
Valentina Tereshkova becoming the first woman to orbit the Earth on 16 June 1963,
Neil Armstrong becoming the first human to set foot upon the surface of the Moon
on 20 July 1969, and the docking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecrafts on 17 July
1975, being the first international human mission in space, and recall that for the
past decade humanity has maintained a multinational permanent human presence in
outer space aboard the International Space Station;
Respectfully recall that the human exploration of outer space has not
4.
been without sacrifice, and remember the men and women who have lost their lives
in the pursuit of expanding humanity’s frontiers;
Emphasize the significant progress in the development of space science
5.
and technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the
universe, and the extraordinary achievements made over the past fifty years in space
exploration efforts, including deepening the understanding of the planetary system
and the Sun and the Earth itself, in the use of space science and technology for the
benefit of all humankind and in the development of the international legal regime
governing space activities;
Recall the entry into force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the
6.
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies1 (Outer Space Treaty) on 10 October 1967, which
establishes the fundamental principles of international space law;
7.
Also recall the first meeting of the permanent Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space, convened on 27 November 1961, which facilitated the
adoption of General Assembly resolutions 1721 A to E (XVI) of 20 December 1961,
including resolution 1721 A (XVI), in which the first legal principles were
commended to States for their guidance in space activities, and resolution
1721 B (XVI), in which the Assembly expressed its belief that the United Nations

7

A/RES/66/71

should provide a focal point for international cooperation in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space;
8.
Recognize that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat, has for the past
fifty years served as a unique platform at the global level for international
cooperation in space activities and that the Committee and its subsidiary bodies
stand at the forefront in bringing the world together in using space science and
technology to preserve the Earth and the space environment and ensure the future of
human civilization;
Acknowledge that significant changes have occurred in the structure and
9.
content of the space endeavour, as reflected in the emergence of new technologies
and the increasing number of actors at all levels, and therefore note with satisfaction
the progress made in strengthening international cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space by enhancing the capacity of States for economic, social and cultural
development and by strengthening the regulatory frameworks and mechanisms to
that effect;
10. Reaffirm the importance of international cooperation in developing the
rule of law, including the relevant norms of space law, and of the widest possible
adherence to the international treaties that promote the peaceful uses of outer space;
11. Express our firm conviction that space science and technology and their
applications, such as satellite communications, Earth observation systems and
satellite navigation technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term
solutions for sustainable development and can contribute more effectively to efforts
to promote the development of all countries and regions of the world, to improve
people’s lives, to conserve natural resources and to enhance the preparedness for
and mitigation of the consequences of disasters;
12. Express our deep concern about the fragility of the space environment
and the challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in
particular the impact of space debris;
13. Stress the need to look more closely into how advanced space research
and exploration systems and technologies could further contribute to meeting
challenges, including that of global climate change, and to food security and global
health, and endeavour to examine how the outcomes and spin-offs of scientific
research in human space flight could increase the benefits, in particular for
developing countries;
14. Emphasize that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
achievement of the goals of the United Nations Millennium Declaration;2
15. Confirm the need for closer coordination between the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and other intergovernmental bodies involved in the
global development agenda of the United Nations, including with respect to the
major United Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural
development;
16. Call upon all States to take measures at the national, regional,
interregional and global levels to engage in the common efforts to use space science
and technology and their applications to preserve planet Earth and its space
environment for future generations.
8
