S/2005/431

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 July 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 1 July 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 29 June 2005,
which I received from the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (see annex). I should grateful if you would bring it to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi. A. Annan

05-40859 (E) 080705

*0540859*

S/2005/431

Annex
Letter dated 29 June 2005 from the Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach herewith a report on operations of the International Security Assistance
Force covering the period 7 March to 3 June 2005 (see enclosure). I would
appreciate your making this report available to the Council.
(Signed) Jaap de Hoop Scheffer

2

S/2005/431

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
I.

Introduction
1.
In its resolution 1510 (2003), the Security Council requested the leadership of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to provide reports on the
implementation of its mandate. This is the seventh such report by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), covering the period from 7 March to 3 June 2005.
2.
As at 7 June 2005, ISAF total strength was 8,404 personnel from 26 NATO
nations plus 278 from 10 non-NATO nations. ISAF expansion to the western part of
the country was implemented on 31 May. Two provisional reconstruction teams
(PRTs) came under NATO command, and two newly established PRTs will follow in
the summer. Planning for a further expansion of ISAF to the south, stage 3, is
continuing.

II.

Security situation
Security in the International Security Assistance Force area of operations
3.
During the reporting period, the level of violence in Afghanistan was relatively
low up until mid-May, when a series of events took place. Allegedly fuelled by the
publication of an article in Newsweek, a number of violent demonstrations took
place in 16 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces. As a result, 16 people were reported
killed. There was also the kidnapping on 16 May of an Italian CARE International
employee (who has since been released), as well as eruptions of tension in the Shirin
Tagab area. The continuing threat to stability posed by narcotics trafficking,
organized crime and factional fighting remains a cause for concern. In the
foreseeable future, the National Assembly elections could stimulate unrest among
opposing militant forces and provoke tribal clashes.
4.
Throughout the reporting period, threat warnings and sporadic bombings and
rocket attacks occurred in the capital. On the night of 29 and 30 May, a rocket hit
the ISAF compound, causing slight injuries to one soldier and minor material
damages. Numerous weapons caches were also discovered during the second quarter
of 2005.
International Security Assistance Force operations
5.
ISAF expansion to the western part of the country was implemented on
31 May, when it took responsibility for the United States-led PRT in Farah province
and the Italian-led PRT in Herat province. Two newly established PRTs in Badghis
and Ghor provinces will follow in the summer. NATO is preparing to temporarily
deploy additional forces in support of the National Assembly elections, which are
due to be held on 18 September. The primary responsibility for security during the
election process will remain with the Afghan security forces.
6.
An integrated project team has been assembled by NATO to provide a strategic
assessment of ISAF air operations up to 2015. This team will take account of

3

S/2005/431

existing NATO plans and studies, as well as input from the Afghan Government and
the Coalition forces, in order to identify the right balance to be struck between the
airfields at Kabul International Airport, Bagram, Kandahar and other sites that could
be used by ISAF. The creation of an Afghan civil aviation authority and studies to
examine possibilities for the privatization of the Afghan commercial airport
facilities are key to the development of this sector.
7.
ISAF played a pivotal role in the resolution of the conflict in the city of Shirin
Tagab, in Faryab province, where unrest erupted. The PRT brokered a ceasefire at
the local level, while ISAF headquarters interacted with the federal authorities in
Kabul.
Support for security-sector reform
8.
The ongoing disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process was
completed in Chaghcharan and the western region with the disarmament of the 41st
division and the 843rd regiment. As at 15 May a total of 53,000 Afghan militia
forces soldiers had entered the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme. The Ministry of Defence removed 85,500 personnel from the payroll
out of a total of 100,000 on its lists. The current focus of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is the 1st division in Panshyr and Kabul, as it is the
only remaining problematic unit. Cantonment is ongoing in Sheberghan for the
48 leftover heavy weapons.
9.
In January the Afghan New Beginnings Programme initiated the disbandment
of illegal armed groups. The initial aim was to gather information on armed groups
operating in Afghanistan. As a result of work carried out to date, there are now
approximately 1,800 such illegal armed groups made up of some
129,000 individuals in the Afghan New Beginnings Programme database.
10. Taking into account the complexity, both material and cultural, of the reform
of justice, for which Italy is the lead nation, progress is being made. Some
800 judges and prosecutors have been trained. Training, facility-building and
restoration are proceeding, as well as the reform of the Ministry of Justice, the
Supreme Court and the Office of the General Prosecutor. Italy, as lead nation in this
pillar of the security-sector reform, is coordinating programmes and activities
implemented also by other nations. Canada is funding a project entitled
“Strengthening the rule of law in Afghanistan” to cover judicial training in civil and
commercial law, elaboration of the civil code (together with Italy), legal aid
education and improving the administration of first instance courts. ISAF assists the
Government of Afghanistan by gathering information about the current physical
condition of judicial facilities and perceptions of people with regard to law and
order and in encouraging resort to courts of law for dispute resolution.

III.

Support for the Afghan Government and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
11. The Government of Afghanistan issued a counter-narcotics implementation
plan on 16 February 2005. The plan adopts an eight-pillar approach to countering
narcotics activity. Specifically, it focuses on building institutions, information
campaigns, alternative livelihoods, law enforcement, criminal justice, eradication,
demand reduction, treatment of addicts and regional cooperation. ISAF welcomes
the plan, which was coordinated with ISAF, Coalition and embassy counter-

4

S/2005/431

narcotics specialists. ISAF will continue to interact with Coalition and embassy
staffs on counter-narcotics issues. PRTs provide discreet support for local initiatives
and logistics, as well as medical support for national eradication and interdiction
operations.
12. The Afghan Ministry of Defence and General Staff are currently manned at
56 per cent following training of staff. In the army, 29 out of 65 battalions are in
existence, and 44 per cent of a planned force of 46,000 soldiers are equipped and
trained.
13. The training of the Afghan National Police has shown good progress to date.
The target number of 62,500 police officers is planned to be reached by the end of
2005. ISAF PRTs are providing assistance to the Afghan National Police by
including national police advisers on the PRT staff.
Kabul International Airport
14. Kabul International Airport continues to develop its role as a civilian airport.
The outsourcing of several airport services is expected to increase in order to allow
for the long-term objective of handing overall management over to the Afghan
authorities. NATO is currently training Afghan firefighters who are expected to
graduate by mid-2005. Air traffic controllers are being trained in India. A
comprehensive plan is still required to allow the Afghan authorities to take over
Kabul International Airport airfield operations and allow ISAF to scale down its
responsibility.
15. A common approach by the international community remains a requirement for
the rehabilitation of Kabul International Airport. A clearing house mechanism,
coordinated by NATO, is currently handling these efforts. Recent debates have
highlighted main priorities, such as the airport’s continuing lack of appropriate radar
systems allowing for landings in accordance with international air traffic
regulations.

IV.

Conclusion
16. ISAF continues to fulfil its United Nations mandate to support the Government
of Afghanistan in the creation of a safe and secure environment within its area of
operations and is expanding its role in doing so.
17. In addition to framework security and directed operations, ISAF continues to
carry out a role of support for security-sector reform within its means, capabilities
and constraints. With the lessons learned from the presidential election process,
ISAF stands ready to provide support for the Afghan National Assembly elections
next September. This will allow the core Bonn Agreement objectives to be fulfilled.

5
