UNITED

I.-

NATIONS

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-SECOND

NEW

YEAR

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

..... .. .. ..... .. .. ... ..... .. ..

1

. .. ... ..... ,. .. .. .. . .... ,,.,..,. .. ..

1

.. . .. , .. ..,... . .... .. . ... ...... .,. .. ..

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12463 and Add.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2054)
Statement by the President
Adoption

of the agenda

SJPV.2054

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions 0.f the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

,

Held in New York on Thursday, 15 December
ficsident:

Sir Harold E. WALTER (Mauritius).

PrcselV. The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/20.54)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12463 and Add.1)
The meeting wus called to order at 7.40 p.m.
Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT: Before turning to the first item on
the agenda, I wish to state how pleased the Government of
Mauritius is at having the honour to preside over the work
of the Council, which has very important problems to solve.
My presence here today is an expression of my Govemment’s genuine solidarity with and firm belief in the noble
purposes and lofty aims of the Organization, which are
directed towards the achievement of world peace.
2. I am sure that I am expressing the feelings of all
members when I ask the representative of Cyprus to convey
to his Government our earnest hope that the President of
Cyprus will very shortly have the joy of being reunited with
his son.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in CyprllS:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/12463 and Add. 1)
3. The PRESIDENT: I have received letters from the
representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which they
request to be invited to participate in the Council’s
discussion of the question before it. I therefore propose, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, and in
conformity with the usual practice of the Council, to invite

1977, at 7 p.m.

those representativesto participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
4. There is a slight hitch in the sensethat Mr. Celik is
1eaVillgNew York tomorrow. Wehavehada hard day in the
course of discussionsand negotiationsin which his co.
operation has been forthcoming in a very genuineandopen
way. 1 know that many of ushave obligationsthis evening,
but, if we only take the vote tonight and defer untj]
tomorrow morning the statementsof membersof the
Council in explanation of vote and statementsby the
representativeswho have askedto be allowedto participate
in the discussion,that wiIl certainly hamperMr. Celik’s
movements.1 am, therefore, in the handsof the Council.
5. Perhaps we could find a solution by acceptingthe
suggestionthat the statements of the membersof the
Council shouldbe handedover to the President,who will in
turn hand them over to the Secretary-General.They can
then be bound in one volume and consideredas official
documentsof the Council. Since we met for consultations
in Conference Room 5, I have discussed
this questionagain
with the representativeof the United Kingdom. 1 believe
that after the little legal tusslewe had over it, even the
United Kingdom delegationhad somedoubtsabout its own
proposal,and I think that it would now go alongwith the
suggestionsI am making if it meetsthe wishesof the
Council. This procedure would, of course, shorten the
debate and enable the representativeof Cyprus to be
invited to speak, to be followed by the other representatives in the order in which they havebeeninvited to take
part in the discussion.
6. Mr. TROYANOYSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpketation from Russian):I am not quite
sure what procedure the President is proposing.IS he
proposing that the representativesof the partiesdirectly
concernedshould speaktonight and that the statements
of
the members of the Council should be distributed as
Council documents?
7. The PRESIDENT: What I meantwasthis.The members
of the Council have priority in the debate.After the vote,
memberswill ask to be allowedto speakin explanationof
their vote. That procedure will take usinto the early hours
of the morning, even though we have had promisesfrom
certain delegations that their statementswould be extremely brief. Therefore, if there isa consensus
on the Part
of the membersof the Security Councilthat they accept
the procedure that statementsin explanationof votewill be
handed 0x1 to the President, it will saveusthe time that
would be taken by that part of the debate.I know that I

15. I should like to be quite clearabout this. If any of the
parties is given the opportunity to speak this evening, I
think that the sameopportunity shouldbe accordedto the
others, becauseotherwise what international public opinion
is going to hear is the news that a resolution has been
adopted and that one of the partieshasexpressedits views.
I think that would be unfair.

am going against the current of tradition, but the time has
come for us to break away from time-wasting procedures.
We should get on with the job before us. Time is for action
and not for words.
8. We are faced here with this typical situation where
somebody has, as the result of very forceful persuasion and
convincing arguments, agreed to go along with the other
side to facilitate our task and I believe that in return we
should be kind to him by allowing him to address us
tonight so that he can leave tomorrow as planned.

16. I should like to ask you, Mr. President,to proceedin
this manner: that you invite the representativesof the
parties-I am referring specifically to the representativesof
the Republic of Cyprus, Turkey and Greeceand, perhaps,
the representative of the Turkish Cypriot community-to
speakthis evening if they so wish. If we proceedotherwise,
then I should like to ask you to open the debateand to
follow the usualprocedure under the rules.

9, I am only making a suggestion to members of the
Council and they may, of course, overrule me; I am but
their humble servant. Probably I have spoken out of turn
and have gone beyond the limits of propriety, but it is time
that something shook, and let us shake it now.

17. The PRESIDENT: May I requestthe representatives
seatedat the Council table to meetmein my office now? I
shall suspend the meeting for five minutes; I have an
important communication to impart to you in the light of
what Canadaand France have suggested,whichprimnfncie
seemsacceptable but which I, as President,know will be
unacceptable.

10. Mr. NOUNGAVOU
(Benin) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, I think that your proposal might
create a situation which would be rather difficult and
delicate for the Council. I thought we had agreed on a
particular plan during our consultations, which was to
adopt the draft resolution this evening and hear cxplanations of vote tomorrow. I think that that would be
desirable, and, with all due respect and in all humility,
should like to ask that you keep to that plan, on which my
delegation thought a consensus had been achieved. In any
event, my delegation intends to have its say in a sovereign
manner in this debate, not to submit a written document to
the Secretariat.

The meeting was suspendedut 7.55 pOm.and rcsumcdat
8.10 p. in.
18. The PRESIDENT: As I said, I have received letters
f&n the representativesof Cyprus, Greeceand Turkey, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion.I therefore propose, in accordancewith the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedureaswell asin conformity with
the usual practice of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussionwithout the right to
vote. If 1 hear no objection, I shall presumethat the
Council agrees to this request.

I 1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): 1 fully
agree with the representative of Benin that there was a
consensus before we left Conference Room 5. But something unforeseen has happened: I had not been aware that
Mr. Celik was leaving New York. That is why 1 made my
suggestion to the Council. I can assure my brother that at
no time did I wish to exceed my rights or the limits of
propriety. I simply wanted to make a suggestion, acceptable
or unacceptable.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. Rossida(Qp?us),
Mr. Papoulias (Greece) and Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey) took
placesat the Council table.

12. Mr. LAPOINTE
(Canada) (interpretation
Qom
French): May I make a suggestion? Perhaps we could
please everyone by deciding that the Council should hear
only Mr, celik this evening and defer until tomorrow the
statementsto be made by Council members.Otherwise I
am afraid we will be in a rather awkward position if we
makeit possiblefor a non-memberof the Council to speak
but prevent membersfrom doing so and simply have their
statements circulated. I think that would be somewhat
abnormal. For its part, my delegation would be quite
preparedto hear Mr. Celik this evening and to defer any
other statementsuntil tomorrow.

19. The PRESIDENT: I should also like to inform the
Council that I have receiveda letter from the representative
of Turkey requesting that Mr. Celik should be invited to
participate in the consideration of the question on the
agenda. I propose, if I hear no objection, to extend an
invitation to Mr. Celik, in accordancewith rule 39 of the
provisional rules ot’ procedure.
It wasso decided.
20. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-Generalon the
United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period 8 June
to 30 November 1977 [S/12463 and Add.I]. In addition,
the Council has before it the text of a draft resolution
contained in document S/12489, which was drawn up in
the courseof consultations.

13. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretation from
French): I wasgoing to propose somethingalong the lines
of what hasjust been suggested,namely, that we should
vote and then hear Mr. Celik and the representative of
Cyprus, the remaining statements being deferred until
tomorrow.

21. I shall now put the draft resolution in document
S/12489 to the vote.

14. Mr. ILLUECA (Panama) (interpretation from
Spanish):I wasgoingto make a proposalalong the linesof
that madeby the representativeof France.

A vote wastaken by showof hands.
2

3rmY still holds under its sway 40 per cent of the island’s
territory, in contemptuous affront to the United Nations,
whose mandatory resolutions demand the withdrawal without de[ay of the occupying forces from the territory of the
Republic. Worse still is the series of international crimes
that followed in the wake of the invasion, under a
pre-planned design to change by force the demographic
structure of the island. The inhumanity involved in the
massive uprootings of the indigenous majority people has
rarely been paralleled in history.

22, The PRESIDENT: The first spcnkcr is the rcpresentative of Cyprus, on WJIOIII I 110~ ~111.
23. Mr. ROSSJDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, J should like
to thallk you iUld the other members of the Council for
having invited my delegation to participate in this debate.
We arc particularly gratified to see you, Sir, the Minister for
External Affairs of Miluritius, the representative of a fellow
non-aligned country, presiding over the C’ouncil’s deliberations. We are convinced that under your wise and able
leadership the Council will conduct fruitful deliberations.

30. These expulsions still continue; they are coupled with
Jooting and illegal confiscation of property, even including
the New Famagusta area. What began in July 1974 is still
continuing. These are facts that cannot be overlooked, no
matter how much we would wish to avoid stating them.
The continuing expulsions increase the number of refugees,
in direct conflict with United Nations resolutions in
Cyprus, all of which call for the urgent return of the
refugees to their homes in safety. So, again, on this urgent
appeal by the Security Council there has been no response.

24. I should like to toke this opportunity to express our
sincere thanks to Sir IIilroId Walter, our President, for the
collcern lx showed in his stutcment of sympathy to my
President, Mr. KyJ?rianou, (111 the sad event that hiis taken
placetoday.
25. 1 should also like to place 1x1 record our deep sense

of
gratitude to the Secret;iry-(;clicr:il, Mr. Kurt W;lldheim, fol
]lis continuing efforts to J)romote 11,jusl and lasting solution
of the Cyprus problem in aCCord;mCCwith his mandate. Our
wami thanks rind apprCCiilti0ll go al%.)to Under-SccrctariesGeneral Mr. Jioberto Guycr and Mr. Brian Urquhart, for
their dedicated work in promoting the objectives of the
IJnited Nations. J should alscl like to pay 3 warm tribute to
the Commander of the United Nations J’cacc-keeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYJ’), Major-(;encrol J:umcs Quinn, as well
asto the senior political adviser, Mr. lidmy Gorg6, for their
significant contribution to the cause of pc~c in our island.

31. The right to return is a fundamental and inalienable
human right. No passage of time can affect it, nor can the
criminality of faits accomplis create acceptable realities. 1n
any case, at no time will the Government of Cyprus forsake
the inalienable rights of tile 200,000 refugees to return to
their homes and properties.
32. The report of the Secretary-General [S/12463/ shows
that the number of Greek Cypriot refugees has reached the
figure of exactly 198,556, that is, one third of the total
pbpulation of the island has been turned into destitute,
bereaved and desolate refugees. Their ancestral hearths and
properties are being openly usurped by Anatolian settlers
massively brought in from Turkey in an ongoing process
to change by force the population ratio of the island. Thus,
daily, Greek Cypriots have been passing through the ordeal
of cruel Jlarrassrnent to the sad lot of refugees.

26, It is indeed with real regret that WC see the highly
esteemed Ambassador JVrcz dc CuBlIar relinquishing his
duties in Cyprus, which hc handled in a mosl exemplary
way and in the best traditions 01’ the United Nations. The
integrity of his character and his sense of justice lyuve been
deeply appreciated by the Cypriot people. We most
sincerely wish him cvcry progress and hi~ppinCS!i in a
brilliant career.

33. A recent variety of territorist activity to that end-that
is, to the end of expulsion---is the burning alive of elderly
women through setting fire to their habitations, of which
we have had a number of recent instances. These and other
crimes with the Greek Cypriots as the victims go unrestrained by any action on the part of the United Nations
and are raInpant in the occupied area. Lists and details are
available. Nowhere has such a pattern of officially sanctjoncd racial discrimination exceeded in criminality these
:IctJons.

27. Furthermore, WC arc particularly indebted to those
States which, through VUll~lltilry
contributions of pCrSl)nlEl
and funds, enable IJNI:IC’YI’ to function in Cyprus.
28. The Security Council is meeting for tile renewal of the
mandate of the ITorcc. On this occasion, it SCCIIEpertinent
to have a brief look at the scqucncc of events that IIWC
taken place since July 1074, namely, since the time when
the situation in Cyprus in its implications and rcpcrcussions
becameone of the prcscnt grave intcrnotional problems, as
referred to in the latest report of the Secretary-Ccncral 011
the work of the Organization.2

34. T]IQ report of the Secretary-General points out in
paragr:lpll 32 that UNFICYP’s freedom of movement in the
nortllcrn part of cyprus continues to be restricted and that
the
Force
llas
110 accessto Greek Cypriot habitations.
The
reason for this ~311be seen in the results of this absence of
col~tact with Greek Cypriot habitations.

29. Three ye;lrs hilvc ;llrc;ldy clapscd since the armed
attack and invasion of Cyprus by Turlccy. Its occupation

35. Tl~s continuing aggression against Cyprus and the
multiple crimes against its people remain unchecked, i.n
flagrant violation of international law, the Charter and
unanimous General Assembly and Security Council resolutjon. These acts should be and are wholly unacceptable to
the world community. They mark a dangerous breakdown
3

in legal order and make manifest the implications from the
failure of the United Nations to carry out its main
responsibility for international security through the effective implementation of its decisions, that is, the decisions of
the Security Council as mandatorily provided in the
Charter.

a normal life, including facilities for education and for the
practice of their religion, as well as medical care by their
own doctors and freedom of movement in the north.”
[S/Z I 789, annex, point 2.1
40. A corresponding obligation by the Greek Cypriot side
in the agreement was that the Turkish Cypriots in the south
who wanted to go to the north would be allowed to do so.
This obligation was promptly and completely complied
with by the Greek Cypriot side. However, no sooner had
the transportation of the Turkish Cypriots to the north
been completed, than the Turkish side wholly reneged on all
its commitments in the agreement.

36. The report of the Secretary-General, referring to the
intercommunal talks, notes that
“The efforts to achieve a solution of the underlying
problems . . 1 have continued to yield disappointing
results.” [Ibid., para. 69./

41. Thus, none of the conditions to provide for normal
life as specified in the agreement were in the least degree
honoured. As appears from the Secretary-General’s report,
Greek Cypriot farmers in the Karpas region are severly
restricted and can hardly cultivate their fields for their
livelihood, teachers are expressly not allowed to proceed to
the north, medical teams are refused clearance, and
UNFICYP’s freedom of movement in the north is prohibitively restricted in violation of a specific paragraph in the
agreement of 2 August 1975 providing for free access of
UNFICYP to Greek Cypriot habitations.

Nevertheless, the Secretary-General continues
“to hold to the view that the negotiations between the
representatives of the two Cypriot communities . . . are
the best available method of achieving a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus problem” [ibid., para. 701.
37. We fully concur with this view. The process of
negotiation is the best available means for the peaceful
solution of problems and my Government firmly supports
the intercommunal talks provided they are meaningful and
constructive, as required also by the Secretary-General. In
the progress of negotiations there must, however, be
concrete proposals from both sides on the constitutional and
territorial aspects, as is indeed demanded by Security
Council resolution 414 (1977) and Genera1 Assembly
resolution 32/15. Such concrete proposals from the Turkish
side have been totally lacking all thraugh the negotiations,
which has resulted in the meaninglessness of the talks. It is
therefore pertinent and necessary to inquire into the causes
that have been rendering the negotiations unproductive for
these three years, Bearing in mind the statements of the
various Members of the United Nations on different
occasions regarding the importance of the intercommunal
talks, we must inquire into the causes that make it
impossible for these negotiations, td proceed any further.

42. But worse still, not only has the Turkish side reneged
on the agreement, not only has it not provided the facilities
agreed upon, not only has it not allowed freedom to stay
and to live normal lives, but its forces of occupation have
renewed and intensified the expulsion of Greek Cypriots
through harassment and terror in a manner calculated to
effect their elimination from the occupied area or else from
life itself. The choice forced upon them in such a dilemma
is now presented by Ankara as “voluntary departure”.
43. In consequence, the number of Greek Cypriots
remaining in the north has perforce been constantly
dwindling. Thus, their original number fell to 3,631 at the
end of 1976 and in the six-month period to June 1977 fell
further to 2,000. It dwindled further during the period
covered by the report.

38. I wish in this respect to refer to the fundamental
requirements for any negotiations-and Cyprus could not
be an exception. These requirements are good faith and
common purpose. Both must be present for any negotiations: good faith in honouring agreements made and
obligations undertaken in the course of the negotiations;
good faith, also, in the conduct of the parties during the
negotiations by refraining from unilateral actions contrary
to the very purpose of the talks, which would undermine
them and lead to their frustration.

44. Can it therefore be assumed that there is any degree of
good faith shown by the Turkish side in the negotiations?
We see by this one example-and there are more-with what
degree of respect or disrespect the agreements reached in
the negotiations have been treated by the Turkish sjde.
45. As regards the good faith which must be demonstrated
by refraining from unilateral actions, as demanded by
United Nations resolutions, the fictitious setting up of a
State within a State in Cyprus as a means of promoting
Ankara’s objective of partition and annexation could not be
considered evidence of that good faith.

39. A demonstrable example of the regrettable lack of all
good faith in the course of the intercommunal talks is the
manifest reneging on the solemn agreement reached
between the parties in the third round of talks on 2 August
1975 under the auspices and in the presence OF the
Secretary-General, which is recorded in his report as
follows:

46. As is natural, the unilateral declaration of the so-called
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus was disapproved and
rejected by the relevant United Nations resolutions and this
State was not recognized by the international community.
Yet, Ankara tries to impose this illegal entity and repeatedly puts forward its representative in order to provide a
means of creating confusion and eclipsing itself from the

“Mr. Denktag reaffirmed, and it was agreed, that the
Greek Cypriots at present in the north of the island are
free to stay and that they will be given every help to lead
4

scene of tile drama,

thinking

tllilt it Call thus esci]pcits

breakdown of any vestige of world order and security in
relations among nations. Among the effects of such
situations is the spili.over of anarchy into the domestic
domain through the increasing incidence of terrorism,
hijacking, the taking of hostagesand other manifestations
of growing insecurity in the international society of our
days.

])eavyrespansibilitics.
47. A striking cvidencc of Iack of god fait]] in the
negotiatiOllS
is the very IWXIlt
;It tCI~l]Jt
to legalize,through
an i]]ega] law, tile usurpation Of t]lC [JI’Operties
of the
e&led

Greek

Cypriots

from

the irlvilded

arca. ‘i’hcse

have been distributed to Turkish Cypriots alien
to l]lej& ;wJ to colonizing settlersfrorll Turkey to whom
fake “tit]e$
of OWErS]lip”
are issued
iii Violation
of
a]]
concepts
of ]e@ty. Indicative 0L’the underlying intent in
these actions
is thiit
t]lC
Slid
1:~ describesthe rightful
properties

inrJigeIIol1s

mmx’s

Of

t]lC

]m[Jerties

35

“dicns”

--a]ietls

54. General Assembly resolution 31/12 expressed the
hope “that the Security Council [would] considerappropriate steps for the implementation of its resolution
365 (1974)“. Security Council resolution365 (1974) is the
resolution reaffirming General Assembly resolution
3212 (X.X1X), by which Turkey was called upon to
withdraw, without delay, its military forces from Cyprus
and to allow the return of the refugeesto their homesin
safety. Regrettably, there has been no responsefrom the
Security Council as yet to that expressionof hope by the
General Assembly. Hence, the General Assembly, in its
current session,by its resolution 32/l 5, more emphatically
recommendsthat the Security Council should “adopt all
practical meansto promote the effective implementation
of
its relevant resolutionsin all their aspects”.My Government
trusts that the Council will not fail in its responsibility to
take early stepsin accord with the aforesaidrecommenda-

to

Cyprus.
48, A furltiler

in the negotiationsis that
‘I’ll0 opprcssivcpresence
of the Turr<isharmy ol‘ occilpatk~n and the fails accomplis
they

&o&l

L’sscIl

bc

freei)’

tiai

o]~m~lt

ctJnc.htctcti.

by it i~Mtnb]y
~lt’f’ect
the coIlduct of llcgotiatjolls, which caIJ1llJt ~Jc said 10 IX fr~iy coIltillcted.
This

perpetr;tted

sjtu;itiou~icecisto bc remedied so as to rcndcr the talks
positive
andproductive, asthey shouldbe.
49. Negotiationsccmducled ftom it posilion of strength
ZIld from a SC~~~~IICC of Ibrcc ci\nn<lt ]IC mcaningfu] or
]eadto a just rind lasting solution. it hasby now become
manifestthat the implc~ncllt:ltiolI by l’urkcy of jts obligationsunder the relcvant reso]utiolIs is becomingcompclliligiyneededfor ally projircss tuWilKiS
solution and fiJr the
conduct
of mcaningl‘uland J~r~~ductivc
negotiationson this
subject.

tion of the General Assembly.

S.5. This is the crux of the whole problem of Cyprus and
of its solution. Indeed, the practicalroad to the solution of
all problems, in general terms, lies in the effective implementation of Security Council decisionsas appearsfrom
the tenor of other resolutions adopted by the General
Assemblyat its presentsession.

50. Furthermore,a spirit (II’ mutual uiitlerstandingbctwen
the two collllllilnitics
sil~~uid prWilil. But tilis will be
unattainableSO IOIlg ilS LilC policy Of AIlkXil,
which
dominatesthe Turkish Qpriot
leadcrsllip,
is based MI
intensifyinglho division illlli raising the walls 01’ separation
whichnrebeingimposed011the rank anti I’ilc of tllc Turkish
Cypriots.

56. At the present critical times in the history of my
country, and while I have at this moment the privilege of
addressingthis principal organ of the United Nations, may
1, on behalf of my countrymen and the hundreds of
thousandsof desperate,desolaterefugees,echo a fervent
and deeply felt appeal that the Security Council should
take the positive decision to proceedto the appropriate
measuresrequired from it by the Charter, in order to give
me:lninglitl content and effecectto its vital decisionson
matters of international security and peace,so that justice
and respect for fundamental human rights may prevail in
our world.

51. 01X iNiJCflli ciWN!nt towards SUciI positive spirit of
understanding
between the Greek and ‘I’urkish Cypriot
cofnm~ii~itics
is the I;lCt tllilt
tilt
hUlli
01’ Illc
(;rcek :lIKl
TurkishCypriot people ~dti
eagerly conciliate and
CO-operate
il’ left free frcmi outside intcrt’creiluc intcrferencefor purposesilli,
to tix
true
jiltcrests 131‘llic Cypriot
people
OfGreekand ‘I’urkisfi origin iliikc.
il

52. In this respect, it

Wi\S

rCpC:ltl’diy

I’~lllilrkCd

ill

57. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Greccc.

a

number
of reportsol‘ the Sccrcl;u’y-(;oncral that there WiIS 1
yearningand impalicnce ol’ the ordinary people of Cyprus
fora full return to normal conditions and that this yearning
wasobvious.The report
ol’ 1 I) March 1066 states:

58. Mr, JIAPOULIAS (Greece): Mr. President,I take great
pleasurein extcndiug to you the warmestcongratulations
of my delegationon your accessionto the presidencyof the
Security Council for this month. Your prestige and the
important role that your country and you personallyhave
played in the affairs of the United Nations and in the
non-aligned movement, as well as your authority and

“There hnvc been recently a numberol‘ indications that
both the Greek and ‘J’urkis]l Cvpriot populations of
QpCUS
iliT increasinglyil~~iJilLiCllt i.or il rcturll to nurtnai
conditions.”[s/7/ 01, pm. I.o./

well-known

diplomatic

skills, give us great confidence

that

this dcbatc wil] be successfullyconcluded.It is, indeed, a
great privilege and honour for us to be guided in the
discussion on this important
item by the Minister for
External Affairs of Mauritius, Sir Harold Walter. 1 dS0 wish
to thank you and the membersof the Council for having
allowedmc to participate in this discussion.

5% The tragcdv (31’(Yyprus ill its very n;iturc becomesthe
tc%edY
Of tile &itcd Nati(bnsin that it nlakesmanifestthe
5

59. The Security Council has, on the proposal of the
Secretary-General, decided to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for a further
period of six months. This resolution, to which the
Government of Cyprus has agreed, has the support OF my
Government.

64. The Council is fully aware of the reasons behind the
stalemate that is exacerbating the deterioration of an
already dangerous situation, and I will confine myself to
repeating them in very brief terms.
65. First, there is the continuation of the aggression
against the Republic of Cypms through Turkish military
occupation of about 40 per cent of its territory in the name
of a minority community not exceeding 18 per cent of the
island’s total population, in contravention of the principles
of the Charter and the relevant United Nations resolutions.

60. I avail myself of this early opportunity to express, on
behalf of the Government of Greece, profound appreciation
to the Member States that are providing contingents to
UNFICYP at considerable financial burden to themselves.
Our appreciation goes also to the Governments that are
making voluntary contributions for the maintenance of the
Force. Further, we wish to join in the tribute paid to the
Finnish contingent which, after 13 years of distinguished
service, has been withdrawn from Cyprus. Finally, I wish to
express our sincere thanks to the Force Commander,
Major-General Quinn, and to the officers and men of
LJNFICYP who are discharging with exemplary devotion
their difficult responsibilities and humanitarian tasks.

66. Secondly, 200,000 refugees-refugees in their own
country-are
being kept by force from returning to their
ancestral homes. That is in itself a gross violation of human
rights, to which is added the usurpation of their properties,
in spite of basic international legal norms and, specifically,
of the fourth Geneva Convention, regarding the treatment
of the inhabitants of occupied territories.
67. Thirdly, the other side is utilizing all kinds of delaying
or “salami” tactics, instead of conducting negotiations
properly, in order to perpetuate faits accomplis and to
create the notorious “irreversible situations” and “new
realities”.

61, The question of Cyprus has been debated twice during
recent months: first in the Security Council following an
urgent request made by the Government of Cyprus in view
of an impending threat of colonization of the new city of
Famagusta, which debate led to the adoption of resolution
414(1977);
secondly, in the General Assembly itself
during the current session, which debate resulted in the
adoption of resolution 32/l 5 by an overwhelming majority
of I 16 votes to only 6. Therefore it is perhaps not
necessary to deal at length with what the Council already
knows, Equally well known is the framework in which the
Council has been called upon to extend UNFICYP’s
mandate, namely, the framework established by the unanimously
adopted
General
Assembly
resolution
3212 (XXIX), endorsed by Council resolution 365 (1974),
as well as by subsequent Council resolutions and by General
Assembly resolutions 3395 (XXX), 3 l/l 2 and 32/l 5.

68. I shall spare the Council and refrain from going
through the various paragraphs of the Secretary-General’s
report, which faithfully describes a pattern with which the
Council must by now bc painfully familiar: the need for
concern for the Greek Cypriots remaining in the north, who
have been reduced to the token number of 1,814 souls and
whose numbers are still being diminished, despite the
monitoring of departures by the United Nations, through
such devices as the withholding of schooling facilities for
children or of adequate medical attention. the continuation
of the restrictions on UNFICYP’s freedom of movement in
the occupied part of Cyprus and on the performance of
UNFICYP’s humanitarian tasks on a limited scale; harassmcnt of the Greek Cypriot farmers in the Karpas and
restrictions on their cultivation of their fields; the confiscation of Greek Cypriot-owned land and further looting of
appreciable quantities of commercial commodities and
other movable properties from houses and other premises in
the Famagusta area, and so on.

62. All these resolutions provide for respect for the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus, abstention from
unilateral actions and interventions directed against that
Republic, including changes in the demographic structure
of the island, withdrawal of all foreign armed forces from
the Republic of Cypms and cessation of all foreign
interference in its affairs, the return of all refugees to their
homes in safety, and the resumption of meaningful and
constructive negotiations between the representatives of the
two communities, under the auspices of the Secretary
General, on the basis of comprehensive and concrete
proposals with a view to arriving at a just and lasting
settlement.

69. What makes the present situation in Cyprus all the
more revolting is that whereas we, the Security Council and
the General Assembly, have constantly been hearing from
the other side about their alleged readiness to negotiate,
particularly when there is to be a debate at the United
Nations on the Cyprus problem, or when it serves some
other purpose, nothing at all has ever been done that could
promote a serious negotiation, let alone bring about a
settlement.

63. Now, we have before us the Secretary-General’s
report, document S/12463 of 1 December 1977, and we
have once again, regrettably, to bear witness to the fact that
no progress whatsoever has been made as regards the
implementation of United Nations resolutions, the result
being that we are no nearer to a solution than we were last
year or the year before. We certainly share the disappointment expressed by the Secretary-General in paragraph 69 of
his report.

70. Indeed, despite eight rounds of intercommunal talks
held al Vienna over the past three years under the auspices
of the Secretary-General, and the first round of the new
series of those talks which took place last April, it has not
proved possible to reach the stage of serious and meaningful
negotiations.
6

71. I ‘wish to repeat the deepest appreciation and thanks
of mY Government for the painstaking and ulltiring efforts
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, in search of a
Pe~~ceflll
d~~ti(m
for Cyprus.
We also extend our sincere
thanks
to
his colleagues, Under-Secretaries-General
Mr. Roberto Guyer and Mr. Brian Uryuhart, as well as to
their staffs.

‘76* Mr. CELJK:Mr. President, I should like to thank you
and each and every member of the Council for having
decided at this late hour to convene a meetillg in order to
give Jne the opportunity to make a statement before J leave
New York tomorrow. I should also like to express our
thanks for and appreciation of your efforts and your
diplomatic skill, which made possible the extension of the
mandate of UNFICYP tonight.

73,. May

1 again assure the Council that the Greek
Wil
continue, as in the past, to lend its full
support to the Secretary-General’s mission of good offices.
Wc fully agree with him when, in paragraph 70 of his
wOrt,
lx states
that the negotiations between the representatives of the tW0 Cyprjot communities are the best
available lnethod of achieving a just and lasting settlement
of the Cyprus problem. For our part, we wish again to
stress that, in order to have a chance of success, these
JWdiations
must be carried out in a substantive way on
the basis of concrete proposals covering au major aspects
of the problem, including territorial and constitutional
questions. J need not remind the Council that the concrete
propos:~ls made by the Creek Cypriot negotiator on those
cp?StkmS
are still awaiting a reply from the other side.
Rel>ctition of dilatory methods and of faits accomplis can
OJ~Y worsen the situation and diminish the prospects of a
peacefill solution. Therefore we share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern about the need for him to obtain
assurances that the parties are prepared to negotiate
concretely and substantively on all major aspects of the
problem before initiating a new round of talks. That is
exactly
what is called for in resolution 414 (1977) and
resolution 32/l 5.
~~m~JlJmnt

7’7. Allow me also once again to express, on behalf of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, our profound gratitude
to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his
dedicated and untiring efforts to achieve a just and lasting
solution to the Cyprus problem.
78. On this occasion, our special thanks and appreciation
go to Ambassador PCrez de CuBlIar, the outgoing Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, who has
decided to relinquish his post and return to the diplomatic
service of his country. I should like to express to him our
deep appreciation for the exemplary and most efficient
manner in which he carried out his assignment in Cyprus
and to wish him every success in the future.
79. I should also like to thank the staff of the Secretariat,
and in particular Under-Secretaries-General Mr. Roberto
Guyer and Mr. Brian Urquhart, as well as Mr. George
Sherry, for the efficient and impartial manner in which
they have discharged their difficult responsibilities.
80. Last but not least, 1 should like to express our
gratitude to the Commander of UNFICYP, Major-General
Quinn, to the senior legal and political adviser, Mr. RCmy
GorgB, and to all the officers and men of UNFICYP, as well
as to all contributing countries in Cyprus.

73. As the Secretary-General observes in his report, the
situation in Cyprus continued to be quiet during the period
under review, but the underlying tensions have shown no
sign of abating and the political differences confronting the
people of Cyprus have been brought no nearer to a
solution. This is prolonging a crisis which continues to
endanger international peace and security, as has been
rccognjzcd by the General Assembly in its resolution 32/15
and in previous resolutions. It is therefore urgent
that
the
Cyprus problem should be settled by means of a just and
lasting solution in conformity with the basic principles of
the Clvartcr and through t.he effective implementation of
the Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

81. The resolution that has just been adopted for the
fourth consecutive time with very minor changes is being
considered by the Council as a vehicle for the extension of
the mandate of UNFICYP without due regard to the fact
that some of its contents have become obsolete and
irrelevant. Had it not been for the shortage of the, we
would have insisted on a new procedural resolution that
would have better met the needs of the present situation.
Our views on and reactions to this resolution are already on
record. The resolution has been adopted four consecutive
times since June 1976, and our reactions to it have been
placed
on record on all four previous occasions. Therefore
at this late hour I shall not repeat our views on the subject.

74. I have waited until the end of my statement to Pay a
tril~utc to the outgoing Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Cyprus, Ambassador Javier PBrez de
Cu@ll:ir. Mr. PBrez de Cu&lar has served with great distinction and unswerving dedication and has rendered invaluable
services to the cause of peace and to the people of Cyprus.
J-Ie has gained our gratitude, and we shall certainly miss him
-very I~IUC~. He takes with him our warm and heartfelt
wis1les for the success, of which we are confident, of his
future endeavours.

82, I should also like to place it on record that, although
we have given our consent to the extension of the mandate
of UNFICYP for a further six months with a view to
avoiding a last-minute crisis, in view of the present situation
in the island the mandate in its aCtUai form is no loJ%er
realistic and must therefore be changed to conform with
the present situation.
83. The points made and the allegations raised by the
Greek Cypriot
representative in the statenlent
the f&Wil
has just heard are not new. We have been hearing then] for
the last few years; they have been adequately answered and
tile answers put on record, so I shall not go into detail in
answering each and every one of them at this late hour.

75, The PRESIDENT: I am informed that Mr. Celik, who
has been invited by the Council under rule 39 of the
provisional
rules of procedure, would like to address the
Council. I therefore call upon him to take a Place at the
CoLlncil table and to make a statement.
7

84. We have left behind us yet another year characterized
by futile political struggles, fruitless acrimonious debates,
ever increasing Greek Cypriot political and economic
warfare against the Turkish Cypriot community and an
apparent lack of willingness on the part of the Greek
Cypriot leadership to concentrate efforts on a realistic and
lasting solution of the Cyprus problem.

91. These offers still stand, for we believe that the
establishment of such co-operation would constitute the
very foundation of an eventual partnership in government
within the agreed federal framework which we are trying to
bring about. In this spirit we have even invited Greek
Cypriot hoteliers to come to Maras-Varosha-and
operate
their hotels.

85. Despite the fact that promising developments took
place earlier in the year-in particular the meeting between
the leaders of the two communities on the initiative of
President Denktag-and although the vastly improved security stituation in Cyprus afforded an unprecedented opportunity to carry out a meaningrul dialogue between the two
communities on an equal footing, unfortunately the political struggle waged by the Greek Cypriot side left us with
no time or energy to pursue constructive negotiations. I am
sorry that the year 1977 will no doubt go down as yet
another year of missed opportunities in the history of
Cyprus.

92. We are always open to co-operation in all areas,
provided that it is carried out on the basis of equality and
mutual respect. A positive response to our appeals would
have reduced the growing rift between the two communities. A positive response would have contributed to the
strengthening of the areas which bring the two communities
together rather than allowing the present circumstances to
perpetuate the differences which divide them.
93. Unfortunately, however, all our appeals fell on deaf
ears. All our efforts to secure co-operation were of no avail,
for not only did the Greek Cypriot leaders resolutely refuse
to establish any links between the two communities but,
with their policies and actions, they have helped to increase
mistrust and friction and deepen separation.

86. Instead of building upon the framework agreed upon
by President Denktag and the late Archbishop Makarios for
the establishment of a b&communal and bi-zonal, independent, non-aligned federal republic, the Greek Cypriot
leaders chose to erode the very essence of that agreement
through statements evincing an intention to create a unitary
State, and destroyed the momentum brought about by the
meeting through their divisive actions and their constant
reference to and preparation for a “long struggle”.

94. In response to our appeals, we were met with a further
intensification of the Greek Cypriot policy of isolating the
Turkish Cypriot community politically and economically.
The refusal to open the Nicosia International Airport to
civilian traffic, the efforts to disrupt international trade
between the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus and the
outside world, the attempts to undermine the development
of tourism in northern Cyprus and the obstruction of sea
and air services to northern Cyprus are only a few of the
actions of the Greek Cypriot leadership calculated to
pressure the Turkish Cypriot community into submission.

87. It should be realized that there is no going back to the
pre-1974 period, that the two communities are destined to
co-exist and that there can he peaceful co-existence only
within a bi-communal State with equal rights and equal
opportunities for both sides.

95. At the risk of repeating myself, I should like to take
this opportunity
to state once more that the Turkish
Cypriot side wants nothing more in Cyprus than its right to
exist as an equal partner in an independent State. We still
consider valid the agreement reached between the two
leaders earlier in the year. We are for a b&national, bi-ional
federation. We want a new set-up which will give US
effective guarantees for life and property. We want a new
arrangement that will permit the effective participation of
the Turkish Cypriot side in the government of the island
and that will give us an equal opportunity to participate in
the economic life of the country without discrimination.
We demand actual effective guarantees against a repetition
of the unfortunate past, on which I need not elaborate
here.

88. We do hope that during the coming year, and in
particular after the expected political developments in the
south, a more constructive and realistic approach will be
forthcoming and new opportunities will arise for concerted
action to bring about normalization as a first step towards
solving the Cyprus problem. We sincerely hope that a new
spirit of co-operation and harmony will be established.
89. The Turkish Cypriot side, for its part, is and has
always been ready and willing to solve the Cyprus problem
in accordance with the legitimate rights of both communities. We shall be prepared, as always, in the coming year to
do our share in the efforts to reconcile the differences
betwen the two sides.
90. Indeed, in line with this policy, throughout the past
two years, the Turkish Cypriot side, in an effort to find a
political settlement, has repeatedly proposed the establishment of a joint federal transitional government or an ad hoc
joint administrative arrangement; it has offered to run some
common services jointly; it has offered to open the
international airport and the international Famagusta port
to intercommunal use-actions which would have brought
an end to the political war between the two commmunities
and encouraged the re-establishment of trust and confidence that is a definite prerequisite for normalization and a
political settlement.

96. If our Greek Cypriot friends accept the fact that there
is no going back to the pre-1974 days and are prepared to
negotiate with us within the aforementioned framework,
there is no reason why the year 1978 should not be the
year of a permanent settlement for Cyprus. I do hope that
this spirit will prevail and that this debate will be the last of
the series of acrimonious debates that have characterized
the past three years.
97. The PRESIDENT:
Turkey.
8

I now call on the representative of

-.-

98. Mr. TUREEN
(Turkey): Mr. President, I should like
to express to you the Congratulations of my delegation
upon your assumptionof the presidencyof the Security
Council for the month of December.It is significantthat
you have decided personally to come to New York to
presideover the proceedingsof the Council.You havethus
underlined in a very symbolic way the importance yoU
attach to the United Nationsand to the Security Council,
We were looking forward to having, during the consultations, the benefit of your wisdom,your wide experience
and your diplomatic ability. However, the changein the
presidency has causeda departure from the procedures
normally followed during previousmeetingsof the Council
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keepingForce in Cyprus. I, for one, was not
consulted by the President on the text of the draft
resolutionuntil 4.30 p.m. this afternoon,barely sevenanda
half hours before the expiration of the mandate.That is
unprecedented.

.-.-

rhetorical exercises?What WC need,anyway, is an end to
double-talkand,for once,sincerityof purpose.
lO4. Wehavecarefullystudiedthe report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document s/12463. That reptrrt
providesus with a balancedassessment
of the situation
prevailing in CYP~S at the present time. We note in
Particular that the situation in Cyprus continued to be
quiet duringthe periodunderreview.In hispreviousreport,
presented last June [S/12342], the Secretary-General
had
also describedthe situationasbeingquiet. It is apparent,
therefore, that for a year now Cyprushasknown tranquil.
lity. It is on the basisof that sustained
improvementin the
situation that the Secretary-General
hasdecidedthat the
FinnishBattalion,which left Cyprusat the endof Gctober,
would not be replaced.In the light of what the Secretary.
Generalhasto sayon the financialsituationof the Forcein
paragraphs73 and74 of his report, that trend is certainly
to be welcomed.

99. I wish to reiterate to the Secretary-Generalour
105. In paragraph 32, the Secretary-Generalmakes
gratitude for his tirelessefforts in carrying out his mission referenceto restrictionsin the freedomof movement of
UNFICYP, but he omits to mention the arrangements
of good offices. We trust that he will be able,in a not too
distant future, to deploy new and fruitful efforts in this which werebeingnegotiatedon the stationing,deployment
and functioning of UNFICYP in the territory under the
field.
authority of the Turkish FederatedState of Cyprus,There
100. We value highly the efforts of Under-Secretaries- is no mentionof the exchangeof letters,on the basisof a
General Mr. Urquhart and Mr. Guyer and of the Force text which had beenagreeduponlong ago.As long asthat
situationcontinues,it isdifficult to judgethe criteria which
Commander,Major-General Quinn, in the fulfilment of
are usedin determiningthe exact natureof the restrictions
their functions.
mentioned.
101. A specialand warm tribute is due to the Special
prevailingat presentin Cyprus,
Representativeof the Secretary-General,Ambassador
Perez 106. The circumstances
the
lack
of
an
agreement
on
the functionsof UNFICYPin
de Cuellar, who is relinquishinghis post. During the two
northern Cyprusand the chronic deticit in the UNFICYP
years that he served as SpecialRepresentative,his contrifinancial accountsare factors which have an important
bution to the maintenanceof quiet and tranquillity in the
bearingon the mandateof UNFICYPasoriginally defined
island and to the continuation of the negotiatingprocess
in Security Councilresolution186(1964).
has been invaluable. He has distinguishedhimself by his
remarkablediplomatic tact, his capacity to deal diligently 107. I should like now to state the position of my
and effectively with the most complex and intractable Governmenton the resolutionjust adopted.
situations, and his ability to inspire confidencein all the
partiesconcerned.
paragraphthereis againthe
108. In the eighthpreambular
irrelevant referenceto a “Government of Cyprus”. Our
102. Mr, President,with our permissionI shouldlike to
point of view in that respecthasbeenrepeatedlyexplained.
say a few words about the statementof the representative A referenceto an entity which doesnot exist eitherill 13%
of Greece.The representativeof Greecehasagainreferred or in practice, is all the more misleadingsince tl;L>
to the intervention of Turkey in Cyprusunder the Treaty framework agreementof 12February 1977/see S/j_?.K!,T
of Guarantee,3which alsobearsthe signatureof Greece,as of 30 April 1977, para. .5/ establishedthe basisof an
an aggression.The only intervention which can be termed independent,non-aligned,bicommunalFederal Republic
an aggression
is, asthe representativeof Greeceknowsonly
and provided for the mergingof the two separateTurkish
too well, the military coup initiated by the Greek Govern- Cypriot andGreekCypriot administrations.
COnSeqUentlY.
ment in 1974 againstthe independence,sovereigntyand this resolutionisunacceptable
t0 USin toto.
territorial integrity of Cyprus.The Turkishintervention was
a lawful responseto that aggression.
109. The resolution containstwo basic and operative
elements.First, it givesUNFICYP a mandatefor another
103. I shall not reply to the other distortions and false period of six months.Weconcurin that extension,having
allegationscontained in the remarksmadeby the represen- heard Minister Celik who informed thC Coud
of the
tative of Greece.But I must say that I was surprisedby
consentof the TurkishFederatedStateof Cyprus.lt should
those remarksonly a few daysafter the Turkishand Greek be noted, however, that Minister Celik underlinedtiil’
Foreign Ministers met at Brusselsand repeated their
necessity of reviewing the mandateof the ForLf as
estabhshed
in 1964, in order to adapt it to the circumsupport for the continuation of negotiations.Does the
;tances now prevailing h cyprus
and to newand reduced
Greek Government want serious negotiations or just
dimensions
of the problem.
3 United Nations, Treaty Series, Vol. 382, P. 3.

9

and on 14 December new and substantial withdrawals of
troops from Cyprus. The latest announcement stated also
that Turkey would be ready to make further adjustments in
the number of its troops in the island in keeping with
progress towards a final settlement. If all the parties act in
the same spirit, we are certain that a favourable atmosphere
for meaningful, new initiatives will emerge.

110. In its second important operative element, the
resolution reiterates the mission of good offices of the
Secretary-General in the intercommunal negotiations. My
Government resolutely supports that mission and has
recently been doing all it can to create a propitious
atmosphere for a resumption of the negotiating process.
The Foreign Minister of Turkey has stated emphatically
that Turkey supports the negotiations and that he believes
the time has come for both sides to approach the existing
problems in a constructive and positive manner. He stressed
the need for a political reconciliation between the two
communities and a mutually beneficial economic co-operation. The Turkish Government announced on 27 October

111. The PRESIDENT: As regards the first part of the
statement of the representative of Turkey, I reserve my
right of reply for tomorrow morning.
The meeting rose at 9.15 p.m.

10

f
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-November

1978-2,200
