r
I

UNITED NA TIONS

r

SECUBITY
OFFICIBL

,

NA TIONS UNIES

RECORDS

THIRTEENTH

812

COUNCIl.
YEAR

th MEETING: 21 F~BRUARY 1958
eme SEANCE: 21 FEVRIER 1958

TRE1ZIBME

ANNEE

CONSEII. DE SfCUBITE

I
r

DOCUMENTS OI'I'ICIELS
NEW

YORK

I

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

I
)

,

I
I

Provisional agenda

(S{Agenda(812)

Adoption of the agenda........................................

1

Letter dated 20 February 1958 from the representative of the Sudan to the
Secretary-General (S/3963)....................
.... . ..... . . ... . . .

1

TABLE

DES

MATIERES

Ordre du jour provisoire (S{Agenda/812)
Adoption de l'ordre du jour

,

1

,...........

,
,

.

1

.

1

Lettre, en date du 20 ({wrier 1958, adressee au Secretaire general par le repre-

sentant <tu Soudan (S{3963)......................................

1

,

"':i
S/PV.812
/

~I
[i
"

,I

Rell:vant documl'.nts. not reproduced in Illll in the records of the meetings

of the Secnrity Council are publish.cd in qll1:rterly supplements to th~ Official
Records.
Symbols 01 United Nations documents are ,-omposed of cnpifalleltefS combined
wilh figures. Menlioll 0/ :>'Uch a symbol indica!es a reference 10 a United Nations
document

***
Le." docllm~nts pertinenls qui ne sont pas reprodLlits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des Sef\llC~S du Conseil de sccuriLe sont publies dans des supplements lrimestriels aux Documents officiels.
Les cofes de.~ documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composcnl de
[cUres ma.juscules el de chifires. La simpfr: mention d'une cole dans un le:r:le signifie
qu'il s'agll d'un document de l'Organisation.

Rn

r
f
I

(

EIGHT HUNDRED AND TWELFTH MEETING
Held in New York on Friday. 21 Fehrnary 1958, at 3 p.m.

HUIT CENT DOUZrEME SEANCE
Tenue iI New.Yorlc, le vendredi 21 fivrier 1958, iJ. 15 heurea.

,

President: :Mr. A. A. SOBOLEV

President: M. A.. A. SOBOLEV

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

(Union des Rr,puhliq1JeR ~o('.illl:st.p,s ~ovictiques).

Puscnl: The represell~atives of the following countries: Canada. China, Colombia, France, Iraq, Japan,
Panama. Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,

Presenh : Les repre..<>entants des pays suivants :
Canada, Chine, Colombie, France, Irllk, Japan, Panamfl,
Suede, Union de~ Republiques sDcialistes soviCtiques,
ROY<lume-l'rli ne Gr:ltlde~BretaJ5t1e et d'Irlande du
Nod, Etats-Unis d'Amerlque.

I

I

I

United Kingdom of Great Britain and No!"tllCrII Ireland,

United Slates of America.
ProviBiooaI agenda (S/A«cudaj812)

1.
2.

Ordft du jour provisoire (SJAgendaJ812)

Adoption of the agenda.
Letter dated 20 February 1958 from the representative of the Sudan to the Secretary·GeneraL

1. Adoption de I'ordre du jour.
2, Lettre, en date du 20 fevrier 1958, adressee au
Seeretaire general par le representant du Soudan.
Adoption de Pordre du jour

Adoption of the agendll

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 20 FebrolllY 1958 frow the repregentative . Lettre, en date du 20 fevrier 1958. adressee an Secreof the Sudan to the Secreury-r..eneral (Sf3963)
taire. general par le representant du Soudan (5i3963)

I

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian): In
accordance with the rules of procedure for the Security
Council, and if there are no objections from the members
of the Council, I shall invite the r('_present.fltives of the
Sudan and Egypt as parties directly mncerned to take
part in the discussion of this questiOl:.

1. Le PRES /DENT (lraduil du russe): Conformement
au reglement interieur du ConseL, et si aueun membre
ne souleve d'objection, j'invite les representunls du
Soudan et de l'Egyptc, parties directement intercssees
a l'allaire qui nous QCCUPC, a prendre place a la table
du Conseil.

(

At the invitation 0/ lhe President, Mr. Lout{i, repre-...enlalive 0/ Egypt, and j\fr. Dsman, represcnla!i.ve of
the Sudan, look places at tile Council l'J.bie.

Sur l'invifafioTl du Presidenl, M. Lou/fr, J'epri,~enlanf
de l'Egypfe, e{ M. Osman, represenlant du Soudan,
prenncnl place a la lable rill CrJrlseil.

,

2. Mr. OSMAN (Sudan): Mr. Presidmt, Jet me first
express my gratitude to you for inViting me to take a
seat at the Council tahle in order that I might participate in the presenl'. rlehate,

2. M. OSI\1AN (Soudan) [Iraduil de l'an!JlaisJ : Qll'il
me soit permis Lout d'abord, Monsieur le Presiden~,
de vous exprimer la gratitude que j'eprouve d'aVOlr
ete invite a prendre place a la table du Const:i1 en vue
du debat qui va s'ouvrir.

3. At the outset, 1 wish to express my profound regret
that we have been compelled to bring this grave situation to the attention of the Security Council. We have
always stretched the halld of friendllhip to our Egyptian
brothers. We shall always remain grabful for whatever
good deeds they have done for us. But let no O:le
make a mistake. The Sudanese people have always
fought for their freedQIU, for their rights, for their
indcIJeudence. It will :lot bo out of place if I recall
the noble role played by Egypt and by tl,e United

3. Je commencerai par dire combien je regrette que
nous ayons ete contrainb d'altirer l'altention dn Conseil
de 1\ecurite sur la g:rnve situation dont iJ s'agit. NOLls
avolls i:oujours tendu la main de l'amitie it 1I0S frere.'>
egyptiens, Nons lenr serons toujours reconnaissa~ts
d eo bonnes actions qu'ils onL accomplies il notre endrOlt.
II ne [aut pas cepcndant que ran. s'y trompe : le peuple
soudanais a toujours lutte pour sa liberte, pour ses
droits, pour son in dependance. 11 ne sera pas dCplace,
ie pense, de rappeler id le noble rete de l'1~:gy~te et du

f

I
,

I
)

>
!

1

I'
..
Kingdom, the two condominium Powers, and by others
in facilitating the la~t ,Hld important stages that led
to the independence of the Sudan.

Royaume-Uni ~ les deux puissances du condominium et de tOllS ceux qui ont facilite les dernieres etapes, si
imporlnntes, de l'acl::ession du Soudan a l'independance.

<1,.

But what cau the Sudanese Government do to
nvoid bringing the present complaint to tl1e United
Katiolls? We in the Sudan esteem -i;he 'Coited Nations
very highly. We know its shortcomings; we know its
d:fficnlties. But wc also know that Loday it is the hope
of people everywhere in the worlc! that the United
Nations will eventnally establisll the rule of law and
universal peace.

4. Mais que j:ouITait f3ire le Gouvernement du
Soudan pour eviter de porter la presente plain:c devant
I'Organisation des Nations Unies? Nons, S~udan::lis,
tenons J'Organisation des Nations Unies en haute
estime. Nous en connaissons les defa\\\s, nous en connaissons les c1ifficllltes, rnais nons snvons aussi que les
pel'.r1es dn monde elltier esperent qu'elle parviendra
lIn jour a etablir le regne du droit et de la pnix univCNelle.

5. We have done everything in our power as n Government to avoid bringing this compldnt to the United
l'\ations, \Vithin the shalt time at our disposal we
have exhansted all our ?ossibilities of reaching a
peaceful Slld equitable solution of lhis questioll. IL will
be recalled that a series of notes and verbal messagr:s
were exchanged bctweell the Egyptian Ministry of
Foreign AOairs and my Government, the Hrst onc
emanating from the Egyptian Government 011 29
JnmlDry 1958. This was received JJy the Sedan Government on 1 February. It referred to the Sudan Constituency Order for the parliamentary elections Wllich
are t[llcing place nOw and requz.sled that appropriate
measures be taken by che Sudan Government to hand
OVCT Lh~ following areas of the Su(ian to the Egyptian
Government:

5, ::VIOlJ gouvcrncmcnt a tout fait pour eviter de portel'
eette plainte devant l'OrgBrusation des Nations Unies,
Per.dunt le lap~ de. temps tres court dont nous disposions, nons avons epuise toules les possibiJites qui
~'or:raier_t El. nons ::lour trouvcr an problcme en question
lllle solution equitable et ptlcifJque. On se sOLlviendrn
qU'llne serie de notes et de communications orales
ant ete echangecs entre le Ministere des affaires etrangeres d'Egypl.e et mon gouvernement; la ::lremirre
de ces notes a cte envoyee par le Gouvernemcnt egyptien le 2tJ janvier 1958, et le. GO'lVel'l:ement du Sondan
I'a re(,me le 1er fevrier. Cette note se rapportait:m decre t
soudannis relntif aux circonscriptiom en vue des e;ec1.iona au Parlement qui ant lieu en r.e moment. et demundait que le Gouvernement du Soudan prenne les
l'Egypte les
mesures appropriees pour remettre
territoires soudanflis suivants :
a) La partie nord-est d:! Soudan situee au nord
du 22 e degre de. llltitlldc JlGrd et eorupn,~JLallt Haleib
et la zone avoisinante ;
b) Due region r.on detennince, situce au nord dn
22 e degre de lat:tude nord et qui, appan1llment,
comprend le territoire soudanais situe au nord de la
ville important0. d€ UU9,di Halfa et englobe les villages
de Surra, Debeira et Faras.

(a) The north-eastem urea of the Sudan north of
latitude 22 degrees N. comprising Halnih nnel the
surrounding areas;
(b) An undefined area nOl'lh of latitudc 22 degrees N.,
which apparently covers Sudanese territory extending
north of the important t[JWIl of Wadi HaUa and including
thf' villages of Sarra, Dcbcira ;:'\nd Par~5.

'

..

a

5. While tlle Egyptian memorandullJ requested the
handing over of the above two areas, it indicated the
willin~ness of the Egypt.ian (',ovcrnnwnt to hand over
to ~hc Sudan a region near the north-eastern frontier
which had previollsly been ceded to Egypt when the
Sudan-Egypt~aJl lrontier was rccomtTltckd shortly
aILer the conquest.

6, Le. memoirc. egyptien c[lli demanciait qUfl ces deux
regions soient remise!> it l'Egyptc indiquait par ailleurs
que 11; GouveTnemcnL egypLien etRlt dispose a remettre
~ll Souuan une region situee pre50 de la fronLi~re UU
nord-esi. et qui avait ate cedee a l'Egypte au moment
JU la frontiere entre le Sondan et l'Egypte avait ell.'
remanice, peu de temps apres la conquete,

7. Before a reply cOllldbc prepared, tile Sudan Governmer.t l'eceived reports that a contbgent of the Egyptian
Army was on its way to the I-Ialaib uri:tl and its ncighbmdJood,

7, Avant d'avoir pH elaborer une reponse, le Gouvcrnement sondanais a revu des rapport.s ~elon lesquel:-;
un contingent de troupes egyptiennes faisait route vers
le seclenr d'Haleih et la region avoisinante.

8. The AcUng i\Thdster for Foreign Affairs in tile Sndan
snnllnone.d the Egyptian Anbassador and llsked bim
if there WllS any tn:tl\ in these reports. The Ambassador
th01lgllL';!lat the ncws was mO;jL tlulil,e[y and promised
to try to obtain clarilleation from his Goverr.ment,
Al tlle ~ame time, the Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs asJ{ed the Egyptian Ambass~dol' lo convey
to his Government the m~ssage that the Sudan Government hoped that the news regarding the movement
of troops waS unlrl'.c and that, if iL was true, it would
have a very serious effcct on the friendly relations
betwe.en the two countries. llle Acting Minister added
that it was impossible for the SudanE:Se Government
to cede territory which had constituted part of the
Sudan for the last half~centt.lry merely I)n ar. exeh'lOfle

8. Le :Ministre ptlr interim des affaires etrangeres du
Soudan a eOllvoque l'ambassadeuT d'Egypte et lui a
demande mee!> rapports ctaient ex.acts. L'ambassadeur
a estime q-Je c~!a etait fort peu probable, et il a promis
Cessayer (i'nhtfnir riP.S pl'1ic.is'ons cle son gOllvcTnJOmenl.
Par la meme occasion, le Ministre a demandc a l'ambassadeur d'EgYrte de faire savoir a son gouvernement
CJlle le Gouvernemeut sounanais espemit ql.lc le~ nou'velles relacives it cc mouvement de troupes etaier-t
dr.nudes de fondemcnt et que, si elles eLaienL exac1.es,
les rclutions amicales entre ies deux ?nys pourralent
s'cn trollver sericlIsement aITectees. Le Ministre a ajoute
que le Gouvetncment du Soudan se vo}'ait dans l'irnpOssihilite de ceder, par simple echange de notes, un
hrritoirc qui faisait parLi~ uu Soudan depuis un demi-

~

2

-of notes. Equally, it was impracticable for the Egyptilm Govcrnma1t to expect an urgent reply on a matter
whicll needed r.areful study and consideration at a time
when most of the Ministers were away becanse of the
impending general elections.

siede. En outre, le GOllV€l'llCment egyptien ne pOllvait
pas attendre une reponsc immediate aiors que la ques·
lion exigeait un cxamen approfondi et que la plupart
des ministres etaicnt al)sents en raison [les elections
generales prochaines.

The reasor. why I say this is that = wish to make
it quite clear that we llavC exhausted all mean~ hefoTe
coming here to the Seclll'ity Council.

9.

10.

10, Lt' 13 fl~vri{'r, soit deux jOUl'S aprb; In rencontl'e
que j'a; mentionnee. le Gou\'ernemenl. l~yptiCll rai~ail
tcnir all Premier \liuisl:oe dtl Soudall, eu meme temps
qtt'a l'amLwssadclll' du, Sondan au Caire, une note en
date du 9 fevricr. Ccttc note dedarait que, it l'occ<:lsion
du plebiscite organise ram l'Clrclion (1[" Pre.~idenl de
la Repnbliqllc Arallc UlIie, le GouvernClTIcnt cgyptien,
clans ]'(';xercicc de i;es droits recannus et en verLu de
la souvcrainetc de l'EbJ'pte, avait decide de donner
aux electeurs des l'l\giUll:'\ l'li question la possibilite
de participl'r Ell pJCbl.~ciLe. L'amJ)i1ssarleur d'Egypte
demanda qu'il rut r~;polldn D. sa deuxii'me Hote, et it
reuffirma aussi que ks nouvl'lles relaLives a 1111 mou·
vcment de trollpes ('taiHlt drnll~es de tOllt fOl1demenL
Le Premier \Iinistn: dll Sourlan t'l lcs (\lItres mbistrcs
presents lircnt oLsQrver que IJS frollti('n~s acLllclles,
ftgnrant Stir It's carte's, av;)ient ctr;. nr:r:efllecs pa: tOllS,
et notamment par l'J!gypte, Ces frontier~s avaicl1t servi
8. detE·rminer les Iimi:es geographiques du SOlldall
indepcrrdant. Cc qni ('.3t ping :mp0l'tanl cncore c'est
que ces fl'ontieres n'on: pratiquement 11ftS fait l'objet
de conteslations depuis pres de 60 ans.

{L

On 13 Fe.bruary, two days after tlIe meeLing re-

fr.l'rp,rj to ::thove, ::t nolI' dRted 9 Febl'uary \vas delivered

by the Egyptian Government simultaneou~ly to the
Prime lHinisler of the Sudan and tile Ambassador
of lhe Sudan in Cairo. In Lhis note it was alleged that,
OB the occasion of the forthcoming plebiscite :01' the
election of the President of the United Arab :Repllblic,
Lhe Egyptian Government, in the exel'ciflc of its recognized rights and in pursuance of Egypt's sovereign
powel'S, had decided to flITol'd to elecLors in these regions
the opportunity of participating in the plehiscite. The
Egyptian Amklssador asked for a reply 1:0 his second
note. He also reiterated tlla: the Il~WS about the
movement of troops was unfounded. Tile Sudan Prime
:\Iinister and the other j\[jnisters present made the
point th:J.t th8 present fl'tllltiers shown on tl~e map
weTl:~ Llw.sc uL(:~]Jled by all, including Egypt, Those
same frontiers were the basis on which the gcogmphical
limits of the indepencent Sudan were defined. What
is more important is the fact that the slime boulltlarie.~
have remained, OIl the whole, undisp\lted for nearly
sixty years.

I:,
I,
I,;

,

I

r

I
1

r
[i

11
"

11

I

l

Si je rappelle tous ecs faits. c'est que je venx bien

pnkiser que nom avails epuise touies les reS50UTces
dont nom disposiou,~ ,IVUllt de [lOltS pre~cnter devant le
COBseil de seclII'ik

11. True. the Agrecnent of 19 Jalll;ary 1899 fixed
the boundaries between the Sudan :.md Egypt at the
22nd parallel of latitude. Tllis was modified, by an
'Order from the Egyptian Ministry of the Interior dated
26 March 1899, to include the Island of Paras in the
Sudan territory. This sanctior.ed an agreement made
between the Commandant of Wadi Halfa in the Sudan
~md the representative of the Egypti.an GovernmenL
This order deiincs the actual administrative ])uulldary
in the Nile valley. Again, fl ministerial ennctmellt
dated 25 July 1902 defines the administrative boundary
between Kurusku and the Red Sea area. This modification was made for the administration of nomad
Lribes on both sides of the bonndary [01' the [l1lrpose
of sinplifying their Ji-ves and faciliLatng their movements. A ministerial enactment dated 21 November
1902 made a s:ight modification of ttlis. In October 1916
the Egyptian Ministry of the Interior infornwd the
Sudan Government that the delimitation did not ~fTect
tile administrative houndary already Hxed.

11. 11 e.~l \TCli (Lue l'aGcord du 19 jallvicr 1899 faisait
passeI' les trontieres entTc le SOlldan eL l'Egyple pur le
22e degre de latitude nord. ?\lais celle disposiLion fut
modifiee pur tin nrrete. dn Ministerc de l'intcrieur :de
l'Egypte, en date du 26 mars 1899, qtti pla~f\iL ['lIe
de Faras en territoirc. sourlanais. CeHe decision conflrmait un uccorc conclu entre le commandant de Ouadi
Halfa, au SOlldan, et le reprcse11tant dl! Gouvernemcnt
egypli~n. eel al'l'ctc fixe l'aeLnel1(' fJ.o:ltiCre admini.~­
trative duns la vallee etJ. Nil. Ell outre, LW arr~tc milllstericl d1l 2:1 jllilleL 1902 defin:t la frontil~re administrative entre Korosko et la region de la lUcr Rouge.
CeLLe modification a eh~ apportec al1.1 lle simplilJer
l'~)(Jmillistratton de::> tl'ibus nOJl1adcs dc part et d'auLre
de la frontit:re eL pour facilitel' j'exislencc et les de plar.emcnl:s dr. ces tribns. Un unet8 milliste.riel, en date du
2t.l novembre :902, H appor'Le une Iegerc. l11odiflcnLion
a c['tt,~ decisio:l. En octohre UllO, le :'Iinisl~rc de l'intel'ieur egyptien liL sa voir au Gottvernenent da Soudan
que cette dClimitatiol1 n'affectait pas la frontiere
administratiw deja dnblie,

12. From this it wi]] be seen that, for prnctj.~al purposes, the aduinistratve boundary is Llle really important one. The 22nd parallel north is taken as the general
boundary, and such modifications as were made in
this arbitrary line were made for the obvious reason
of avoiding t:1e plating of portions of the same tribe
unde, different administrations. The present bo:mdal'ies
of the Sudan confirm this. With slight temllorary
mouHh:aliulIs, they hflve remained the 3umc for over
fifty-five years.

12. On comprcndra donc qu'u Loutcs fms utiles cc
soiL tu fwntieno administrative qui compte l'oellemellt.
Le 22e parallele nord ~onstitue de mar,U~re goncrale la
fronti~re, et les morlificatiom CJlIi ont de apporlt'-c!;
a ccUe jignc de demarcation arbitl'aire l'onl ete pOUI'
unte rnison evidenle, a savoir qu'il fallail eviter qllC
des membres d'une meme lrihll relevent d'administral.ions difl'~rentes, ce gile confinm'. le traec actuel des
fronlieres du ~Oli(]"'<ll. SOilS r~serve de l~gercs modi·
fications tcmporaircs, ces frontieres sont demeurees
les m&nes depuis plus de 55 ans.

'

3

13, Again, the present boundllries of the S.tdan,
which have been under uninterrupted IldminisLration
by the Sudan Government, were confirmed hy the
Agreement concludH] in Cairo between Egypt and the
United Kingdom in February 1953, and also by the
Trnllsitional Constitution IlOW i~ effect in the Sudan.
Chapter I, arLicle 2, paragraph 2, o[ thi~ Constit.ltion

13. En outre, les frontit':res actnelles du Soudan, qUt
limitent les terrltoircs adminisl.es de fayon iainterrom_
puc par le Gouvernemellt dll Soudan, ont ete eonfirmees
par l'ae.co:cd anglo-egyptien concIu au Caire, en feYrier
HJ53, et pal' la Constitution tnmsitQire actuellement
en vigueur au Soudan, CeLte constitution, au chapitre 1,
article 2, paragraphc 2, .';tipnlc que:

reads as follows:
" {The Territory of be Sudtln] shull comprise all
those territories which were i:1cluded in the AngloEgyptian Sudan immediately before the commence-j
ment of lhi~ Constitution."

«[Le tcrritoire du Soudan] se compose des territoires qui formaient le Soudul1 anglo-egypticn au
jour de I'entree en vigueur de la preseme Consti·

14. Furthermore, all Egyptian election:; in th~. ?l\st,
including the most recent plcbi3citc for the olftce of
the President of the Egyptian Hepnblic conclucled in
June 1956, have excluded those ~reas on the slrength
of thel1' heing part and parcel of the Sudan, Also,
elections held in tll(. Sllrlrm, indllding those fOI' ~elf­
government following the Anglo-El,rypLinn AgrecnenL
of February 1953, wc:-c conducted under the supervision
of all internntional cOlllmis~illll, 1t will be remembered
that Ef.,rypt was a ncmber of that commission. The
Sudan elcc"liolUi werr. eUl'rid out on th~ basis that the
nrca~ in qlH~~tion wen' part aud pared of the Sudan
and that the inllftbiLnnts thcreof were Suda'lese, participating in their normal elections foJ' tIle House of
Repre.'~entfltivcs,
The Princ Minister also "recalled
that, 011 the day the SUUUll becAme tlldependent, it
was olflde dear to the condomitlium Governments
that the Sudan reserved ih Tights not to hc bound l.ly
any treaty or agreement concluded on its behalf pial'
to independence unless such treaties and agreements
were confirmed by it, TillS was UH~ subjccL of a sLatemcnt made by the Lhen Prime i\olinister on 1 January
1956, If the E.gyptian Government had had iOiny views
on the matter, it could lmve put tllem forward either
l)eiore independence or on receipt of the letter dated
3 January Hl56 from the ben Prime Minister of tIle
SuduJl to President Gcuun} Abdcl Nasser of EgypL.

14. De pIllS, A,U cems d,;: ~O\\tc..~ ks elections qUi ont
cu lieu en l~gyptc dans le ;lasso, y compris le demier
plebiscite organise en juin 1956 pOllr dire le President
de la TIepl:l.lliqllc cgyptiemle, on. a fait abstraction des
regions en question parce que l'on a consiMrc qu'elles
forment partie intcgl'llntc du Soudall. Des elecliulls ont
egale:l1cnt eu li.eu au SO\ldan, nolammcnl celles qui
ont conduit it l'autonomic apres l'accord anglo--egyp';ien
de fcvrier 1953, Ellcs se sont dcrouIees sous la surveillance d'une commission intcrll:ltionale, et l'Egy~te,
on se Jp raPI)clle. ffl.isait partie de eettc commission.
01' ces elections au Soudan ant ctc organisees en partant un prineipc quc- les regiom en question faisaiC'nt
purtic intcgrantc du Soudnn et qne leurs Imbilants
etnient soudaOllis et pouvaient participer a des eJec.tions normales it la Chambre deg r{',pn\~f'.lItants. Le
Premier Ministre a rappeIe· cgalei\lent que le jOllr Oll
Ic Soudnn est devel1L1 indBpendant, il a etl! precise aux
gouverllcmell ts du condominium que le Soudan se
reservait le droit de n'etre lie par aucun traite au accord
~onchl cn SQn nom avant J'il!dependance, a moins que
cc tmite ou cet accord n'ait etc r,onrtnn.e par hd. Tel
a ete l'objet d'une declaration faite par le Premier
~finistre d'alors, le 1 ~r janvier 1958. Si le Gouvernement
egypLien avait eu des obsen·atioll5 a faire :.\ GC sujet,
il aurnit pu les faire connaitre avant l'indcpendance
au :l la reception de la lettre, en date du 3 janvier 1956,
adres~ec au president Gamal Ahdel N:lsscr d'Egypte
par le Premier l\-linistre du Soudan,

15.

15, C'cst hi llne grnve. une tres grave question. et il
n'etait pa~ fncile rle la rcsoudro dans le d6lni indiqu6,
c'est~a-dire uvant le 21 fBvrier. Ce delai etaH manif::steme-nt insumso.nt pour pe-rmettre d'ex.aminer u:J.e
quesUon d'une lelIe envcrgure et de prendre une decision
cc sujet. Pour des raisons evidentes, nOllS ne pouvons
l1~ce]lter le point de vue du Gouvernement egyptien.
Il s'ngi~, en quelque sorte, d'lln ultimatum devant lequel
aucun gouvernement soucieux de sa dignite ne pourrait
sans allcun doute !'>'iaclincr, Ann de maintenir de 110ns
rnpporls cntre les deux. pays, H vaut mieux, nous
semble-t-il, rcnvoyer l'exumen du probleme apres les
electiolls 50uuanuises, qui commenceront le 27 fcvrier
et qui durcront probablement line dizaine de jours.

This is not a light subject; this is a gmvc subject,

:md it could not easil~ be settled in the aiven timcnamely, before 21 F('.bruary, [l is clear that there is
not sufficient time and that the time is not appropriate
fol' the COllsideration of such a lar~e issue and for lhe
reaching of a decision 011 i~, The Egyptian Government's point of view cannol be accepted, Ior obvicus
reason.';; for - how ca:\ I put it? - it is like an ultimatum .....Vllich no sclf~Tespccting Government could
accept without que~tioll. Therefon, it is considered to
be in the interest of good fliendly relaUons between be
two countries to defer cOrlsideratioll of this problem
until after the SudaneSe; clccllons, which will take place
on 27 February and will probably continue for some
ten dnys.

tu~ion

)l.

a

tu. On 16 February-three days after the meeting 16, Le 16 fcvder, lrois joufs apres la nmc[)nt:-e dont
referred to above - the Egyptian Ministpl' for ForeiglI j'ni pnrlC, le Ministrc cl,;:~ uJrail"C~ etrnngere~ de l'Egypte
Affairs cOl1ununicated to the Sudanese Ambassador 0. fail ~avoir fo. \'alTIbas~adcllr du Soudan au Caire que
in Cairo that the Egyptian Government had, in order le GOllverncment eg}'ptien [lvait deja envoye, ell vue
to conduct the plcl.liscite, a.l,eady sent electiOn com- ell! plebiscite, des commissions electorales et un detlimittees and <) contingent of the Frontier Guard to the cJlcmcn~ de gardcs-frontiercs can.'; ID region qu'il avait
area which it has claimed. It was also reported by tl:e revendiqucc. Le Gouvernel1lcnt egypticn a egalement
Egyptian Government tilat its emissaries would be ,I fait savoir que ses envoyes se trouvcraient a leur poste

I

4

......

'

I

ill the appointed places on the appointed day to au jour dit pour e.ffectuer le plebiscite. LUlldi del'nier,
conduct the plebiscite. On Monday, 1'1 :February, the le 17 fevriel', le Cunseil lies mill.istrcs lIu Soud~n s'e,t
Council of Ministers of the Sudan met to consider the I reuni pour examiner la situation et il a con:;tate. les
situation, and the following facts emerged.
faits suivants.

I
I

(

I

17. First, the Republic of Egypt has not raised
this matter since the reconquest, but has chosen
the present tirr.e to bring it up - a time when the
GOVtfULnelLt <HId the people of the Sudan ~re actively
engaged in parliamentary elections and a time when
it ha3 been made known that there are mineral c1eposits
in tl~e area now becoming a subject Ol dispute. Again,
the issue ha!> been raised at. a time when, as a :e~ult
of the negotiations concerning the waLers of the Nile.
it has become clear that the Sudan will claim compensation for the flooding I)f the :l.TrJl~ north of v...'adi
Halfa because of the prop05cd erection of the Egyptian
high dam.

17. Prernlerement, la RepulJ1l4u~ egypLienne, qui
n·avait pas soule-ve cdte question depuis la reconquete,
a choisi pour le rai:-e le :noment all le Gouvernement
et le pellple soudauais s'occupcnt activement des elections parleme-ntaircs et i)U 1'on Cl appris qu'il existoit
des gisemcnts miniers da:1s la region qui f.ait actuellemont l'objet du differend. De plus, I'Egyple souleve
cette ljlleslion a un momcllt DU, npres ks negociatiollS
relatives £lUX caux dn NL, il est devenu evident que le
SOlldan rcclamcra une indemnite pour I'inondatii)n
de la region sitnee au Hord de Ouadi 1-laJn, a la suite
de la consl;ruetion du grand barrage cgyptien qui est
envisagee,

18. SecundLy, the. plebiscite, whieh the Egypti~n
Government has used as the reason for its second note,
is Ilot the first plebiscite to bc tleld h Egypt siLc€. or
before the Egyptian revobtion, and in each case lhe
inhabitants of tlle area in question have not been Olsked
to vote.

IK neuxiemcmens, le plebiscite, qui a ete donne
comme motif de la deuxieme note du Gouvernement
egyptien, n'est pas le premier qui ait eu lieu en Egypte
depuis ou <lYant la revolution egyptiermc et, dans
chaque cas, lea hnbjl;nnts des rcgiom en C:ll~stion n'Ont.
pas Ct~ invites a voter.

]9. Thirdly, whereas the first Egyptian note js bnsed
on an objectior. to the participation of the citizens of
the arM :n the Sudanese elections, the second note is
based on a demand that the Sudanese citizens of the
~rea - W:lO, bc Egypti~n Governl:lent dHim.~, 2re
Egyptian citizens - should vote in an Egyptian
plebiscite.

19, 'lrQisiememcnL, aiors que la premiere note egyptlenne exprime 1I1le objection a la participation des
h"bital1ts de ces regions ;lUX cilections soudanaises, la
deuticme exprime unc revendication: le Gouvernemcnt
egyptien demande que [es citoyens soudallais de C'eS
regions - qui ser3ient, s~lon hi, citoycns egyptiens, votent lors da plebiscite egyptien.

20. Fourthly, the tillle sLowed for tl:e Sudan Government to decide such an important issue did not exceed
sixteen days - that is, from 1 February t.o 16 Pebruary.

20_ Quatriernement, le delai I!.~corde au GouvernetUmt
soudanais pour decider d'une question si importa:J.te
n'etait que de 15 jours - it savoir dn ler au 16 feyrier.

21. Fifthly, the second note confront::; tile Sudan
Government \1,'ith a fait accompli, without giving that
Government an opportunity for consttltation or nego~
tiation

21.

22, Sixthly, the ..-erbal statement concerning the
sending of electoral staff accompanied by frontier
guards to the disputed area Cl'm firm~ the gra ye news
that reached the Sudan Government earlier and which
has been repeatedly denied by the Egyptian Ambassador, in an effort to provide the right atmosphere for
such a fait accompli.

22. Sixiemement, la declaration verbale relative ii.
I'envoi dans les r~ions ell question de personnel charge
d'y organiser le plehiscitc et accompagne de gardesfrontieres co:1firme la grave nouvelle dont le Guuvernement soudanais avait eu connaissanc.e et qu'avait
dementie a plusieurs reprises l'arr.bassadeur f-gyptien,
afn de creer le climat appropl'ie pour ce fait accon:pli.

23, Seventhly, the Egyptian Government does not
seem to appreciate the fact that the Sudan Ministen
are engaged in duties connected with the eledionsson:etimes away from the capital, Khartoum. It has
also refused to accede to the Sudan Government's
request to rlefr.r disf:ussions on the subject until after
the elections, which will take place, as I have already
mentioned, on 27 February,

2.1. Septiememcnt, le GouvctnemGnt egyptien ne
semble pas comprendre que les ministres soudanais
soient occup6s pllr des taches lipcs atH< elcctions et se
tl:'ouvent que[quefois loin de Khartoum, la capitalc.
11 a egalement refuse d'acceder a la demande du Gouvernemellt soudanais de renvoyer la discussion d~ la
question apres les elections, lesquellt:s, comlne jc l'ai
deja dit, auront lien le 27 fevrier.

24. In view of t.he above-mentioned facts, the Sudan
Council of Ministers has decided to mke all the necessary measures to safeguard the sovereignty of the
Sudan over its territory and to defend its independence.
However, 1JeClJu~e of its earnest desire to leave the door
open hetween the two friendly, neighbouring countries,
it has taken the following mild decisions.

24. En raison des faits que je viens d'indiquer, le ConseH des ministres soudanais a deride de prendre toutes
les rnesures nccessaires pour sauvegarder la souverainete
du Soudan sur son territoire et pour dCfendre son indepmdll.nce. NeanmDins, dans son desir sincere de laisser
12 parte ouvcrte enlre deux. pays voisins et amis, i1
a egalement pris les decisions sllivantes, empreintes de
rrcoderation.

Cinquiemement, la deuxiellle note met le Gouvernement somhmais devant nn fait acwmpli et ne Iui
pc:met pas de recourir a des consullations ou des
ncgocia:ions.

5

25. First. the Prime ilfinister should contact Presiden~ 25. Tout d'aJ)ord, ~e Premier Ministre s'adresseraiL
GamaJ Abdel Nassel' by teler,honc and repeat to bilr. nlJ Prcsidellt Gamul Abdcl Nassel" par tdcpll(111~ et lui
the Sudanese reqmst that Egypt should not proceed reitererait la demande faite par le Sondall que I'Egypte
with the measures contemplated, at the same time ne mette pas a execution les meSUl'es qu'elle envisage,
Ell meme tcmps, il souligntrait que le Sou/lan eot dispose
~mpllll.sizing the Sudan's willingness to enter into ncgo·
jal:iol1s with Egypt on tl,e question ::It isslIe. 1'11e Sudall it elltumer des negoeintions avcc l'EgypLe ~ur la quesLioll
:?rime MinisLer has, in fact, tried and faileel to contact l'1I cause. En fait, le Premier l\Tinistre du Soudlln a
President Nusser hy telephone. InsteHtl, the Prime essayc, mais ~allS sucees, de s.'entrc1enir par teJe'phollc
avec le pl'e~ide!lt ~asser. Il a seulement pn faire parIdinis~er was able to give the message in question to
the Egypl:ian lUinister of the Interior, who promised venir le message en questiou au i\1iuistre de I'interieur
Lo con\'ey il: to President Nasser and obtain his reply. egyptic:l, qd [) promis de le transmettre au presideul
Nvsset· et d'en obtenir uue reponse.
2G. Stocondly, the Govf:rnmcnL should contact tIle 20, Df2ll."iemelll.ellt, le gouvemcmenL se metlrait en
[jpposition leaders --. this is all internnl matler-~ contact river les chef, de l'npljOsitioll --- c'e~t la Ull~
,1nd eS_lllaLTl tll<: sltu:J.tion. This has. becll donc.
afTairc illtcril'ure - pour leur cXIloser la situatlol!.
Ccla a (ott fait.
27. Thirdlv, the :-;alUC information slllJukllJc coovey~'.d
to the LCUliuc of Arnb Slr.lcs, 81](1 la heads of lllis~{0J1S
of Arnh countries nut! others represented in thc Suclnn.
This IHIS u150 J)eell dLloe. Further ill[OI']I'f1tloll is to be.
cOllycyed whellever ]lo~sibJe ill order to tell the people
what the situ:ltion is.

27. Trui"ienernent, le.» mcmes renselgnemcnts :.eraiel1L
lr<lllSmis a la Ligue des Etats [lrabes, aux chefs de
mi.'sion des pays arabes et autres [Jays representes au
SO\:dan, Cel", <I ete fait egfl!ement. To\\t~ infornultion
compJementaire sera transmise aussitOt que possJJle
alin que J'on so it teml au couranL de la ~itnai.if1n.

III conclLlsion, the Gover/llncut ot the Sudan,
while doing its IltmO!it to reach fin amicable and re2son~
<lblc l;o]\\Lioll, \las gr(~at hopes thnt wise COllllSil will
prcvail so thut thc friendly relation" Gxisting hetween

28. POllr concJnre, le GOl\verr.ement clu SOUdilll, ell
fah;ant tout son possible pour trotlyer a l'amiahlc line
solation raisonnnble ::1.1\ pfl1bleme, e~p(:l'C vivemwl
que la sagesse prevaudra et que les relations arnicdes
entre lel' dCl:x pays, relations anxqueIJes le Gauvernen1cnL t't le peuIlle du SOUdl\ll attachellt .e ph~s 1,~2nd
Illi;.:, ne .seront pas compromises.

28.

Llie h ..'o countries. - relations which tbe Sudan Government :mcl pp.ople vnlne very highly - will not be impaired.
2~.

What el~e oo\lld any Govcnmle:1L. do in the excepliounl circulllstances and in the few days at its diposal ?
But the Sudan Govel'nment has dOllE even more wi~hill
thi:; limit of a few days.

29. Que pouv11il faire d'alltre Ull gOllverrJrmenl,
dans des circonsLances anssi exccptionnell€s et dans un
deJai aussi court? Cependant, durant Ies q,telque:- jours.
don_ il di~posait, le Gouvcrncment du SuuJan a fail
plus enCOl'C,

30. The Sudan Government sent its Foreign Minister
to Cairo to convey lo tbe President of the Republic
the Sudan Government's rrquesl to defer discassion of
Eeypt'~ claim lllltil ;lfter lhe S\ldal~ elections, which,
<1S I have alrwdy slated, will lake place on 27 February.
The l'oreign Minister we:1t to Cairu, accompanied
by the Sudan AmbassauorLo Egypt, DJl the morLing
of lS February. Immediately aIlcr their arrival, they
held a mcetil;g Witll the f.gyptian Foreign ~,:Iil\i.~L('r.
Some Egyptian millisters were also present, At this
U1eding, LIre Sudan Foreign l\Iillistcl' cxplained Lhe
Sl1dnn Government's 110int o[ view ami stressed its
goed will towards lhe Egyptian Government.

30. n a em'oye all ::::'airc son MillisLre des ai1ai~es
etnugeres pOLlr qu'il fasse savoir nu Pl'e~ident de la
HepllLlique cgyptienne que le Gouvernemclll soudanais
denHtndait le ~eJlvoi de la discussion des rpveIHi'cations
egyptienncs aprcs les elections soudanaises qui, eomme
je I'ai deja dit, auronl lieu le 27 fcvrier. Le 1I1iltistre
des alTaires ctrangeres, 11ecompagnc de r,Hnbassadeur
dl! Soudan en Egypte, s'est rendu all Caire le 18 {evr:er
all malin. De..". lem arrivec, ils ont eu lUl \'ntrctiw aver::
1(' Ministre des aITaires etrangl'res d'Egypce, D'llutres
ministres egypticns etaient presents. Au conrs de cette
rcnuinll, le ivHnisb'e de~ all<lires eLrangcrcs dll So\\(lan
a expJique la position de son gouvernement et souligne
sa bonlle volonte a l'egard du GOllvernemCJ\t egyptien.

31. At mid-clay on 18 Feb:'uary, the Foreign Minister
lYlet with Pre.'lidcllt GumaL Abdel ~as"'cr i.\IHl explained
to :lim the circumstances prevrriling in the SLldan 31
the present time. He emph£.sized t:hal: his Government
was prepared lo start discussions 011 the subje~t immediately [lIter the SudaneM' elecLions. ::'Il~anwlJile, he
suggested that the Sudan Government, as prod o[ its
good intcntiO\l5 in the matler, w<JLLld furnish the Egyp[;ian Government with a \vritten guarantee that the
carrying out of the Sudanese elections in the disputed
;:lJ'\~n woulJ not be used as onc of the arg\lmcnh ill the
proposed discussions t:1 prove ~he Sudan's right to
these: areas. However, the Ef,ryptian Government rejected
this proposnl. In fal,;l, it. insisted that elections should
not be beld - not only in the areas claimed by Egy;:lt

31. Le 18 fevrier it mid, le Ministre des affaires etrallgel'es Un SOlldan a reneontre le president Gamal ALde]
Nns~er et lui a expose},l situation t.elle qu'ellc se pre,~ente
en cc moment au Soudan. IJ a souligne que le Gouvernemcnt soudanai!'l etait dispJse it. Cnlaml'l' des discussions sur la qUlOstion aussit6t apres les eIeclions soudanaiscs. n 11 propose qn'en attendant le GOllVf',fI}(l.ITII'I'.I:
30udanais foul'nisst'. a\l GauvcrnClllenl cgypLlen, wmrr.c
Pl'CllVC de ses bOll:CCS intclll.ions, une garantie ecrilc
que, au cours des dicllssiolls cr.visagecs, le Soudan
a'illv»qucwit pas eomJ:lC preuve qu'il a des droits
Sllr eGS regions le fait que des elections souoanaises s'y
soient dcroulees. Cependant, le (;Ol\v<'rnE'ill('llt cgyptic:l
11 rejete eeLte 7ropositicn. En fall, il a m~me insiste
pour qu'aucune election u'ait lieu nail seulcmcnt

•

csscrait
c et Jui
Egypte
lvisage.
dispo.':>e
llcstion

1.l(!;U\

a

epIJone
re parItcrienr
csidenl

rail en
la unt:
lla-tion.

eraicn L
lefs de
'les
:nation
ossible
,no

"ll

an, en
,le Ulle
·emcnt
nlcf1]cs

OllV(~l'­

grand

~mcnt,

illS lill

; .iours

a rrtit

n'aires
de la
Jnnais
:ltions
Gmme
nistre

adClll'

cvrier
avec
u trcs
ceUr

Udfl1l

liignc
)tien,

lran-

~bdcl

sente
J.ver::;cus-

Itlda-

TlenL

ml"l1C

crite
1dan
roits
5 s'y
ltien
siste
l1('nt

,I
'f

•
in its note of 13 February 1958, but in the tDnstitncncy
which they adjoined, namely, the big tOWIl of Wadi
Halfa in the Sudan. The Sudan Council of Ministers
met on the same day in the afternoon and, after dh:cussion, was sntislied that it would be impossible to ftccede
to such a demand because it was an infringement of
Sudanese sovereignt.y and Sndanese rights, rcprcse.ntcd
interferencc in the Sudan's norm~ll domestic atYairs,
whieb it has conducted for so long, and ·would prevent
the. Slld<lnesc from exercising their fill! democratic
rights. It would also inLerfere with the Constitution
of the Sudan for LhtO realization of its so,'cI'c(gnty and
indepcndcnce ..

dnns les regions revendiquces par l'Egypte dans sa
['ote du 13 fevrier H158, mais dans la circonscription
voisine, a savoir la grande ville soudanaise de Onadi
Halfa, Le Couseil des ministres du Soudan s'est reuni
dalls l'apres-midi du me-me jour, et, apres avoir examine In queslion, il a decide gU'i] ne pouvait acc(·.ptcr une
telle exigence, qui constituerni l \lIlC atteinte a !;:l souverainete et mIx droits du SOUdilll ainsi qu'tllle ingen~nce dans SC$ ntfaires intericllt"t's, dont le Soudan n
df'pnis 10llgtenl[1s la charge, et qui el1lpecherait les
SOlldanai~ J'cxercer plcincmcnt lel1l's droits democrntilJl]C~, Celle revcndje~tion iraiL cgalemcnt a l'encontre de la Constitution du Sondan tn portant attcintc
a la suuverainete cl a l'ind6pendance dll Pl1)'S.

32. Two electiom. h,lve already teen held in the SUdan,
am] about neither onc has the: Egyptian Govcrnmellt
made any resen'aLion or lodged any complaint..

32.

33,

I sincerely lwpe Ul:J.t I have explaioed satisfacLorily the point of view of my Governmen L, and I sincerely hope that the Council will adopL a measure which
will calm L1le situatioll that exiiits between Egypl and
the Sudan and pave the way for [1 pcaceful nlld friendly
solutioll,

3;1. Je vcux espcrer que rai hien mcnLre 18 position
(!c mOll gouvernenl('lI L, et que le C(ln:icil adopterfl Hnc
n1C'!illre qui jloUlTa s\lppdmer la tl:'n5ioll qui existe entre
l'Egypte et le S01\dan et qui penncLtra de rr,'somlre le
problclllr. de fa90n pacifiqne et 3micalc.

3-1. Lastly, I wish to resel'Vl' my delegation's right
once again to participaLe ill this debaLe should it he
necessary,

34.

35, Mr. LOUTFl (Egypt) (1I'wn!{Ilcd trom French):
I confess that it is with grcat regret that I address
the Seellrity Council todny in order to siB-le my delegation's position on the eomplain-L lod~(:d yesterday
by the S\I[]anc.se delegation.

35. M, LOUTFl (t:gypLe) : Tavouc que c'est avce
heaucoup de regret quc je prends aujourd'hui la parole
devant le ConSell de securite pour definir la position
de lUa delCg<ltion a I'egard de la plainte qui a 6te deposee
Iller pnr la delegation dll Soudal1,

36.

Members of thc Coullcil arc aWlirc that Egypt
and the Sudau, as neig]lbour countries, arc bounrl lly
many tics of fricncbbip and hroLllcrhood, EgYrt,
Wllich for long held sovereignty over the Sudan all(l
was by virlue of that sovereignty R party to the condominillOl \lader Wl1ich the Sudan WflS till recently admiuistered. adhered strictly 10 the principle of self-determinaLioll of [lcoples and puL it into practice in the
agreemenL runcerning the Sudan concluded between
Egypt and the United Kingdom 011 12 February 1953,
Our aim was to give the SlIdnn whatever status it
might wish to have in the futme. and we achieved that
aim by recognizing thc Sudan [IS an inclependent ~ll1d
sovereign State.

30. En elIeL, les membres du Conseil n'ignorent pas
que J'Egypte et le Soudall, pay~ Yoi!iins, SOl1t unis pnr
de mulLiples Iien~ d'amitie et dc fraternite, L'J1gypte,
qui a possedc pendant longtemps la souverainete sur
le Soudan et qui, a ce titre, a parLicipe au condominium
qui administmiL nagnere le SOLldan, n stl'icternenL <ldlH~n~
au principe du droiL des peuples a disJloser d'eux-memes
et I'a mis en ceuvre en f[lLL dans l'accllrd qui a etc coalLL
enLre l"Egyptc et le Royaume-Uni, ic 12 fevrier 1953.
concernant: le SOlldatl. Nons avioJls pour objcctif
d'assurer au Soudan le statui qu'il dl~f;irait avoir it
I'avenir, cL nollS aVaIlS ponr cela r('connu i(' Soudan
comme f:laL independant et souyernin.

37, Since that agreement was comluued and Slld~~
Hese independance was proclaimed the Egyptian Governmenl has had to setUe various outstanding questions
with the Sudan; it bas always done so ill a spirit of
friendship and conciliation, in accordante with tile
principles and provisions of Lhe United Nations Charter.
In this spirit a monetary 8greement was reccntly concluded with the Sudan.

Apre.s td accord cL la produlllfltion de I'indcpendilnce iioudmlfli::w, le Gouvernclllent egyptien a eu ir.
rf.gkr nvec le SOllrlflll c('rtaines questions pendan'Les ;
ill'a tOUjOUl'ii fail dan:; un espril d'<,l\1iLje et de conciliaLion, confOl"lw\.mcnt anx principes ct rlU;'; dispositions
ce la Charte de;; NaLioJl~ UrJics. Ccst rl~ns eet esprit.
qu'ull nccora moncLaire avec le Sondal: a cte conclu
recemment.

38, For all these reHsons ·we can only deplorf'. the
Sudanese Government'ii hasty decision to lay tllis
question hefore the Security Cneltleil, after having
rejected various suggestioDii made by Egypt with a
view Lo settling this dispute in the spirit of tL1e United
NaLions Cllartcr and of the friendly and good-neighbourly relations which have always prevailed between
the two counLries, and before the other peaceful llleans
refelTed Lo in the Charter -- particularly in Article 33 -

38, Pout' loutes Cl'S raisons, now; ne pouvons que
deplorer qne le Gouverncment du Soudan ait decide
hfltivement dc sournettre ccUe question au Conseil de
securite, npres avoir repoussc plnsicurs suggestions
qui ont de faiLcs par l'Egypte pour trollvcr Et ce difU.rend une solution conforme a I'csprit de la Churte des
Nations Unies et des relations amiculcs et de ban
voisinagc qui ont toujourii existc entre les deux pays,.
et aVf1nt d'<lvoir epnise lcs recours nux aUlrcs moyens.

Des dcclioll5 ant deja (-'11 lit'lI pHr deu.'{ fois au
SOndf1ll, et k GOllvememen't egyptien lI'a jamais fait
la moilldre rescrve oi preserrle la moindrc plaintc.

Ennl1. je dQsire re!iervcr le droit de ma dClegRtioli
de reprendre In parole Jans cc debut si eela est nceessaire,

37.

7

pacifiques qui sont mentionnes dans la Charte, notammellt dans l'Article 33. Je n'ai pas bcsoin de rappcler
cet article qui est tres clair et qui dtldare notamment
que:
~ Les parties Et tout difIerend dont la prolongation
~st susceptible de menacer le rnaintien de In paix
et de la securite internationaks, doivent ell rechercher
la solution, avant tout. par vok de negociation,
d'enquete, de mediation, de conciliation, d'arbitrage,
de reglement jUdiciaire, de recours aux organismps
ou accords regionaux, ou par d'autrrs moyem
pacifJques de leUT choix n,
Il est evidcnt que lorsqu'on parle de recours aux organismes Oll accords regionanx, cela comprend, pour notre
region, la Liguc des Etuts arabes. Mais, puisque le
SOtldan a choisi cette procedure, il ne me reste qU'a
essayer de repondre, d'ailleurs tres bricvement, a cr,
que vienl cie dire le representant eu Soudan.

had been exlm\lsted. There is 110 need for me to remind
you of this nrticJe, which jg qui.te clear and which providcf>, inter (Ilia, that:
"Th\l parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to cndanger the maintenance of
international peace :md security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by neg-otintion, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, "rtitration, judicial settlement, resort
to regional agl:ncics or arrangements, or other
pCflceful mrilllS of their own choice."
In the case of our :lTCa the expression" resort 1:0 regional agencies or arrngemcnts" clearly includes the
League of Arab SLates. Since, howeve:r, the Sudan has
opted for this proccdlll'e my only course is to try to
reply, albeit very hriefly, to wl~nt the Sudanese representative Iws jl\f~l. said.
39. Before going into the substnnr-e of the questiorl
] wish to dCfll with olle 01" I;wo matters relating to
procedure anti 'ca the wordiug of the complaint submitted by the Guvernment of the Sudan. I would
mention, first, Ih:11; ill his lettfr the represcllLative of
the Sudan refers to massed conccntrations of Egyptinn
troops moving toward" the Sudanese fronLier. In this
connexion I !nust point out that there are no Egyptian
armed forces ill that area, \Ve have frontier guards,
who are needed to maintain order and security.

39. Je voudrais, avant d'entrer dans le viI du sl.ljet,
me pencher sur tine ou deux questions qui concernenl
la procedure et la redaction de la plainte presentee
par le Gouvernement du Soudan. .le ferai observer,
taut d'abord, que, dans sa lettre, le representant du
Soudan nous pade de concenl.raL!cns massivcs de
troupes egyptiennes qui se dirigeraient vel'S la lrontiere
soudanaise. Sur ee point, je voudrais affirmer qu'il
n'existe pas de forces armees egyptiennes dans cette
region. Nous avons des gurdes-frontieres neeessaires
pour le IDnintien de l'ordre et de la securite.

40. On tIle contrary, wc have information that there
are Sudanese armed forces in the area in dispute, and
that they have even seized an Egyptian river boat.

40. Au contraire, iI nisulte de nos informations qu'll
se trouve des forces armees soudanaises dans la region
sur laquelle parte le difTerend et qui ont m~me saisi
un bateau ill1viu\ egyptien.

41. Unfortunately, furthermore, the Slldanese letter
uses the term "~ggression". Now according to the
United Nations Chrlrter the word aggression, unless I
am mistaken, Illenus nn firmed attack; that is far from
true in this case. This aggression, which the letter
describes as "impending", is difficult to conceive. I
think that, where. there is any question of aggression,
either it exists or it does not.

41. En outre, la lettre du Soudan emploie t1Ialheureu~
semenL l~ tcrme "agression )), Or l'agression, dans le
sens de l<l Charte des NaLions Unies, ~ignific, i moins
que je ne me trompc, une agression armee, cc qui est
loin d'Hrc le cas. Cett(' agression, qll'on a appelee ici
(l imminente »), est diffici1e a concevoir. Je pense que,
10rsqll'H s'agit d'agression, il y a on il n')' a pasagre:;sion.

42. While Egypt is convinced that it is in the right
in this disput~ and that we can prove, by argument
and by dOctlmcnts, the valididy of our right to thlO
disputed area, we have always preferred to deal with
the Sudan with talcrance and good will and ill a condliatory spirit, because of our good-neighbourly and
friendly relations. I do not thinlr, therefore, that there
is much to be gained today by discussing, particularly
in the Security Council, the legal question out of which
the dispute seems to hove arisen between Egypt and
the Sudan. There is really no point in referring here
to the agreement relative to the administration of the
Sudan concluded ilt Cairo between Egypt and Great
Britain in 189g or to "the Egyptian ministerial decisions
on the administration of the area which, incidentally,
buttress the Egyptian case.

-12. Bien que J'Egypte soit certainI'. qLI'elle a, dans ce
dWcrcnc1, le droit de son cute et que nous puissions
etnblir, pnr de8 arguments et des documents, le bicniontle de nos droits sur la region contestee, nous avons
toujours prMere prendre line aUitude de tolerance et
de bienveillance envers le Souc1an, et ce dans un esprit
de conciliation, en raison de nos relations de bon
vaisinagc et d'amitie. C'est pourquoi jc ne trouve pas
qu'it soit tres utile aujourd'hui de discuter, surtout au
Conseil de securite, la question de droit qui semble ~tre
la base du ditTerend entre l'Itgypte et le Soudan. Tl
est reellement superflu de pnrler id de l'eceord conclu,
au Gaire en 1899, entre l':E:gypte et la Grande-Bretagne
concernant l'administration uu Soudan, ni des decisions
ministeriellcs cgyptiennes sur l'administrution de la
region qui, notamment, appuient le hien-fonde de la
these egyptiennc.

43. Yesterday the Egyptian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, on learning of the memorandnm communicated
to the Secretary-General of the League of Arah States
JJy the Sudanese Minister for Foreign Affairs, defined
;the Egyptian Government's position in the terms 1

43. Hier, le Ministre des aITaires etrangcres d'Egypte,
lorsqu'U l1. pris eonnaissance du memorandulII presente
au Secretaire general de la Ligue des Etats arabes par
le Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Soudan, a defini
la position du Gouvernement egyptien dans les termes
8

m-

1er·

mt

Ill,

I',
'cs

and that it is firmly resolved to avoid doing or even
saying anyLhing implying any change in that attitude.

-

'"

't,
nt

I
I,

ee

\

I
"

~r

,

lu
I,

'il
t,

~s

44. En outre, notre Secretaire general, i\{ Hammarsl{jold, m'avait fait pari., hier, de ;;on inquietude au slIjet
de la siLuation qUi regnait sut' la fronb~re, espcrant que
l'Egypte ne commcttrait aucun acte de nature it
aggl'aver la situation. Sur instruction de man gouver~
nement, je l'ai informe aujourd'hui que le Gouvernement
egyptien adopteru envers le Soudan uue attitude p:.:dfique et de bon voisinage, dictce par le:; relalions fra~
ternelles qui unissent les deux pcuples, et qu'il a la
ferme inlention d\~vitcr tout acte ou tottle declaration
meme qui soit de nature a l110difkr celte attitude.

Furthermore, Mr. Harnmarskiold, our Secretary-

to the ties of brotherhood which bind t11(' two peoples.

'"

"le

44.

the situation at the frontier and his hope that Egypt
would do nothing to worsen it. On instructions irom
my Government I have informed him today that the
Egyptiau Government will adopt towards the Sudan
the peaceful and good-neighbourly attitude appropriate

'ix

,ee

I' fl

que rat deja cites, en insistant S!lr [cs bonnes intentions
que l'Egypte nourrit envers le Soudan.

GcneroJ, informed me yesterday of his anxiety about

on

~a

have already used. and emphasized Egypt's good
intentions towards the Sudan.

i

i

'il

,n

si

1-

I,

".t

45. For these reasons I am, to my great regret, forced
to observe that thiR complaint lodged Rgainst Egypt
in th<.' Security Council does not really carry anyweighL.
It is doubtless the lmhappy outcome of Slldallcsc
internal considerations connected, perhaps, with the
elections soon to be hcld in the Sudan, a matter in
which, as I see it, the Security Council i.~ enLirely without
jurisdiction. I shall therefore not dwell on it.

45. C'est pour eeb qu':~ man grand regrd je ne p~ux
que constater qlle ceLle plaintc preRentee conlre I'Egypte
au COllseil de securite ne revet pas l'ecllement un caracte.re serieux. Elle est malheurellSClllent illspiree, sans
doute, par des considerations inf:eriellres soudanaises.
Jiees pellt-tire HllX elections qlli vont se dcrouler bientOL
au Soudan, (le CJui, vraiment, a mOll avis, 1I 'est pus du
tout de la compett'.nce dll Conseil de seeurite; c'est
pOllrqlloi je nc m'y 6tcmlrni PQS.

·:l6. Despite the hasty submission of this complaint
against Egypt, despite the ptopnganda lhat is being
made out of this matter, the Egyptian Government,
in a spiril of condliation, has taken a friendly and kindly
attitude towRrds the Sudanese Government and has
published today at Cairo the cDmmunique which is
before you. and whiell I shall, with your permission,
read in English:
"To preserve the ties that bind together the
Egyptian and Sudanese peoples, the Egyptian
Government decided to postpone the settling of thp.
frontier question till after tIte Sudanese elections.
Negotiations aTe to begin for the settling of all
undecided questions after th~ new Sudanese Government is chosen.

40. Malgnl. cette plain1e hati\'cm~nt presentee contre
I'EgypLe, malgre la propagande qui El mtoure ceUe
question, le Gouv-.;tnement egyptien, dam un esprit
de conciliation, a udoptc nne uttitllde amicale et biinveillante envers le Gouvernemellt rin Soudan et a
pllblie, aujonrd'lmi m~me, au Caire, le texte dn communique qui se trollve entre vos mains eL que je vais;
me pennettre de vous lire en anglais :
~ Pour preserver les liens qui uniRsent les peuples
egypLien et soudanais, le GOllvcmemCnt egyptien a
decide de dHferer le reglemenl de la question de la
fronW~re jusqu'au moment ou les elections soudanaises
auront eu lieu. Des negociations doiv~llt R'ouvrir
pour le reglement de tontes les questions en sllspens
apres que le nO\lvean gouvernement sondanais allra
ete choisi.
(( l':~'eYpte, qui a manifeste sa solidarite avec le·
Soudan all nom de la liberte et de I'independance,.
prend cette mesure avant tout pom [aire echec
aux dcsseins des esprits malveillants qui ont exploite·
les possibilites d'cnvenimer les relations que les deux
pays freres ont toujours entrctenues. De plus, l'Egypte'
n'a pas reagi devant les provocations par lesquelles
on a essayc de faire croire a lIne intel'Vention armee
ou a une invasion rin tf'rritoire soudanais, alors qu'i!
ne se trollve aLlcune force egyptienne a la frontiere
mcridionale, a l'cxception des patrouillcs qui circulent normalemt'nt le long de la frontie.re.
~ T.e GOllvcmement cgyptien declare une fois
encore que les forces armecs egypLiennes n'ont pas ete
constituees pour envahir le SOlldan, mais pour
l'aider it. resister it l'ennemi connnun 1. l)
Sm cette communication, je crois qu'il ne me reste
rien a ajonter.

~i

"

,

s

,

t

,t

s

r

"Egypt, which has demonstrated its solidarity
with the Sudan for the sake of liberty and inde~
pendcnce, takes this step primarily in order to frustratc the designs of evil-wishers who have exploited
opportunities to deteriorate the eternal relations
between the two sister countries. Also, Egypt has
not responded to the provocations whic.h h:lVe tried
to create the impression of armed intervention or an
invasion of Sudrmese territory, at the time when
there are no Egyptian forces on the soutllcm border,
apart from the normal frontier patroLs.
" The Egyptian Government once again announces
that the Egyptian armed force~ have not been built
up to invade the Sudan but to help it stand up to
the common enemy." 1
I do not think I need add anyUling to this communique.
47, In conclusion, I express my confidence that this
dispute will be seWed between Egypt and the Sudan in
the tradition of the friendship which has for centuries
bound the two brother peoples together.

47. Jc termine en exprimant ma confiance que cc
difTerend sera resoll1, entre l'Egypte et le Soudan,
dans le cadre des traditions d'llmitie qui unissent Jes.
deux peuples freres depuis des siecles.

I The speaker read the quotaUon III English.

!

9

TradUdion etabUe par le s",crtL~I·jaL.

I:
48. M. ",fATSUDAIRA (Japon): Je propose, a ce
stade, que la seance soit sLlspendue pour une heure
afin dc permettre flUX me\nbres du Conseil d'uvoir
rip,s conv~j,<;~1:ions privees Sl1]' cette question.

:'-tIro :llATSUOAlRA (Japan) (translated from
French): I propose that the meetillg sl\Culd now be

48.

slls[Jendcd for fin hoUl' in order Lo enable members of
the COllllcil to discuss this question privfltdy.

49. Le PRESIDENT (lraduil du russe) : Le repregentant dl1 Japoll a propose de mspendre la seance
pendant llne heure. En l'absencc d'objection, la sermce
est suspendue pOUf llne heure.

·19. The PRESIDENT (translated from Russian):
Tile Japanese representative has proposed that the
meeting of the Council should be suspended for an
honr. As there arc no objections to this proposal, the
meeting will be slIspem\c(1 for one hour.

La 8(~aflCC est susp~ndue

The meelinq was su,~pended III 3.55 p,rll. and /'Csllmed

1i 17 hellf'r.s,

50. Mr. WADSWOI'\TH (Unitccl Slates of America):
I should like to make SOll1l' very brief observations
on the statements we have heurd this afternoon, the
:>lHLel11ent of ne Sudanese representative, who has
pn~scnted his
Go\'tTllnlent's complaint concerning
"the gra"c sib,ation existing Oll the Sudan~Egyptian
hmder ", and the statement which the representative
of Egy[lt llas nm<lc in reply. L\Iy delegation feels thnt
wc :;honlcl note 011(; or two "n.li~nt point!; here,

.50. AI. WADSWOHTH (l~tat5-Unis d'Arnerique) [lradui! de l'(jntllai.~l
.If' v(llldmis foire quelquf'~ trl'S
breves observations au sujet des dec!<lralions que nons
avoilS entendues cet apl'€s-midi, la declaration du repn',st'.ntallt du Soudall qui a expose la plainte de son gO\!vemement au 5ujt"t de «la grave situation qui existe
la frontiere soudano-egyptiennc)) et la dechm1Lion
que le represenLant de I'Egypte a faite en I'epcnse.
ne I'avis de ma ddegation, il convic.ndrait que now;
notions a eet cgal'll 'tin ou deux [Joint~ importants.

a

of 27 February.

51. Nous Botons, en parliculier, que le~ representants
de l'Egypte. et du Soudan ont declare que leurs pays
etaient disposes a regler cette question apres les elections du 27 f6vrier.

52. "\Vc nolI'. <11.'10 that the Se(Crctal'y-(~eneral's concern
:md interest hanc already been communicated to the
Government of Egypt and that Ill; has received a
favourable reply frolll that Go\'ernment.

52. Nous notons aussi que le Secretaire general a deja
fait part an Gouvernemelll c",tryptien de S-3S pr(~occtl­
paLions et de son inLeret touch:mt celle question, et
qu'il a re~11 dc cc gouvernement une re.ponsi3 favor8ble,

5~.

We therefore wis.h to express till". sincere hope
that tile parties to this dispute ,viII refrain frolll allY
actions or statements which might aggravate conditions
or prcjudicc prospeds for an amicable solution until
such time as llley mntually agrel'. La reconvene in llCgOtiation.

Nous tenons, en conseqllence, a exprimer l'espoir
Etacs pmties a cc dillcrend s'ulJstiendront de tOllS aetes ou de toutes declarations qni risqueraiwt d'aggraver la situation OJ de compromettre
les perspcctives d'ul1e solution amiable, jusqu'au moment ou les dCt\.x parties sercnt d'accord lJoL!r reprcndre
la ncgociation.

M, :\'Iy delegation would also like to remind the Council
that by OIU' action today ill adopting lh~ agenda, the
Council is oflicially seized of this problem aml that
in the evc.nt that the situatiOll should detcrioratewhich we hope will l10t be tile case - Lhe Council can
always metlt again on vr:-ry ~h01L no Lice

:JJ.

jIa delegation desire aUl';si r<lppel~.r au Con~eil
l<l dlicil';io\\ qu'il a prise alijollrd'!lui en adoptnut son ordre dll jDUI', il est omci~llement stllsi de la
question, ~t que, dans l'evelltnalite oil la sitl1alion
s'aggraverait, ce qui, je I'cspcre, ne se pl'oduira pas,
le Conscil pourra t(Jl1j{)lIl'~ ~(' n:ullir a l\ouveau dans un
delai trcs bref.

55. Finally, my delegation hopes that peace and tran~
quillity will prevail in this area, and thnt following the
elections, which aro:: to commence on 27 February,
the parties will seek and achieve a peaceful solution
of their dill'cl'cnccs.

55. Enfm, ma d(l!egatioJl espere que la paix et la tnlllquillite rcgnerollL dans la region et quc, apl'es les
elecLions qui doivCllt commCllccr le 27 [evriel', les
parties cherchcrOllt cl trouveront une solution pacifiquc
dc kurs. dilIerends,

56, Mr. MATSUDAIRA (Japan): 'My ddegation has
listened with gl'eat attention to the statements made
by the represcntatives of the Sudan and Egypt. It is
II matter of regTct that the eHores to seek a pcacdlll
settlement between the partirs h:lVe fnilecl and that
the matter had to be brought to the attention of the
Security COLIllCil at all. Thifi is especiaUy so since the
dispute is one between Egypt and the Sudan. with
both of whom Japan is hound by strong tiBS of fliendly
.feelings.

50. 111. :\II-\TSUDAIHA 0<1[1011) [lraduil de ['allglaisl:
i\Ia delcigation a eGoute avec beaucDup d'attention le~
declarations des representants du Soudan et r:e l'l~gypte.
fl est regreUable que les eJTorts deployes pour obtcnir
un reg1cmenl IJucifiqnc dll dilW:rend aiellL CclIOLH~,
et qne la qucstiOll ait dll. elre portee devant le Conseil
de securite. NOlls le regrc~tons d'autant pins qu'il
s'agit d'ulI difI6rend entre 1'2gyptc et le Soudan. deux
pays auxqurJ" k Japon cst \lni par des. liens d'amitie
tres etroUs.

':)7. My delegation has to confess that it lack~ suffi,eient knowledge of the dispute and its backgl'OllOd. It

[;7. Ma delegation doit f1vouel' qu'ellc a line connaissance insuffisante Ju difTerend et de son hisLQrique.

51.

Wc wish to note in prllticular the statements of

the repres\'.ntative" of Egypt <1l1d the Sndun indicating
their willingness La sctt(~ this mntter rlflel' the elections

.'i

a hi h. M ; die csl reprise

at·5 p.m.

.53.

~iJl[;eIe que le",

qu~, {Jar

10

I

I

I

I

-

is not in a position to pass judgement on this matter.
If the displ1te is a matter concerning th~ interpr~tation
of internnbonal agreemenh, my delegation naturally
considers it appropriate that tILe t:ase shuuld be. brought
to the InternationaL Court of Justice. If it is not, a
solution by negotiation or otller pe'lceful means of
the parties' own choice would be in order.

EIle n'cst pas en meSL1l'e de prononcer un jugement
sur cette qnestion. Si 1('. differend a trait
l'inlerpr6tatLon cl'accords internationaux, ma delegation
cstimc nu'lurellcment qU'il convient ne porter l'afll'\irp,
devant la Cour internntionak de Justice. Si tel r:est
pas le r9.s, il eOllvjenL de res,)udre le dillerend p3r la
negoclatton ou par tonl autre moyen paci:lque choisi
par les parties.

58, My delegation welcomes the statements made
by the representatives of both Egypt and the Sudan
that they would seek the peaceful solution of this
dispute after the Sudanese elections. My delegation
ho?es that neither part)' to this dispute will take any
steps to aggravate the situation in the me~atilllt:, llmt
the status quo will be maintained by both parties and
th;1t the dispute will be solved peacefUlly, I understand
thRt the Co'unci! remflins seized of the matter and tltat
we could always discuss it if necessary.

58. Mu delegotion o,<;t IlCurt'UM~ d'avoir entenl1u les
represelltants ell'. I'Egypte et du Soudan declare]' cous
deux que ]curs pays s'effol'ceraient de trouvcr une
solution pacifiCjue de leu}" difrCrend apres les elections
~olldanaises, Ma delegation souhaite qu'aucnne des
deux pm'lics u cc difTerend ne prenne des me~llre,~ C(l1i
aggravc:'aient la situation dans l'inlervalle, que les
deux parties mnintiennenlle sralll QIW et que le diITe~cnd
re,"oive une solution pHcifique. Je comprends que le
Conseil reste salsi de la question et qu'il pourra toujours
en rl iscutel' s'il est necessaire.

59. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): The
Security Coundl has met at short notice in response
to a request of the representative of the Sudan lS/3963j.
TIle reason for this request, a~ we have heard from that
representalive, was the llnXlety of this G()vernmenL
at certaIn actions of the Egyptian Government in
regard to certair. ar~a;; along the 22nd parallel which
have for many years been administered by the Sudan,
I may say in parenthesis that, according to our infornwtion, Lht::;c area" have been adm:nistercd without
interruption by the Sudan since the very early days
of the condominium, in fact for more than half a century. So far as we know, the~e arrangements, over bat
long period of time, have worked in an entirely satisfactory mallner ano withollt dispute or reservation
l1itherto from the Egyptian side. Tt is the timing and
manner in which this question has been raiSed ttat,
as I understand it, has led the Government of the
Sudan to come to the CounciL

59.

a

Sir Pierson DIXON (Hoyaume-Uni) [lruduil de
I'anglais] : Le Conscil de securite s'est rCllni sans tarder
a la suite d'unt demallde pr6oenh~e par le represenlant
du Soudall (S)39631. Commc le representant
Soudan L'a expliquc, le motif de ccUe demande etaill'in-

ott

quietlld~

cprouvee par son gouvernement devant
certains actes du Gouvernemeut egypLien tOll chant
certaines regions situees le long du 22" parallele, qui'
sont administrees depnis de nOmbreuses annees par
le Soudan. .le puis diTe en passant que, d'apres nos
renseigl~ements. ces regions ant ete adruinisirees par
le Soudan san~ interruption depuis les tout premiers
jours du condominium, c'est-a-dirc depuis plus d'un
demi-siecle. A notre connaissallce, ces dispositions
ont ete appliquces dllrnnt cette lougue periode d'une
maniere entierement satisfaisante et. jusqu'a present,
sans contestation ni reserve du cote egyptien, C'est
le moment oil r.ette question a ete sou levee ainsi que
la maniere dont eUe l'a tte qui, comme je crais le
comprendre, ant amenc le Gouvernement du Soudan
iJ. s'ad:resser au Conseil.

60. This certainly would not be the moment for us
in the Council to embark 011 an assessment of the
substance of tlle probLen itself. So far as Her :Majesty's
Government is concerned, we hold that t.he dispute
wbch has now arisen is one which should be settled by
thr. parties through peaceful means of their own choice
in tile spirit of the Charter. In the meantime, it seems
plain common sense that nothing should be (lone to
disturb administrative arrangement.." which htlve existed
for so long in the areas in question - which have
cx:sted for su long largely, no doubt, because they
worked so well.

60. Ii ne sernit certainement pHS opportun que nous,
au COllseil, nous entreprenions mair.tenant de forP.luler
des appreciations sur le fond du probleme. Le GOllvernement de Sa IVIa.ieste estime que le differend e.lt de
cel.lx q::ri doivenL ~tl'e regles pHI" les parties, par les
moyens paciliques de lem dlOix, dans l'esprit de. la
Charte. Entre temps, il semble que le simple ban
sens cl'<ige que I'on ne fasse rien qui puissc troubLer
Jes clisposiCiulIs administratives q:1i sont appliquees
dcpuis si longtemps dans les r~giolls en U\use et qui,
sans aucun dOllte, n'ont pu rester en viglleur si longtemp que pal'ce qll'elles ant dOllne de bons resultats.

(H. We have }:,ecn glad co hear the representative
of the Sul1all say today that his Government is prepared
in due course to seek appropriate ways of negotiating a set.tJement of the dispule. We have also
noted the speec:l mude today by the representative
of Egypt. In particular, we have noted his assurance
in the couse of his statement thnt the Egyptian Government has now decided to postpor.e the settling of
the frontier question lLntil afler the Sudanese e~ec­
tions, This seems to my delegation to met the essential
point in the Sudanese :::omplaint to the CO.lnciL The
CouncU will of course remain seized of the matter,

61. Nous avons eLe heureux d'enlendre le representant du SOl1rlan dire nlljourd'll.li que son gOllvernemf'.nt ctait pret n l'eellercher en temps oppor-lun
des moycns <lpproprh~s pour ncgocier UJ. reglement
du difIerend. Nous avons aussi nole le discours pronDnce
aujourd'hui pat" le representant de l'Egypte. Nous
avons l1ote, ('.n parl;j~uLier, qu'il a donne l'assurance,
au cours de sa decJaratioJ., que le GOllvernement
egyptien avait maintenant dccicte de differer le reglement ue la (p.lestlon de la frontiere jusqu'apres les,
elections soudanalses. De l'avis de ma delegation, ceUe
decision semble repondre au point principal de la.
11

I.. ·

but it does not seem tl) me that in these circumstances
it is necessary for ~my more formal action to he taken
at this time. T[le Council could, of course. meet again
on short notice if - which I naturally hope will not be
the case - the situation should deteriorate.

plainte deposee par le Soudan devant le Conseil. Bien
entcndil. le Conseil restera sais i de la question, mais
il ne me parait pas necessaire, dans ces con.ditions,
que le Consei! prenite actueUement une decision plus
formelle. Le Conseil pourrail evidemme.nt se rennir
de nouveau a. bref d61ai si la situation s'aggravait,
ce que j'espere naturellement ne pas voir se produire.

62. Mr. KHALAF (Iraq): It is unfurtunate that two
sister and neighbouring countries should have difficulties
that could not be solvlld by sufficient mutual understauding and co-operation. My delegation would have
pre[erred lhat the question should be negotiated by
tIle two parties with the two needed essentials for any
successful negotiation: time and patience. It is essential
..Iso that no measures shouh1 be taken which may
change the situation in Lhe area in question, pending
a peaceful and just solution. Any measures which may
be taken by either party and which are foreign to the
peaceful and friendl)' negotiations between the two
pnrties would only tend to complicate the situation
and endanger the peace and security in tlle region. It
is indeed legitimate and riglll lo expect that while this
question is undel' consideration and negotiotion both
parties will refrain from doing anything which may
change the .~lallls quo or interfere with the present legal
or political right~ and responsibilities in the area.

62. M. KHALAF (Irak) [lraduil de i'anglais] : 11 est
regrettable que deux pays freres et voisins aicnt des
differends qui ne puissent etre regles por la comprehension et la cooperation mutuelle,<;. Ma delegation
aurait prefere que la question fit l'objet de migociations
entre les deux parties et ql)C I'on cut recours aux deux
elements essell.tiels de toute mlgociation fructueuse ;
le temps et la palience. Il est essenticl aussi que ron
ne prenne aucune mesure qui puisse modifier la situation
dans la region en cause en attendant une solution pad·
fJque et juste. Toute mesure qui pOllITuit ctre prise
par l'une ou I'autre des parties et qui n'aLlrait rien a
voir Rvec des negociations paciHques et nmicales entre
les deux parties ne ferail qu'aggraver la situation et
compromettre la paix et la securite dans la region. It
est en fait legitime et juste d'attendre des deux parties
que, tllDt que cette question "era a I'examen et fera
l'objet de negociations, elles s'abstiennent de faire
quai que ee soit qui puisse modifier le stalu quo ou
porter atteinte a 1'etat aetuel des droits et obligations
dans cette region aux points de vue juridique ou poJi·
tiqc.e.

63. In this respect we have listened to and noted the
declaration of the Government of Egypt to the effect
that that Government had decided to postpone the
settling of the frontier question until after the Sudanese
elections.

63. A cc sujet, nous avon,<; entendu et not~ la decla·
ration du representant egyptien annon~ant que le
Gouvernement egyptien avait decide de difTerer le
reglement de la question de la frontiere jusqu'apres
les elections soudanll.ises.

64. We have also listened to and noted the statement
of the Sudanese representative in which he declared
his Government's inlenlion and readiness to settle this
question peacefully.

{H·.

65. Mr. GEORGES-PICOT (France) (transla!ed from
French): From the statements we have heard from the
parties we gather that the frontier question is somewhat
complex; that question, however, is not at preSEnt
before the Council. The Sudanese Government's request - that disclIssions on the frontier question should
he postponed until after the elections due to hegin on
27 February and to continue, according te the Sudanese
representative, till about 10 March - was accepted,
as the EgypLian representative said, by his Government.
That Government proposed postponing the settlement
01 the frontier question till aHer the Sudanese electiOns
and stated that negotiations should be held aHer tIle
Government thus elected had be.cn installed in office;
tillS seems to be substantially what tile Sudan requested.

65. M. GEORGES-PICOT (France) : Apr~s avoir
entendu les declarations des parties, nous recueillons
l'impressjon que la question des frontieres est assez
complexe ; cependant, cette question n'est pas actuel~
lemellt soumise au Conseil. En eITet, la requete presentee par le Gouvernemellt c1u Soudan - requete demandanl que les discussions sur la question des fl'ontieres
soient ajournee,<; jusqu'u une date posterieure aux elections qui commeneeront le 27 fevrier et devront, d'apres
le representant clu Soudan, durer jusqu'aux environs
du 10 mars - a cte acceptce, comme I'a dedare le
representant de l'Egypte, par son gouvernement. Ce
demier a propose de reporter le reglement de la question
des frontieres jusqu'apres les elections soudfwaises,
indiqnant en meme temps que des negociations devraienl
avoir lieu apres la constitution du gouvernemenl qui
resLlltera des elections, ce qui, semble-t-il, correspond
bien a la demande presentee par le Soudan.

66. Thus Article 33 of t.he Charter applies; we have
come back to the procedure. of negotiation. As we see
it, all that is needed at this stage of the discussion is
Ior the Council to take note of the statements made
<lll the subject by the two parties.

66. Par consequent, nous nous trouvons dans le cadre
de l'Article 33 de la Charte; nous revenons a [a procedure des negociations. A notre avis, il suUit. dans la
phase aclueUe de la discussion, que le Conseil prenne
note des declarations faites sur la question par les
deux parties.
12

Nous avons egalement entendu et note la declaration du representant soudanais nnnorly.,'1nt que le
Gouvernement soucianais entendait rechercher un
reglement pacifique de la queslion,

,]

67. Mr. RITCHlE (Canac.a): As a nIatter of established
policy the Canadian Government has always held the
view that States should make every effort to settle
their diiIerences through the means outlined in Article 33
of the Charter. It is surely;J responsibility find a duty
incumbent on all the Members to seek solutions through
the means suggested in that articl~..

67. M. RITCHIE (Canada) [tmduil de l'an!1lai.~] Le
Gouver:lement canadien a taujours admi<l pour principe
que les Etats doivent s'efl'orcer de regler leurs diflerends par les moyens enonces a l' Article 33 de la Charte.
La responsabilite et le devoir de rechercher des solutions
parIes moyens preconises dans cet article s'lmp03ent
certainement
tous les Etats Membr<:s.

We have been informed t.oday by the represen-

68. Le representant du Soudan a infOl'me aujoun.:'hui
le Comeil - et ee renseignemenl est cgakmtllt dIJllwS
dans la lettre qui fait l'objet de notre discussion qt.e le Gouvernemcnt souc.anais avail dej~ eu certains
echangf'~ de. Vll~~ avec le Gouvernerncnt egyptien mais
que la posribiJite d'une solution satisfaisante n'eiait
pas apparue jusqu'a present. NOllS avolls entendu
aujourd'hui [es observations du representant de l'Egypte
au sujet de l'attitude de !lon gOllvernement concernant
ies negociations relatives aux questiolls en cause. A
notre avis, il semble qu'il y ait de fortes raisons d'esperer que les deux gouverrlCments directement intcresses, ceux de I'Egypte et du Soudan, puurrunl pOllrsuivre
I'examon de ces questions. Si j'ai bien compris le representant de l'EgypLe, le GouvernmnenL egyptiell a
I'intention et le desir de reprendre les llegociations
peu apr~s les elections qui vonL 8:yoir lieu at.; Soudan.

68.

"
n
,
,

tative of the Sudan, and thit; information is also set
forth ill lite letter wh:ch is the subject of oLtr discussion,

that the Sudan Government has had some discussions
"i,'ith the GoverruuefJl uf Egypt, but that up to the

present time no satisfactory solution seemed possible.

We have today heard the remarks of the representative
of Egypt concernLug the attitude of his Government
toward the negotiation o! the issues inVOlved. In our
view there seems to be a comiderable basis [or hope
that the two Governments directly concerned, Egypt
and the Sudan, would hi:' ahle to pursue these questions
further. If I understand the representative of Egypt
correctly, it is the intention and desire o~ the Egyptian
Government that negotiatons should be resumed shortly
after the forLhcoming elections in the Sudan.

,,
e
]

,I
I

I

a

69, Of course, there is the problem of the interim
period penc1ing resumed negotiations. I Hm f:l1re that
members of the Council bve been gratifIed and reas~
sured by the assurances of peaceful intent which hav~
been expressed in the. Council today. It is our hope that,
because the attention of the Coundl has been focused
on the situation along the Egyptian-Sudanese border,
this in itself will also have a reassuring effect and that
calm and confidence will prevail on both sides of that
border.

69. Evidemmer,t, il reste le probleme de la periode
intermediaire qui s'cwulera uvant la reprise des negociations. Je suis certain que les membres du Conseil
ont. ete Sl'.tisfaits d'entendre exprimer a\;jourd'hui
devant le G:msei! des assurances d'intcntions pacifiques.
et que ces 9.SSllr~lDceg, ont calme leurs inquietudes.
NOllS esperons que, l'aUention du Conseil ayant ete
attin~e sur ~a situation le long de la frontiere souc.anoegyptienne, cc fait aura en lui-m~me un efiet rassurant
et que le caltue et la con fiance rcgneront des deux
cotes de cette frontiere,

70, The PRESIDENT (lranslated /rom Rus.sian);
Do allY other members of the Security Council wish
to spenk? If not. I 5hould like to say a few words as
representative of tile UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.

70. Le PRESIDENT (Iraduil du russe) : D'aut!es
membres du ConsciJ desirent-ils prendre lp. p~role?
Sinon j'aimerais presenter qllelques observations en
ma qualite de representant de I'UNION DES REPUBLIQUES SOCIALlSTES SOVn'TIQUES.

71. Tile Soviet delegation has listened with great
attention to the statements made by the representatives
of the Sullan ~md Egypt. In our opinion it is important
to note that both the Sudanese and the EgyptiaIl
representatives have declared the clesire and readiness
of their Governments to settle by friendly negotiation
Lhe frontier dispute which has arisen betwee,n them.
There is every po~sibility, therefore, of settlement of
the diIIerences between the Sudan and Egypt by
peaceful means through negotintion by the parties
concerned,

71. La delegation sovietique a ecoutc avec la plus
grande attention les declarations des representants du
Soudan et de ['Egypte. II convient de noter que ces
deux repr~sentants UHt IaiL etat de la volonte de leurs
gouvernements de regler le dif[erend de fronti~re a
I'amiable, par voie de negociation. Ainsi, un reglernent
paeifique du desaccord qlli divise le Soudan et l'Egypte
peut fort biell intervenir par voie de negociations entre
les parties interessees,

72. The procedure of settling disputed questions by
neans of r.egotiatior. is in full accordance with the pro~
....isions of the United Nlitions Charter on the pacifi~
!;C:ttIement of disputes. We hope that, in keeping witll
the statements they have made, the parties will not
allow the conflict to spread and will settle their differences ill complete accordance with the Charter. Such
a settlement will be in the best interests of the Sudan
and Egypt, and will also serve to strengthen peace
and security in this; region.

72, On s<'lit que la procedure consistarrt a regler des
difierends par voie de negociations est parfaitement
conI01me 31lX riis;positions de la Charte des Nations
Unies relatives au r~glement paeifique des diffenmds.
Nous esperons que, donnant suite a leurs declarations,
les parties empecheront le cantHt de s'etendre et resoudruut leur d6saccord en pleine conformite de la Charte.
Un tell'eglement sen;ira au mieux les interets du Soudan
et de !'Egypte et permettra d'affermir la paixet la securite dans celte region.

73. Consequently, the Sovjet delegation considers
that there is no need at the present time for any inter-

73. La delegation sovietique estime done qa'!i. l'heure
actuelle le Conseil de securite n'a pa~ besoin d'intervenir"

13

1'[

I',

,,~.~.

venhoTI by the Security CounciL For the sllccessful
outcome of the negotiations, the SecuriLy Council
should disconLinue the examination of tl\l'. question,
ha,'ing noted tile appropriutc statements made by the
parties,

Les negociations auraient pIns de chances d'aboutir
si le Conseil ajournait l'examen de la question apres
avoir pris note des declarations des deux parties.

7<1. We also hope all States ::vrembers of the United
Nations will [uI"ther lln immediate peaceful settlement
and that an insignilklml frontier dispute will not be
used to bring about a deterioration in the relations
between the Sndan and Egypt or to aggravate Hw
sitnation in this region,

i4.

Nous exprimons egaleme_nt I'espoir que taus les
lhats Membres de J'Organisation des Nations Unies
contrib'Lleront au l'eglement pacifique du problcme dans
les plus brefs delais, et ne permettront pas qu'on
exploitc un dilTerend de frontiere sans gravitc en vlIe
d'envenimcr les relations entre le Souden et l'Egypte
et d'nggraver la situation clans ceUe region.

75. j\olr. LOUTFI (Egypt) (lmnslalcd from French):
I apologize to the Council for speaking again, b"t I
wish to add a le'W words to my previous statemenl.
I have already said that I have no intention of dis·
cussing the quesLion of law which is the lOssential issue
in the differences between Egypt and the Sudnn COIIcerning the dispn Led areas. I must, however, express
the fullest reservations concerning that piut of tILe
United KinE(dom reprMeutative's statement relating
to Lhe legnl slatLls of the disputed terl·itory.

75. M. LOUTFI (Egypte) : le prie le Conseil de
m'excuser de prendre la parole une deuxieme fois,
mais je voudrais ajouter quelques mots it la declaration
que j'ai faite. l'ai deja dit qu'il n'etait pas dans mon
intention de discuter la question de droit qui, en fait,
est I'essence meme du diITerend qui separe l'Egypte
et le Soudan au sujet des regions contestees. le dois
loutefois formuler les plus amples reserves quant a
la partie de la declaration du representant du RoynumeDni qui touchait le statut juridique de la region contestee.

76. In conclusion. I reaffirm our confidence that this
qnestion will be settled amicably between the Sudan flnd
Egypt.

76, En conclusiop., je reafftrme une fois encore notre
connance en le fait que ccUe question sera reglee amicalement entre le Soudan et I·Egyptc.

77. :lIIr. OSMAN (Sudan): 'My delegation is glad that
the Security Council is seized of this question and thflt
it will meet on short notice if circumstances so demand,
although we sincerely hope that that will not be necessary.

77. :M. OSMAN (Soudan) [Iraduil de l'anglais] : Ma
delegation est heurcusc que le Conseil de securite soit
saisi de ceUe question, et eUe prend note du fait qu'j}
se reunira a bref delai si [cs circonstances I'exigent,
bien que nom esperions sincercment que cela ne sern
pas necessaire.

78. As 1 have already stated, we for our part have
done everything possible to facilitate settlement of
this issue, and \ve shall continlle to do so.

78. Pour notre part, nous avons fait et nous continuerons a faire tout notre possible, commc je l'ai deja
declare, pour faciHter le reglement de cctte question.

79. TIle PRESIDENT (lranslaled from Russian):
If no ether member of the Council wishes to speak,
then 1 [llink that as President I illay sum up the
opinions of the member8 of the Security Council as
follows.

79. Le PRESIDENT (ll'llduit du russe) : Si pel'Sonne
ne elemande la parole, il ne me reste plus qu'a faire
bri6vement le point en mll qualite de President.

80. Thc Security Ciuncil has heard the statements
of the representatives of the Sudan and Egypt and
notes tlte Egyp [ian representative's as:,;l1T::mces that
his Government has decided to postpone the settlement
of the IronHer question until the elections in the Sudan
arc over.

80. Le Conseil de sl~cllrite a entendu les declarations
des representants du Soudall et de l'Egypte ; il constllte
que le representant de l'Egypte II donne I'assurance
que son gouvcrnement a decitlc de difTerer le reglement
de la question ell'. frontiere jmqu'all moment DU les
elections soudan[lisf'~ anront eu lieu.

81. Of course, tlle question put forward by the Sudan
remains before the CounciL With this we [:an end our
meeting, bearing it in mind that the next meeting,
should one prove neccssnry, will he convened, as usual,
on consuJUltion between members of the Security Council
and the parties concerned.

81. 11 va snns dire que le Conseil demeure saisi de la
question presenlee par h, Soudan. Je crois que nom;
pOll vans lever la seance; le COl1seil se reunira de nOIlveau si besoin e:'it, apres les consultations d'usage entre
les membres flu Conseil et Ics parties intcressees.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

La seance es/levee a 17 h. 45.

,

Printed in France

Price: $o.S. 0.15; 1j- stg.; Sw. fr. 0.50

(or equivalent in other currencies)

1{;2~)2-November

1958-1,800
