A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/188
6 March 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.3)]
50/188.

Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran

The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 1/ and the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2/
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 3/ as
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/121 of 20 December 1993,
in particular section I, paragraph 1, in which the World Conference on Human
Rights reaffirmed, inter alia, that human rights and fundamental freedoms were
the birthright of all human beings and that their protection and promotion was
the first responsibility of Governments,
Reaffirming that all Member States have a duty to fulfil the obligations
they have undertaken under the various international instruments in this
field,
Mindful that the Islamic Republic of Iran is a party to the
International Covenants on Human Rights,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

96-77071

/...

A/RES/50/188
Page 2

Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/54 of
14 March 1984, 4/ in which the Commission requested its Chairman to appoint
a special representative to make a thorough study of the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran, based on such information as the
special representative might deem relevant, including comments and material
provided by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Noting the appointment by the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights
of Mr. Maurice Danby Copithorne as Special Representative of the Commission on
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
and paying tribute to his predecessor Mr. Reinaldo Galindo Pohl,
Recalling its previous resolutions expressing concern at the violations
of human rights by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, including
the most recent, resolution 49/202 of 23 December 1994, and the resolutions of
the Commission on Human Rights, including the most recent, resolution 1995/68
of 8 March 1995, 5/ and those of the Subcommission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, including the most recent,
resolution 1995/18 of 24 August 1995, 6/
Reaffirming that Governments are accountable for assassinations and
attacks by their agents against persons in the territory of another State, as
well as for the incitement, approval or wilful condoning of such acts,
Noting that in the view of the Special Representative the significant
number of communications received by the Centre for Human Rights of the
Secretariat for the attention of the Special Representative and the important
concerns reflected therein will need careful scrutiny,
Welcoming the announcement by the Special Representative that he has
been invited to visit the Islamic Republic of Iran and the high priority given
by the Special Representative to visiting the country,
Noting the stated readiness of the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to invite the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on
religious intolerance and the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on freedom of expression to visit the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Noting also the concluding observations of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on the human rights
situation in the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Noting further that the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities, in its resolution 1995/18, condemned the
flagrant violations of human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran,

4/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1984,
Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1984/14 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
Ibid., 1995, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1
5/
and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
6/

See E/CN.4/1996/2-E/CN/Sub.2/1995/51.
/...

A/RES/50/188
Page 3

Taking note of the interim report of the Special Representative of
20 October 1995, 7/ and his intention to present a substantive report to the
Commission on Human Rights,
Taking into account the reports of the former Special Representative,
including his report of 16 January 1995, 8/
Considering that continued international scrutiny of human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the Islamic Republic of Iran is warranted and that the
subject should remain on the agenda of the General Assembly,
1.
Expresses its concern at violations of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in particular the high number of executions, cases of
torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the failure
to meet international standards with regard to the administration of justice,
the absence of guarantees of due process of law, the discriminatory treatment
of minorities by reason of their religious beliefs, notably the Baha’is, whose
existence as a viable religious community in the Islamic Republic of Iran is
threatened, lack of adequate protection for the Christian minorities, some
members of which have been the target of intimidation and assassinations,
excessive force in suppressing demonstrations, restrictions on the freedom of
expression, thought, opinion and the press and widespread discrimination
against women;
2.
Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, as a State
party to the International Covenants on Human Rights, to abide by its
obligations freely undertaken under the Covenants and under other
international instruments on human rights and to ensure that all individuals
within its territory and subject to its jurisdiction, including religious
groups, enjoy the rights recognized in those instruments;
3.
Calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
implement existing agreements with international humanitarian organizations;
4.
Also calls upon the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
take the necessary steps so that the visit of the Special Representative of
the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran can take place as soon as possible and without conditions;
5.
Expresses its grave concern that there are continuing threats to
the life of Mr. Salman Rushdie, as well as to individuals associated with his
work, which appear to have the support of the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran;
6.
Urges the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran to refrain
from activities against members of the Iranian opposition living abroad and to
cooperate wholeheartedly with the authorities of other countries in
investigating and punishing offences reported by them;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to give all necessary assistance to
the Special Representative to enable him to discharge his mandate fully;

7/

See A/50/661.

8/

E/CN.4/1995/55.
/...

A/RES/50/188
Page 4

8.
Decides to continue the examination of the situation of human
rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran, including the situation of minority
groups such as the Baha’is, during its fifty-first session under the item
entitled "Human rights questions", on the basis of the report of the Special
Representative and in the light of additional elements provided by the
Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995
