VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committt>e

195

in the International Plan of Action on Aging49 in accord­
ance with their economic, social and cultural systems and
social values and changes, taking into account the circum­
stances of each country,
Reaffirming its resolution 37 /5 l of 3 December 1982, in
which it requested the Secretary-General to continue to
use the United Nations Trust Fund for Aging 50 so as to
assist countries, in particular developing countries and
least developed countries, in formulating and implement­
ing policies and programmes for aging in order to meet the
rapidly increasing needs of older persons,
Recognizing the role played by the United Nations and
the specialized agencies through their efforts in the field of
aging and the need to strengthen this role, especially at the
regional level, in order to ensure the implementation of the
Plan of Action and the systematic and efficient functioning
of the technical advisory and co-ordination services of the
United Nations,
Recalling recommendation 58 of the recommendations
for the further implementation of the World Population
Plan of Action,51 adopted at the International Conference
on Population, 1984, which urged Governments to make
further efforts to analyse the issue of aging, particularly its
implications for overall development, social services,
medical care and other related fields,
Recorifirming that aging is a population issue which
affects development and is affected by it,
Recognizing the increasing awareness in many countries
of issues related to aging and of the need to provide
national authorities, at their request, with technical and
financial assistance in their efforts to implement policies
and programmes,
Stressing the importance of the activities of the United
Nations Trust Fund for Aging towards the realization of
the goals and objectives of the Plan of Action,
Acknowledging that aging is an interdisciplinary issue
and that the United Nations and the specialized agencies
must ensure a well co-ordinated international response to
this question,
Confident that the first review of the Plan of Action, to
be undertaken by the Commission for Social Development
at its twenty-ninth session in 1985, will be of considerable
value in view of further measures with regard to the ques­
tion of aging,
Noting with satisfaction that the question of older
women will be considered at the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, to be held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985,
Noting that the Plan of Action recognizes the relation­
ship between aging and youth, particularly as it relates to
intergenerational matters,
Appreciating the role of non-governmental organizations
in promoting international awareness of and action on the
issues of aging,
l . Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of aging; 52
2. Calls upon Governments to consider the changing
age structure of the population in their plans for economic
and social development;
3. Invites Governments to retain or establish appropri­
ate mechanisms at the national level to promote an effec-

tive and co-ordinated response to the implementation of
the principles and the recommendations contained in the
International Plan of Action on Aging;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts for the implementation of the Plan of Action at the
national, regional and international levels and to continue
to promote the United Nations Trust Fund for Aging so as
to assist countries in formulating and implementing poli­
cies and programmes for aging;
5. Invites Governments to continue, and increase
when possible, their contributions to the Trust Fund and
calls upon Governments that have not yet done so to con­
sider contributing to the Fund;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to pro­
mote the exchange of information and experience in order
to stimulate progress in the field of aging, to encourage the
adoption of measures to respond to the economic and
social implications of aging and to meet the needs of older
persons;
7. Urges the Secretary-General to include advisory
services to developing countries that request them in tech­
nical co-operation programmes, to the extent feasible
under the funding of those programmes;
8. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
promote, in co-operation with the national committees
concerned, joint activities in the field of aging and youth,
particularly as they relate to intergenerational matters,
especially during the International Youth Year, to be
observed in 1985;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure a
well co-ordinated system-wide response in implementing
the provisions of the Plan of Action;
10. Urges the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, in co-operation with all organizations respon­
sible for international population assistance, to continue
its assistance, within its mandate, in the field of aging, par­
ticularly in developing countries;
11. Invites the regional commissions and specialized
agencies to continue contributing to the realization of the
objectives of the Plan of Action;
12. Invites the non-governmental organizations con­
cerned to join in the co-operative effort to implement the
Plan of Action and accomplish its objectives;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the measures
taken to implement the present resolution, taking into con­
sideration the first review of the Plan of Action to be
undertaken by the Commission for Social Development at
its twenty-ninth session in 1985;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Question of aging".
71 st plenary meeting
23 November 1984

49 See Report on the World Assembly on Aging, Vienna, 26 July-6 August

51 See Report of the lnternatwna/ Conference on Population. /984, Mexico
City. 6-14 August /984 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.XIIl.8

198:Z (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.82.1.16), chap. VI, sect. A.

SO Previously known as the United Nations Trust Fund for the World
Assembly on Aging.

39/26. United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons
The General Assemblv.
Recalling its resolutions 37/52 of 3 December 1982, by
which it adopted the World Programme of Action con­
cerning Disabled Persons, 53 and 37/53 of 3 December
1982 by which, inter alia, it proclaimed the period 1983and corrigenda). chap. I, sect H
52 A/39/14 7.
53 A/37 • 3511 Add. I and Add I •Corr. I. annex. sect. VIII, recommenda110n
I (IV)

196

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

1992 United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons as a
long-term plan of action,
Recalling its resolution 38/28 of 22 November 1983, in
which it recognized the desirability of the continuation of
the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Year
of Disabled Persons throughout the Decade,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1983/19
of 26 May 1983, in which the Secretary-General was
requested to monitor and support the implementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled Per­
sons by enlisting extrabudgetary resources,
Noting with satisfaction Commission on Human Rights
resolution 1984/31 of 12 March 198454 and the draft reso­
lution of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimi­
nation and Protection of Minorities, ss concerning viola­
tions of human rights and fundamental freedoms and disa­
bility, and the appointment of a special rapporteur to
study this issue in collaboration with the Centre for Social
Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat,
Noting with great appreciation the generous voluntary
contributions and pledges made by Governments and
other donors to the Trust Fund, as well as other voluntary
contributions to support activities concerning disabled
persons,
Noting also with appreciation the results achieved so far
through funding from the Trust Fund during the Interna­
tional Year of Disabled Persons and its follow-up activ­
ities, as well as through other voluntary contributions,
Desirous of ensuring effective implementation of the
World Programme of Action, and aware that, if this is to
be achieved, Member States, organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations and organizations of disabled persons must
be encouraged to continue the activities already under­
taken and to initiate new programmes and activities,
Stressing that the primary responsibility for the realiza­
tion of the objectives of the World Programme of Action
rests with individual countries and that international
action should be directed towards assisting and supporting
national efforts in this regard,
Noting the emergence of organizations of disabled per­
sons in all parts of the world and their importance to the
implementation of the World Programme of Action,
Convinced that high priority must continue to be assign­
ed to the planning, management and financing of the activ­
ities and programmes relating to the United Nations Dec­
ade of Disabled Persons,
Convinced that the Decade will give a meaningful and
forceful impetus to the implementation of the World Pro­
gramme of Action and to a broader understanding of its
importance,
Concerned that developing countries are experiencing
increasing difficulties in mobilizing adequate resources for
meeting pressing needs in the field of disability prevention,
rehabilitation and equalization of opportunities for the
millions of persons with disabilities, particularly in the
face of pressing demands from other high-priority sectors
concerned with basic needs,
Recalling that in paragraph 157 of the World Pro­
gramme of Action concerning Disabled Persons 53 it is
stated that the Trust Fund should be used to meet requests
for assistance from developing countries and organizations
of disabled persons and to further the implementation of
the World Programme of Action and, in paragraph 158, it
s4 See Official Records ofthe Economic and Social Council, 1984, Supple­
ment No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. II, sect. A.

is indicated that there is a need to increase the flow of
resources to developing countries to implement the objec­
tives of the World Programme of Action, and that, there­
fore, the Secretary-General should explore new ways and
means of raising funds and take the necessary follow-up
measures for mobilizing resources, and that voluntary con­
tributions from Governments and from private sources
should be encouraged,
Stressing the importance of an effective system for col­
lection and dissemination of technical information on
disability,
Stressing further the importance of public information
and education activities in the field of prevention, rehabili­
tation and equalization of opportunities,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the World Programme of Action
concerning Disabled Persons, 56
I. Expresses its appreciation to all Member States
which elaborated national policies and programmes for the
implementation of the World Programme of Action con­
cerning Disabled Persons and for the United Nations Dec­
ade of Disabled Persons, and urges those which have not
yet formulated such programmes to do so;
2. Notes with appreciation the activities relating to the
implementation of the World Programme of Action
undertaken by the United Nations system and by relevant
non-governmental organizations;
3. Urges Member States to make every effort to attain
the objectives of the World Programme of Action in co­
operation with non-governmental organizations concerned
and to involve disabled persons in planning and decision­
making related to the implementation of the Programme;
4. Invites Member States as a matter of priority to
reinforce or establish national committees or similar
bodies for the Decade at the highest level with participa­
tion of organizations of disabled persons to plan, co­
ordinate and encourage the execution of activities in sup­
port of the objectives of the Decade at the national and
local levels;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate the
guidelines for priority actions during the Decade based on
his report to the current session56 and on the replies
received from Member States and organizations including
those of disabled persons;
6. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General
strengthen the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat through a realloca­
tion of existing resources to enable the Centre to continue
to serve as the focal point in the field of disability, particu­
larly for purposes of paragraph 5 above;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and relevant organi­
zations of the United Nations system to develop specific
programmes to publicize the Decade and the goals of the
World Programme of Action, and invites Member States
and non-governmental organizations to assist in this
undertaking;
8. Invites Member States, organizations of the United
Nations system, as well as non-governmental organiza­
tions to make available resources in the form offunds and
personnel for the purpose of planning, managing and
financing the Decade at the national, regional and inter­
regional levels;
9. Urges all organizations of the United Nations sys­
tem to take into consideration the interests of disabled perSS E/CN.4/Sub.2/1984 L.24.
56 A/39/ I 9 I and Corr. I

VI.

sons as well as the effective implementation of the World
Programme of Action in the pursuance of their overall
objectives in their respective areas of competence;
10. Decides that, pending completion of the elabora­
tion and the adoption of the guidelines referred to in para­
graph 5 above, the United Nations Trust Fund for the
International Year of Disabled Persons should continue to
support activities in accordance with paragraph 157 of the
World Programme of Action 53 and paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 38/28;
1 1. Calls upon Member States and other donors to
continue to contribute generously to the Trust Fund;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to promote the
recruitment of more disabled persons within the United
Nations system;
13. Again requests the Secretary-General to convene in
1987 a meeting of experts, consisting largely of disabled
persons, to evaluate progress at the mid-point of the Dec­
ade and to prepare a report that would enable him to help
the General Assembly at its forty-second session to evalu­
ate the implementation of the World Programme of
Action, as provided for in paragraph 3 of resolution 37/52;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including
detailed information on the activities relating to the Trust
Fund, to the General Assembly at its fortieth session and
decides to include in the provisional agenda of that session
an item entitled "Implementation of the World Pro­
gramme of Action concerning Disabled Persons and the
United Nations Decade of Disabled Persons".
7 Ist plenary meeting
23 November 1984
39/46. Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All Per­
sons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopt­
ed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975,
Recalling also its resolution 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in
the light of the principles embodied in the Declaration,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 38/ 119 of 16
December 1983, it requested the Commission on Human
Rights to complete, at its fortieth session, as a matter of
highest priority, the drafting of such a convention, with a
view to submitting a draft, including provisions for the
effective implementation of the future convention, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session,
Taking note with satisfaction of Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1984/2 1 of 6 March 1984, 54 by which
the Commission decided to transmit the text of a draft
convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, contained in the
annex to the report of the Working Group, 57 to the Gener­
al Assembly for its consideration,
Desirous of achieving a more effective implementation
of the existing prohibition under international and
57 E/CN.4/1984172.
58 Resolution 217 A (Ill).

197

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

national law of the practice of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
I. Expresses its appreciation for the work achieved by
the Commission on Human Rights in preparing the text of
a draft convention against torture and other cruel, inhu­
man or degrading treatment or punishment;
2. Adopts and opens for signature, ratification and
accession the Convention against Torture and Other Cru­
el, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment con­
tained in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Calls upon all Governments to consider signing and
ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority.
93rd plenary meeting
JO December 1984
ANNEX
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Devadlng Treatment or Punishment

The States Parties to this Convention,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed in the

Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the equal and inalienable
rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom,
justice and peace in the world.
Recognizing that those rights derive from the inherent dignity of the
human person,

Considering the obligation of States under the Charter. in particular Arti­
cle 55. to promote universal respect for, and observance of. human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Having regard to article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights58 and article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 59 both of which provide that no one shall be subjected to torture or
to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Having regard also to the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly on 9 Decem­
ber 1975,60
Desiring to make more effective the struggle against torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment throughout thr
world,
Have agreed as follows:
PART I

Article I
L For the purposes of this Convention, the term "torture" means any
act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is inten­
tionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a
third person information or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having committed. or intim­
idating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based on dis­
crimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the
instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or
other person acting in an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffer­
ing arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.
2. This article is without prejudice to any international instrument or
national legislation which does or may contain provisions of wider
applicauon.

Article 2
I. Each State Party shall take effective legislative, administrative, Judi­
cial or other measures to prevent acts of torture in any territory under its
jurisdiction.
2. No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or
a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency.
may be invoked as a justification of torture.
3. An order from a superior officer or a public authority may not be
mvoked as a justification of torture.
59 See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
60 Resolution 3452 (XXX\. annex.
