United Nations

S/PV.6483

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6483rd meeting
Wednesday, 16 February 2011, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Viotti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Čolaković
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Kumar
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2011/43)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-23603 (E)

*1123603*

S/PV.6483

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2011/43)

Assembly elections not held within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999) and in which UNMIK played
no role. The day of the election passed without serious
security incident. Kosovo Serb participation, except in
the North, where it was negligible, was the largest
since the general elections organized by UNMIK in
2001. However, local and international observers
reported widespread irregularities and manipulation of
votes. The Kosovo Supreme Court, the Election
Complaints and Appeals Panel and the Central
Elections Commission tried to address these problems,
and voting was repeated in several municipalities.
External observers, however, stated that irregularities
persisted at some locations.

The President: Under rule 37 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
With the certification of the final results now
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. behind them, Kosovo leaders are in the process of
forming a new Government, which I hope will be
Under rule 39 of the Security Council’s
sufficiently strong and stable to engage authoritatively
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Lamberto
in a substantive dialogue with Belgrade. I would also
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretarynote the calls by various members of the international
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
community — which I, personally, fully endorse — for
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
Kosovo to have a Government with clean hands.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
This period also saw the publication of a report
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
by the Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
Special Rapporteur, Dick Marty, concerning allegations
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
of organized criminal activities, including trafficking
Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.
in human organs, by members of the Kosovo
It is so decided.
Liberation Army (KLA) in northern Albania in 1999.
On 25 January, the Parliamentary Assembly of the
The Security Council will now begin its
Council of Europe adopted a resolution calling for an
consideration of the item on its agenda.
investigation of allegations of inhuman treatment of
I wish to draw the attention of Council members people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
to document S/2011/43, containing the report of the Kosovo.
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
In my view, this Council of Europe report needs
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
to be taken seriously and an investigation should be
I now give the floor to Mr. Lamberto Zannier.
launched as a matter of priority in the interest of all. In
this regard I cannot but urge all those with pertinent
Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
knowledge, including Mr. Marty, to make any and all
details the activities of the United Nations Interim
evidence available to the competent investigating
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) from
authority without delay. Of course, it is crucial that
19 October to 15 January 2010. Today, I wish to draw
adequate protection be provided to all witnesses. I have
the Council’s attention to the major events of the
discussed the matter with the Head of the European
reporting period and subsequent developments, as well
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX),
as to the principal challenges to security and stability
Mr. Xavier Bout de Marnhac, who has assured me that
in Kosovo and how we believe they can best be
EULEX has the expertise and jurisdiction to handle the
addressed.
investigation under resolution 1244 (1999). My
Political instability and uncertainty have understanding is that EULEX would be ready to
characterized the past three months in Kosovo. In assume any responsibilities assigned to it in this matter.
December, the Kosovo authorities organized the first

2

11-23603

S/PV.6483

For my part, I can only reiterate that UNMIK will give
its full support to the investigating authority.
Beyond these issues, while the security situation
in Kosovo has remained largely unchanged since the
last reporting period and unresolved political issues
continue to challenge Kosovo’s long-term stability, I
would like to draw the Council’s attention to another
problem that has become increasingly pressing.
Mounting fiscal difficulties and the possible economic
hardship they may cause could soon overshadow
political differences as the greatest threat to Kosovo’s
stability.
The International Monetary Fund has warned that
Kosovo can ill afford the implementation of recent
campaign promises of substantial pay raises for
teachers and other civil servants, which the
Government has stated it intends to finance by
enforcing tax revenue collection. However, the
relatively low level of tax collection is just one of a
number of economic difficulties facing the Kosovo
authorities. The low level of foreign direct investment
and high unemployment are also cause for concern.
Kosovo faces a €1.8-billion trade deficit, and its
exports amount to just 14 per cent of the value of
imports. To add to Kosovo’s economic troubles, the
agreement with the European Union (EU) on
preferential treatment of Kosovo goods has not yet
been renewed.

have taken place with all key stakeholders to find
appropriate modalities to ensure the participation of all
CEFTA members in this year’s meetings. As
signatories on behalf of Kosovo, our presence is
required at CEFTA meetings; accordingly, UNMIK will
engage to facilitate Kosovo’s participation and ensure
that the CEFTA process is not blocked. I urge all
stakeholders to work towards finding solutions to the
pressing economic problems facing Kosovo, and to
rethink Kosovo’s budget projections as quickly as
possible in order to ensure that the population will not
face undue and potentially destabilizing hardship.
The weak economic situation is doubtless one of
the primary impediments to the returns process, but I
am concerned regarding the chilling effect on returns
of recent incidents of attacks on minority community
returnees, including the recent assault on a Kosovo
Serb in Istog/Istok municipality on 28 January, and the
attack on a Kosovo-Egyptian couple by two Kosovo
Albanian males in Deçan/Dečani municipality on
23 January. The municipal authorities have condemned
these incidents, which Kosovo police are investigating.
Still, every such incident can dissuade others from
returning.

Unresolved issues in northern Kosovo continue to
be a key challenge facing Kosovo’s long-term stability,
with the potential to influence the security and stability
of the region. While security incidents have largely
involved damage to property, this period was marked
Kosovo also suffers from the highest
by the murder of a Kosovo Bosniak whose home in
unemployment in the West Balkans, estimated by the
northern Kosovo was to be used as a polling station for
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) at
the elections called by the Kosovo authorities. While
almost 45 per cent, coupled with the lowest per capita
police have yet to conclude their investigation,
gross domestic product (GDP) in the region.
including in respect of alleged connections with
Dependency on the Kosovo diaspora, particularly
organized crime networks, speculation that the murder
among low-income members of the rural population is
may also have been intended to intimidate those who
high. A recent UNDP study found that one in five
cooperate with the Kosovo institutions heightened
households in Kosovo receive remittances from abroad,
tensions.
which amount to approximately 11 per cent of GDP.
Opposition by northern Kosovo Serbs to
Unresolved political issues are also contributing
engagement with the Kosovo institutions continues.
to Kosovo’s economic challenges, as the Kosovo
Recently, protesters gathered to prevent the
authorities seek to find a way of participating in
inauguration of a newly renovated park and playground
regional economic mechanisms with non-recognizing
in northern Mitrovica, sponsored by the United States
States without UNMIK. In fact, UNMIK continues to
Agency for International Development and the Kosovo
facilitate Kosovo’s presence in a variety of such
authorities’ northern Mitrovica municipal planning
regional forums, including the Central European Free
team, forcing the cancellation of the ceremony.
Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
UNMIK continues to engage closely on a daily
This year UNMIK/Kosovo has the rotating
basis with northern Kosovo’s communities. Such
chairmanship of CEFTA, and intense consultations

11-23603

3

S/PV.6483

engagement, and continuing consultation and
coordination with all relevant stakeholders, are
essential in northern Kosovo. However, I have to point
out that, contrary to last year, the municipality in
southern Mitrovica has chosen not to engage in a
process of consultations to manage the next phase of
the reconstruction of houses for Kosovo Albanian
returnees to northern Kosovo. That may lead to
instability on the ground. In addition, Pristina-based
media have continued to single out members of my
staff in northern Kosovo on the basis of their
nationality, thereby exposing them to potential security
risks.
Nevertheless, UNMIK will continue to attempt to
engage in proactive mediation between the
communities and to act as a link between the leaders in
northern Kosovo and the Pristina authorities, along
with promoting economic development and stability in
close cooperation with the United Nations Kosovo
Team, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and our other partners on the ground.
We hope that the planned census in Kosovo will
be able to proceed as scheduled. The United Nations
Office for Project Services, as a status-neutral entity,
has agreed to conduct the census north of the Ibër/Ibar
River. However, in recent weeks there have been calls
by representatives of the Serbian Ministry for Kosovo
and Metohija for Kosovo Serbs to boycott the census.
In my view, such calls risk harming the long-term
welfare of Kosovo’s residents, regardless of ethnicity. I
urge all parties to recognize the value that a longoverdue census can contribute to the wellbeing of
Kosovo’s inhabitants, and ensure that the census takes
place on the basis of procedures fully compatible with
resolution 1244 (1999).
There will be no long-term stability and
development of Kosovo without a successful process
of reconciliation among the communities. There is
therefore a pressing need to launch the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and to work towards
establishing viable cooperation and lasting peace and
security. Issues of missing persons and sustainable
returns of internally displaced persons and refugees
can also be most effectively addressed through
dialogue between the parties. Belgrade has stressed its
readiness to begin the EU-facilitated dialogue called
for by the General Assembly, the beginning of which
has been delayed as a result of the political instability
in Kosovo over the past few months. Now that the

4

formation of a new Government appears imminent, I
welcome statements that the authorities in Pristina will
also be ready to engage in this important process. We
in UNMIK remain committed to continue working
closely with the EU in bringing this process forward.
On behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish to thank the
Council for its continued support, and to reiterate our
assurance that we will continue to implement the
mandate with which it has entrusted us. For our part,
we remain firmly committed to continue operating to
the best of our ability so as to ensure lasting peace and
stability in Kosovo.
The President: I thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I would like to thank you
very much, Madame President, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council on Kosovo pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999).
I welcome the presence of Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier. The United Nations remains a
crucial actor in the province. We believe it is critical
for all responsible stakeholders on the ground, together
with the Security Council, to reaffirm support for the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) as an indispensable pillar of peace
and stability.
At the outset of my remarks, I would like to
reaffirm my Government’s position on the unilateral
declaration of independence by the ethnic-Albanian
authorities of our southern province of Kosovo and
Metohija. For us, it is null and void. We do not, and we
shall
not,
recognize
Pristina’s
self-declared
independence, explicitly or implicitly. This is
mandated by the democratic will of the people of
Serbia and enshrined in our Constitution. A substantial
majority of United Nations Member States, and of
those seated on the Security Council, continue to
respect Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, in
accordance with the basic principles of the United
Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act.
On behalf of my nation, I would like to reiterate
our deep gratitude for their support and solidarity. We
urge them to maintain their principled position with
regard to the separatists, thus ensuring that unilateral
attempts to impose outcomes to ethnic and territorial

11-23603

S/PV.6483

disputes are not legitimized, and thereby preventing
Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence from
becoming a dangerous and destabilizing precedent for
the world community. It will also help to maintain a
healthy international environment within which the
long-awaited dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
which the world supported by acclamation last
September, can take place.
I want to emphasize that Serbia remains strongly
committed to those talks, despite delays in getting
them off the ground. We share the Secretary-General’s
assessment contained in the report before the Council
today (S/2011/43) that the dialogue is a valuable
opportunity to resolve long-standing issues, which
would contribute significantly to the consolidation of
peace, stability and reconciliation in Kosovo and
throughout the region.
Last autumn, the Republic of Serbia announced
that it was ready to start the dialogue. We are still
waiting for Pristina. We hope that they too will be
ready soon. There will be many issues to discuss, and
some of them will be complicated. As we move
forward, we should strive to build trust and
understanding. Results will surely come, if the parties
demonstrate good faith and work hard to achieve
constructive arrangements that would benefit all the
residents of the territory. That could pave the way for
what the dialogue should ultimately produce, namely, a
transformative peace between Serbs and Albanians
throughout our region.
My country is dedicated to solving all differences
at the negotiating table. We welcome the opportunity
presented by the dialogue. We intend to make the most
of it, just as we reasonably expect other parties to do
the same. It is therefore critically important that no one
try to alter realities on the ground while discussions get
under way. Numerous reports by the Secretary-General
have warned us of that danger, including the one before
us today.
The province’s ethnic-Albanian authorities
continue to encourage illegal construction of new, or
the expansion of existing, housing settlements — a
direct challenge to the authority of the UNMIK
Administration Mitrovica. They also seem to be intent
on extending the reach of the Pristina-based
institutions to North Kosovo, against the will of the
local population. Serbia remains deeply concerned by
these and other provocative actions, which cannot

11-23603

contribute to peace and stability in North Kosovo and
which could dramatically, and perhaps fatally,
undermine the dialogue.
That is one of the many reasons that the United
Nations reporting function remains indispensable.
Serbia welcomes the Secretary-General’s commitment,
as stated in today’s report, to keep the Security Council
informed of all developments in the dialogue. The
Council’s leading role in determining, and providing
legitimacy to, a comprehensive settlement is
indispensable,
in
accordance
with
resolution
1244 (1999) and the Council’s primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security, as
assigned to it by the Charter of the United Nations.
The United Nations status neutrality and that of
all organizations that operate under its overall
authority — such as the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Mission in Kosovo —
remain the only acceptable framework within which all
of us can work together to improve the lives of
ordinary people in Kosovo, irrespective of their
ethnicity.
UNMIK’s principled commitment to the external
representation function for Kosovo — its obligation
under resolution 1244 (1999) — is highly appreciated.
We are deeply concerned, however, at the “lack of
enthusiasm” by the province’s ethnic-Albanian
authorities on this issue. Today’s report reconfirms that
Pristina refuses to attend a number of regional and
international meetings for which UNMIK’s facilitation
is required. This includes sessions of the Regional
Cooperation Council, as well as the Central European
Free Trade Agreement, which UNMIK, as the signatory
to this free trade agreement on behalf of Pristina, is
slated to chair throughout 2011.
We hope that Pristina will come to embrace the
constructive approach offered by UNMIK. As the
report underlines, their current stance “will directly
affect Kosovo’s economic and social development”.
(S/2011/43, para. 47) It will also affect how seriously
rules are taken by the region’s democracies. The
question of UNMIK’s facilitation cannot be separated
from the necessity for all to adhere to the terms of
treaties and legally binding agreements. No one in the
Western Balkans — or, for that matter, in the wider
world — should be permitted simply to ignore

5

S/PV.6483

established procedures or attempt to unilaterally
impose new ones. For change to be legitimate,
agreement is required. Until one is established, the
consistent adherence to existing working arrangements
is the only way to ensure that regional cooperation
continues to improve and stability is strengthened.
The report before us draws attention to the small
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) returns
by non-ethnic Albanians. For this reporting period, the
number of Kosovo Serbs exercising their right of
return is estimated to be around 120, out of the total
205,835 expelled since June 1999, according to the
figures of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner
for
Refugees
(UNHCR).
The
consistently low number of returning IDPs is in line
with the September 2010 Amnesty International report
that states that Amnesty International, UNHCR and
other international organizations “do not consider that
conditions for the sustainable return for Serbs currently
exist in Kosovo”. The same document concludes that
the situation at present, and for the long term, is both
unstable and uncertain. This represents a failure of
monumental proportions.
I would like to remind the Council that the
Republic of Serbia has repeatedly urged stakeholders
to focus on the central humanitarian issue of internally
displaced persons. I hope that a way can be found to
empower Kosovo Serb IDPs to exercise their right of
return immediately and unconditionally.
The Secretary-General’s report underscores
recent developments in Serbian cultural and religious
heritage issues in the province. We appreciate
UNMIK’s critical role in facilitating activities in
Kosovo of both UNESCO and the Council of Europeled Reconstruction and Implementation Commission.
The Commission was established in the wake of the
March 2004 pogrom, which resulted in the destruction
of 35 Serbian Orthodox Church holy sites over a threeday period. Despite a number of successful projects,
the Commission has still not completed its work in the
province. We urge all potential donor countries to
contribute to the next round of funding for the
Commission, so that its valuable contribution to the
reconstruction of destroyed Serbian churches and
monasteries may be completed.
The report refers both to the 26 December
enthronement of His Grace Teodosije as Bishop of
Raška-Prizren and all of Kosovo and Metohija, as well

6

as to the fact that the Orthodox Christmas Day liturgy
took place in the same church less than a fortnight later.
On each of those occasions, held in the ancient Serbian
capital city of Prizren, representatives of other
religious communities in Kosovo were in attendance.
We welcome this and other inter-faith contacts, and we
appreciate UNMIK’s continuing encouragement
thereof. We also appreciate the commitment of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to maintaining a static presence
at some of our most important holy sites, including the
Dević Monastery, as well as the Visoki Dečani
Monastery and the Patriarchate of Pejë/Peć, which both
remain on the UNESCO List of World Heritage in
Danger.
By noting the desecration of a number of Serbian
holy sites during the reporting period, the report once
more draws our attention to what can happen as KFOR
downsizes. Unfortunately, the report provides no
details of these hate crimes, nor does it indicate the
arrest of any perpetrators. The culture of impunity for
attacks on places that represent the core of Serbian
national identity continues unabated. We call on all
relevant authorities to make it a priority to investigate
these distressing incidents.
The roots of democracy have not taken hold in
Kosovo. Today’s report presents the findings of the
United Nations Development Programme’s 2010
democratization index for Kosovo, which concludes
that “democratic processes in Kosovo do not fulfil
democratic standards” (ibid., para. 10). This is
consistent with the results of the 2011 Map of Freedom
put out by Freedom House, which does not classify
Kosovo as an electoral democracy.
It is in that context that the controversial results
of the recently held elections by the ethnic-Albanian
authorities in Pristina should be examined. As the
report of the Secretary-General makes clear, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General “did
not call the elections, which were not organized within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), and will not
certify the results” (ibid., para. 4).
By all accounts, the election was deeply flawed,
in spite of the presence of an average of 14 observers
at each polling station, according to the report. Several
re-votes and recounts were required. The European
Parliament’s election monitoring delegation to Kosovo
stated, according to today’s report, that “serious
shortcomings underscored insufficient political will,

11-23603

S/PV.6483

including at the grass-roots level, to conduct a genuine
election in line with international standards and good
electoral practices” (ibid., para. 9).
The report also references the overall conclusion
of the European Network of Election Monitoring
Organizations: “a high number of irregularities during
the Kosovo Assembly elections have severely affected
the trust in the democratic process in Kosovo” (ibid.,
para. 9). That is all the more regrettable given the
higher standard of achievement in previous election
cycles — that is to say, when they were conducted with
the full support of all stakeholders and in line with
resolution 1244 (1999). The report expresses concern
that the security situation in Kosovo is potentially
volatile and that the
“number of murders, cases of unauthorized
possession of weapons, and shooting incidents
remained significant. Organized crime continued
to be of concern throughout
Kosovo, mainly
involving smuggling and narcotics trafficking”
(ibid., para. 21).
The report does not provide details, however. Nor
does it focus on contemporary cases related to the
smuggling of human organs. Only Annex I of the
report mentions the multiple indictments handed down
in the Medicus case, which is an alleged organized
criminal conspiracy to source human organs for illicit
transplant. Some of those who are suspected of
involvement in this affair are also mentioned in a
deeply disturbing report approved by the Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly on 25 January, entitled
“Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo”. That report is based on a
number of testimonial accounts and what are
characterized as the compelling findings of a number
of European intelligence and law enforcement agencies,
together with analysis produced for NATO. It is
particularly disturbing that, as far back as 1999, to
quote from the report, “international actors chose to
turn a blind eye to the war crimes of the KLA, placing
a premium instead on achieving some degree of shortterm stability”. The report concludes by saying that
“certain crimes committed by members of the KLA,
including some top KLA leaders, were effectively
concealed and have remained unpunished”.
That report states that the so-called Kosovo
Liberation Army Drenica Group engaged in moneylaundering and the smuggling of drugs, cigarettes and

11-23603

weapons, as well as human trafficking, and that it bears
primary responsibility for the fate of many hundreds of
kidnapped civilians. The report goes on to state that the
abductees were sent from Kosovo to secret detention
camps in Northern Albania, where many of them were
singled out for forced surgery before being murdered.
Their internal organs were extracted and sold on the
international black market. The report indicates that
those events took place before, during and after the
1999 armed conflict in Kosovo.
The report explicitly identifies Hashim Thaci,
Kosovo’s sitting prime minister, as the group’s leader,
and lists a number of prominent personalities,
including Xhavit Haliti, Azem Syla and Fatmir Limaj,
as having “played vital roles as co-conspirators in
various categories of criminal activity”. It also
identifies one of Hashim Thaci’s current close advisors,
Shaip Muja, as a leading co-conspirator in the
trafficking of human organs.
For justice to be done, a full and independent
criminal investigation of the reported allegations is
essential. Such an investigation must be internationally
mandated as well as internationally accountable. It
must also be able to provide an effective witness
protection and relocation programme to guarantee
credible testimony by all. This is an acute problem in
Kosovo, for, as the report authors highlighted, “fear,
often to the point of genuine terror” was observed “in
some of our informants as soon as the subject of our
inquiry was broached”.
No existing institution on its own has the
mandate or the temporal and territorial jurisdiction to
carry out a serious investigation that would be
comprehensive in scope. This includes EULEX.
I want to be clear on the following point: the
contribution of EULEX to uncovering what took place
inside Kosovo itself will be crucial. That alone will not
be sufficient, however, because EULEX cannot operate
outside Kosovo, while the relevant allegations appear
to encompass not only that territory, but various United
Nations Member States in Europe, Asia and Africa. A
single authority must ultimately coordinate the
investigation process, manage the jurisdictional issues
and ensure the proper administration of justice.
It is the position of the Republic of Serbia that
the solution lies in establishing an ad hoc investigating
mechanism created by and accountable to the Security
Council. This has been the case in all previous

7

S/PV.6483

instances involving war crimes in the Balkans,
whichever side the perpetrators belonged to and
irrespective of their political role. It is only through the
action of the Security Council that we can prevent the
onset of a perception of double standards in the
administration of international justice. Maintaining a
coherent approach on the issue of war crimes is an
essential component in the common effort to
consolidate peace and stability in the Balkans.
The final words of the Council of Europe report
state that its sole aim today is to act on behalf of those
men and women who, regardless of their ethnic or
religious backgrounds, simply aspire to the truth and to
an end to scandalous impunity, with no greater wish
than to be able to live in peace. That statement serves
to frame what Serbia asks of the Security Council — to
ascertain the veracity of the allegations outlined in the
report and, should the evidence warrant it, bring all the
culprits to justice. We do not expect the discussion in
this Chamber to be concluded this afternoon. In our
view, today is the start of a shared effort to reach a
consensus on how to decisively address these heinous
contentions. Serbia intends to actively participate in
this process.
I want to make it clear that for us, the question of
human organs trafficking is an ethical and human
rights issue of the first order. We have to make sure it
is not portrayed as an attempt to assign communal
blame. There is no such thing as the guilt or innocence
of an entire nation. Guilt, like innocence, is not
collective, but personal.
We believe that the imperative to conduct a
proper investigation must neither be politicized, nor
linked to diplomatic disagreements over Kosovo. It
must be ultimately put in the service of truth and
reconciliation. Its successful completion is a
prerequisite for lasting peace and will represent the
final repudiation of the policies that promoted
extrajudicial killing, ethnic cleansing and the
criminalization of a society.
The President:
Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.

I now give the floor to

Mrs. Çitaku: Let me initially express gratitude
to the Council for giving me the opportunity to inform
the Council firsthand about developments in the last
three months in the Republic of Kosovo, as well as
provide the Council with the observations of the
government of the Republic of Kosovo regarding

8

current political developments. I wish to congratulate,
in alphabetical order, the new Security Council
members: Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal and
South Africa.
I am addressing the Council today in this very
distinguished room, where history has unfolded and
where nations are protected, on the eve of the third
anniversary of the declaration of independence of
Kosovo, an event that marked the birth of a new
country in the European continent. I thank the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General of the
Organization and all his successive Special
Representatives, including Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for
the role they have played in helping our region achieve
long-lasting peace by strengthening the democratic and
multiethnic institutions of a free and democratic
Kosovo.
It is a suitable moment to remind ourselves where
we are today, three years after the democratically
elected representatives of the people of Kosovo came
together to fulfil the will of the people and declare
independence. Since that day, three years ago, the
Kosovo Government has implemented the critical
provisions of the Ahtisaari Plan, the comprehensive
proposal of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
in full accordance with the established international
law and Security Council resolutions, as was
determined by the landmark advisory opinion on the
legality of Kosovo’s declaration of independence,
issued in July 2010 by the International Court of
Justice at the request of Serbia.
This was a giant final step in the long and
torturous process of defining Kosovo’s final status, and
it came not a moment too soon, for it has not been easy
at all to be living in Kosovo in the last few decades.
We should never forget that Milošević first began his
campaign of terror in Kosovo in 1989, and it is in
Kosovo that he ended, in the most tragic way
imaginable, his plan for a greater Serbia, taking the
lives of thousands of innocent people. This is now an
established historical fact, as the world has witnessed
and as finally documented in the verdicts of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in The Hague, making us, the people of
Kosovo, the subject of quintessentially unjust rule for
decades.
All oppressed people and nations around the
globe know what the feeling of liberation, freedom and

11-23603

S/PV.6483

dignity is. Just to mention one prominent and
exemplary case, the people of South Africa know what
the feeling of freedom is, after apartheid. Therefore it
is easy to understand how we Kosovars were suffering
in those years and how we feel nowadays.
I am speaking here on behalf of the Kosovo
government, as we have always done here, in an open,
frank and transparent way. We have experienced
challenging times during the last couple of months. As
you may recall, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo
ruled that the former president, Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, was
in breach of the country’s Constitution, which made
him promptly resign, in full respect of the procedures
in place. This development affected the political
equilibrium and led to early elections.
Candidates for ministers of Parliament engaged
in a lively electoral campaign, sometimes at the edge
of fair play. Notwithstanding attacks against election
officials in the north of Kosovo, international monitors
reported a calm and remarkably peaceful campaign and
voting day. Furthermore, over 200 complaints were
submitted to elections bodies by all political parties
and civil society organizations, and those were
addressed in record time. Revotes were ordered in
several municipalities, including a manual recounting
of suspected ballot boxes where needed. All procedural
and legal steps were lawfully followed and respected,
in a system of checks and balances, in order to make
sure that complaints were properly addressed and the
will of the people respected. It is of paramount
importance to point out that throughout the entire
process, the system functioned: the state delivered its
services and the appropriate budgetary procedures of a
caretaker government were strictly observed.
We political representatives and leaders of
Kosovo have very attentively listened to and taken due
note of all critiques and suggestions made by our
friends and partner regarding the electoral process.
This represents an important moment of thoughtful
reflection in our endeavours to strengthen our
institutions and democracy. Above all, it should be
stressed that the citizens of Kosovo are firmly
establishing themselves as an energetic, stable and
forward-looking society where individual freedoms are
respected and institutions function in the interest of all
the citizens of Kosovo, irrespective of their ethnic or
religious background.

11-23603

At the end of the process, all political parties in
Kosovo have accepted the final results. Yesterday, an
agreement to form a new Government was reached
among
several
political
parties,
including
representatives of the minorities, providing the
institutions of Kosovo with full political and legal
clout.
Another issue was current in the media during the
reporting period, which I would like to address clearly.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
recently approved a report written by a Swiss
parliamentarian, Mr. Dick Marty, alleging that senior
political leaders of Kosovo — but not only of
Kosovo — had engaged in organ harvesting. Free with
its imagination but failing to provide any proof
whatsoever, the Marty report further claims that senior
NATO, European Union (EU) member States and
United States officials had knowledge of and tolerated
this alleged wrongdoing.
Appalled, the Government of Kosovo has clearly
and firmly rejected the allegations in Mr. Marty’s
report. Besides profoundly hurting the feelings of
every Kosovar, the report has also, regrettably, harmed
our international reputation. It is worth recalling that
the allegations in the report are not new. They have
already been subject to international investigation, in
particular by the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and, most recently,
by the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We welcome the input of
international experts, such as recent statements by
former ICTY Chief Prosecutor Sir Geoffrey Nice, that
question the legal arguments put forth by Mr. Marty.
That being said, the Government of Kosovo
wishes to reaffirm its official stance that, in the light of
the severity of the allegations, it will insist on a prompt
launch of a thorough investigation by EULEX
prosecutors on the ground. EULEX, entrusted by the
United Nations and the EU to support the local judicial
system, has the expertise, the resources, the
prosecutors and the judges to thoroughly investigate
the allegations put forth. We will give it our full
cooperation.
But no mistake should be made and no confusion
should be tolerated. The war in Kosovo did not happen
centuries ago. It happened 11 years ago, before the
eyes of the whole world. No report can change or

9

S/PV.6483

reconstruct artificially a well-known and clearly
documented situation between oppressor and oppressed.
Blurring that distinction does not correspond to reality;
it does not help truth; it does not serve the process of
justice and reconciliation. The people of Kosovo, more
than anyone, need and demand investigations since we
have nothing to hide. The same clear, firm and
unambiguous stance has been expressed by the
Government of Albania.
With regard to the integration of minorities into
Kosovo’s society and institutions, we are happy to
report significant progress during the reporting period.
A substantial number of Serb voters participated in the
national elections. There was, for the first time, a much
higher participation of the Serb community in elections
organized by the Kosovo authorities than in those
organized by the Serb illegal structures. The Serbs won
over 10 per cent of all parliamentary seats, becoming
an essential part of the Government. The minority
communities won 25 seats, or over 20 per cent of the
seats in Parliament. For the first time in Kosovo’s
young democratic history, a Serb politician will soon
become a Deputy Prime Minister.
The success of decentralization and the
acceptance by the majority community of the
constitutional mechanisms that protect minorities
represent a success that cannot be disputed. New
municipalities have been established and, with the help
of the international community, are being equipped to
serve their inhabitants with the newly decentralized
powers.

Back in 2005, during months of talks in Vienna,
good will provided unprecedented local authority for
the Serb minority. They are now using these rights in
all of Kosovo, except in northern Mitrovica, where the
political landscape has become a hostage to parallel
structures that are involved, as is widely known and
recognized, in crime and smuggling. According to
United Nations estimates, we are losing at least
€40 million annually due to illegal smuggling across
border crossings 31 and 1. We expect Serbia to honour
its pledge to fight crime and corruption by assisting
EULEX and the Government of Kosovo in
re-establishing the same principle of integrated tax
collection operations in effect at Kosovo’s other border
points with Serbia and its neighbours.
While we have taken note of the concerns
expressed by Special Representative Zannier regarding
the position of United Nations administration in
Mitrovica, we would like to remind everyone that
Kosovo taxpayers, through the Government of Kosovo,
currently pay well over 50 per cent of the entire United
Nations operational budget in Mitrovica, contributing
greatly to the United Nations presence on the ground
and acting as an important supporting pillar. We are
also insistent that the current status-neutral position of
the United Nations means exactly what it says — that
the United Nations does not exclude the right of
Kosovo to be called and recognized as a State.
Sometimes, this point is not clear on the ground.

I have an appeal to make to the Republic of
Serbia today. It is not what it would have normally
been if Serbia were mature enough to make the grand
The Republic of Kosovo is in the process of
gesture of complying with reality and recognizing
organizing the first population census since 1981, with
Kosovo, thereby ensuring the opening of a new chapter
the help of the international community and the
in the Balkans. It is a much more modest appeal for
support of Eurostat. The census will take place in April.
Serbia to respect the very framework under which
It is fundamentally important that we see the positive
Kosovo operates as a State, including the Security
trend of Serb participation in local institutions continue
Council’s resolutions.
and become active in the forthcoming census. Special
provisions and additional questionnaires have been
For example, the United Nations Mission in
developed with the help of Eurostat to account for Kosovo has licensed two operators of mobile phone
Kosovar refugees from all communities who no longer services under the 2004 United Nations-promulgated
reside in Kosovo. We urge the international community law on telecommunications. Any other operations run
to call for the full participation of the Serb community by Serbian authorities are hence illegal under
in the process. This is especially important in northern international law. Serbia’s insistence on keeping
Mitrovica, where we need to see legal and authoritative mobile operations in Kosovo is in blatant disregard of
bodies emerge out of democratic processes, with resolution 1244 (1999).
institutions that operate within the framework of the
Similarly, Kosovar authorities have the inherent
Kosovo Government.
authority to issue automobile license plates in the cities

10

11-23603

S/PV.6483

of Kosovo. The Serbian authorities have not had that
right since 1999. Serbia simply cannot hope to
continue issuing, hundreds of miles away in Belgrade,
plates for vehicles in Kosovo’s cities.

proves that the process is irreversible and remains the
only legal and politically sustainable way for all of us
to move forward with our agenda of development and
Euro-Atlantic integration.

In the case of airspace, the Kumanovo Agreement
and subsequent decisions of the United Nations and EU
airspace regulatory bodies have given Kosovo full
rights of control over its airspace. All of Kosovo’s
neighbours, barring Serbia, and all international
airlines accept that fact. Serbia continues to ban flights
originating in Kosovo from entering Serbian airspace,
again disregarding the majority of the main points of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the International Court of
Justice opinion.

Being so preoccupied with the bad news, we
sometimes forget that life continues in Kosovo and the
Balkans. We are no longer concerned with issues of life
and death, but rather with the more prosaic problems
typical of a society in transition. In fact, our reports to
international stakeholders are increasingly about issues
of true importance, such as electing better leaders,
having a free media, stopping corruption, fighting
organized crime and securing a social support network
for the neediest, and less about status and borders.
Therein lies the opportunity before us. Both Serbia and
Kosovo want to become members of the EU. We must
do so because our peoples are asking that of us.

There are many other points of discussion ahead
of us, for which we need the Serbian Government to
adopt a new and realistic approach. It must recognize
the basic truth that Kosovo is in fact a nation separate
from Serbia. It needs to establish many modes of
communication with Kosovo, as an equal partner, to
uncover the truth about the missing of the war and to
address such issues as the fight against crime, the
provision of health care, education, sports, culture and
heritage. The Government of Kosovo looks forward to
engaging in meaningful talks with the Government of
Serbia in the immediate future on all of those
important issues, with the facilitation of the European
Union.
The security situation in Kosovo is stable. As a
result of the steadily improving security situation, the
Kosovo Force has pursued its plan to reduce troop
levels, which will drop to a low of 5,000. When we
remember 1999 and the massive military-humanitarian
operation that involved over 70,000 international
troops and civilian personnel, we realize how far we
have come in turning Kosovo into a success story for
the United Nations and the international community.
Although Kosovo was confronted with the task of
having to prove the solidity of its institutions in
overcoming a political crisis and organizing early
elections, I am pleased to reiterate that it has not
affected the continuing international recognition of
Kosovo as an equal member of the community of
nations. Since my most recent report, five other States
Members of the United Nations have recognized
Kosovo as an independent and sovereign State. I take
this opportunity to thank the Governments of Kiribati,
Tuvalu, Qatar, Guinea-Bissau and Oman. This only

11-23603

The process of establishing clear, transparent and
measurable benchmarks for progress in internal
reforms and neighbourly relations will drive the
dialogue between the Republic of Serbia and the
Republic of Kosovo. We have already seen the
necessary adjustment when the Government of Serbia
submitted the new text of General Assembly resolution
64/298 accepting the opinion of the International Court
of Justice. The Kosovar Government will competently
and credibly advance our EU agenda and deliver on the
promises we made in the election campaign. We expect
the Serbian Government to take the necessary final
step and accept Kosovo as a partner on an equal
footing.
The upcoming dialogue affords Kosovo and
Serbia a unique opportunity. We in Kosovo see that
dialogue not as an end goal, but as an instrument to
establish a new foundation in the region. We cannot
and will not change history; it is unfolding. We cannot
and should not forget or erase the past, but perhaps we
can learn a lesson from it on what should never happen
again. We cannot change our geography. Kosovo and
Serbia will be living next to each other as immediate
neighbours for eternity. But we can change the future
and the legacy we will leave behind for our children. It
is in our hands now to make sure that they inherit from
us a peaceful and prosperous region. That will require
commitment and leadership in both countries. I am
here to assure the Security Council that Kosovo is
ready.

11

S/PV.6483

Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zannier for his briefing. I would also
like to welcome the Serbian Foreign Minister, Mr. Vuk
Jeremič, and thank him for his statement. My thanks
also go to Ms. Vlora Çitaku for her statement.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) to facilitate dialogue and reconciliation
among the parties concerned. We urge UNMIK to
pursue its efforts to maintain security and stability,
facilitate Kosovo’s participation in regional and
international forums, and assist in responding to the
social needs of the different groups, particularly in the
north, in coordination and cooperation with local and
international parties.
On the basis of the Mission’s constructive role,
we urge all parties to extend to UNMIK the support it
needs to implement its mandate. We also urge them not
to publish inaccurate information on the Mission’s
activities, which only obstructs its work and
jeopardizes the safety of its staff. We also welcome the
continuing coordination between UNMIK and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
pursuant to the principle of neutrality set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999).
We welcome the relatively calm security situation,
but persistent efforts must be made to combat
organized crime, which, according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2011/43), continues to be a source
of concern in different parts of Kosovo.
The situation in the north of the country is also
still fragile. Harassment and security incidents
continue to foster a climate of tension and mistrust
among various groups. In those circumstances, it is
important for security forces to provide the maximum
level of security for all citizens of all regions. All
parties must refrain from provocative acts that could
disturb the peaceful coexistence.
Security, trust and respect for diversity are the
basic elements needed in addressing the issue of
refugees. Ensuring those conditions would create a
positive climate that would in turn pave the way for
dignified and safe returns. While returns increased in
2010, the rate is still low.
On a different issue, we would like to express our
regret about the irregularities in the recent
parliamentary elections, which affected the confidence

12

in the democratic process in Kosovo, despite the partial
redress of those irregularities by the re-vote in a
number of polling stations. The increased percentage of
Kosovo Serbs residing south of the Ibar river who
participated in those elections represented an important
positive development.
At this stage, it is important to focus on forming a
Government that reflects the aspirations of the
population and can improve its standard of living. We
also hope that the momentum of General Assembly
resolution 64/298, adopted on 9 September 2010, will
serve to facilitate a truly frank and constructive
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina as soon as
possible. It must be accompanied by efforts to achieve
reconciliation and to establish confidence among the
parties in Kosovo, allowing them to feel the benefits of
such a proposed dialogue.
Meanwhile, we would like to pay tribute to the
current cooperation of the Serbian Government and the
Kosovo
authorities
with
the
Reconstruction
Implementation Commission to protect Serbian
Orthodox sites. In that regard, we agree with the
Secretary-General regarding the significant and
effective role that the religious authorities can play in
reducing tension and in building bridges among groups
in a way that would protect such sites and strengthen
reconciliation.
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Human
Rights of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe adopted a resolution on the report of Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty on the inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo. We hope that appropriate legal means can be
found to establish the truth, devoid of politicization, in
a way that meets the expectations of Kosovars and
achieves justice for the families of those victims.
Looking beyond such incidents, we affirm the
importance of fighting corruption and of transparency
and accountability as the main pillars in building stable
institutions and lasting peace.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, back to the
Security Council and to thank him for his briefing on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign

11-23603

S/PV.6483

Minister of Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku, and thank
them for their statements.
According to resolution 1244 (1999), part of
UNMIK’s mandate is to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo, in coordination
with the leadership in both Belgrade and Pristina.
Those are important aspects of UNMIK’s mandate,
which my delegation strongly supports. An integral
part of implementing that mandate towards securing
sustainable security and durable peace in Kosovo is the
promotion of dialogue and reconciliation between the
two sides.
South Africa urges both sides to commence to
resolve outstanding issues with direct constructive
dialogue, as mandated by General Assembly resolution
64/298. Furthermore, we consider it critical to continue
with the implementation of UNMIK’s mandated
activities aimed at promoting reconciliation, such as
addressing the issue of missing persons, the return of
displaced persons and the protection of religious and
cultural heritage sites.
My delegation is concerned about the attacks
against UNMIK reported in the media in Kosovo and
all attacks aimed at undermining the legitimacy of
UNMIK as mandated by the Security Council. We urge
parties to continue supporting UNMIK in the
implementation of its mandate.
South Africa continues to be concerned that the
current political impasse undermines peace and
stability in the region, thus further undermining the full
potential for sustainable development and regional
integration. Since dialogue is essential to the peaceful
resolution of the crisis, it is important for Belgrade and
Pristina to start full-fledged dialogue on outstanding
matters between them to achieve a sustainable solution
to the situation in the Western Balkans.
My delegation therefore calls on the authorities in
Pristina to exert all efforts to reach a political solution
that will allow them to start the dialogue process. We
also call on both sides to start such talks in good faith
and be willing to listen and to compromise, with the
aim of reaching agreement.
The need to address issues of direct concern to
the population in Kosovo has an impact on
reconciliation. In that regard, we are pleased to note
the progress made in the return of displaced persons,
but continue to be concerned about the lack of

11-23603

resources to deal with the forced returns in Kosovo.
More work needs to be done to address the challenges
currently faced.
In addition, we welcome the limited progress in
the Working Group on Missing Persons, and have
noted the call by Serbian and Kosovo Albanian
families for the Working Group to hold joint briefing
sessions. In our view, such briefings would continue to
contribute towards establishing direct contact between
the various communities, especially the Serbian and
Albanian communities, which, we believe, directly
contributes to reconciliation efforts. Another example
of progress relating to reconciliation is the work done
by the Reconstruction Implementation Commission on
the reconstruction of religious and heritage sights.
The fragile progress towards stability is also
undermined by the continued volatile situation in
Northern Kosovo/Mitrovica. It is essential that the
Security Council-mandated mission be respected
throughout Kosovo and that its authority not be
undermined. All sides must also refrain from any acts
of provocation and must respect the international
presence throughout Kosovo.
Furthermore, South Africa is concerned that the
limited progress in reconciliation could also be
unravelled by the disturbing allegations of organ
smuggling against several leading political figures in
Kosovo. Those allegations need to be fully and
properly investigated, and South Africa is of the view
that an appropriate international response aimed at
ending impunity must be found.
It is clear that much work remains to be done in
Kosovo. We remain ready to work with the Council to
ensure that UNMIK’s mandate is fully implemented.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and of Mrs. Vlora Çitaku, the representative of Kosovo,
who have come to the Council with important
statements that merit our full attention and
consideration. I also appreciate the comprehensive
briefing presented by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, which attests
to the importance of the mandate and the significant
contribution of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
promoting security, stability and respect for human

13

S/PV.6483

rights in that country in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).
Colombia has followed with interest the recent
election and institution-building activities in Kosovo.
We believe that effective democracy is essential to
strengthening governance, generating citizen trust and
promoting an atmosphere of greater harmony among
Kosovars of all ethnicities, as well as to the continued
improvement in relations with the countries of the
region.
We share the concerns with regard to the impact
that events surrounding the elections on 12 December
2010, referred to in the report (S/2011/43) of the
Secretary-General, could have on the evolution of the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. Colombia
hopes that the firm commitment expressed by both
sides is reflected in concrete steps by taking advantage
of the European Union’s readiness to facilitate the
process, which the General Assembly welcomed last
September in its resolution 64/298.
That regional support could help bring together
Pristina and Belgrade and provide broader perspectives
for addressing issues and differences between the two
countries, taking into account the experience and
participation of regional organizations in the
stabilization process of Kosovo in support of UNMIK’
mandate.
Yesterday we had an opportunity to listen to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania (see
S/PV.6481), who in his capacity as Chairman-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe referred to some of his organization’s
contributions in Kosovo. Likewise, the SecretaryGeneral’s report and Mr. Zannier’s briefing have
highlighted UNMIK’s cooperation and coordination
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo and with NATO’s International Security Force.
In that context, it is appropriate for the Security
Council to decisively support the process of dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade while also continuing to
promote efforts to encourage an environment of
political, social and multicultural stability throughout
Kosovo.
The Secretary-General’s report refers to the
recurrence of incidents and tension of ethnic nature,
especially in Northern Kosovo. It is imperative to
ensure adequate respect and coordination by Kosovo’s
authorities with regard to UNMIK’s competencies

14

throughout the entire territory, including the northern
area of the country. In addition, strategies that foster
increased contacts and exchanges among the different
communities should be agreed upon. The positive
experiences with regard to interreligious dialogue and
the reconstruction and preservation of cultural heritage
on the ground in Kosovo are avenues that should be
further explored towards more harmonious coexistence.
Colombia considers very serious the references to
the possible commission of war crimes related to illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. The Security
Council should evaluate this issue against the backdrop
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the value of justice in the
promotion of peace, and then determine the course to
be pursued.
Colombia supports the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
aimed at consolidating an enabling political, social and
economic environment in the country that leads to
definitive peace and stability in the Balkans.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zannier for his briefing. I also
welcome the presence among us today of Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I have
listened very carefully to his statement, as well as that
by Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.
Currently, the overall situation in Kosovo is calm.
However, it remains complex and fragile. We are
concerned about the inter-communal tensions that exist
in Kosovo.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We have always been of the opinion
that the question of Kosovo touches on peace and
stability in the Balkans, and in fact in the whole of
Europe. It is therefore up to the parties concerned,
within the framework of the pertinent resolutions of the
Security Council, to find a negotiated solution that is
acceptable to both parties. China encourages the
beginning of dialogue between the various parties with
a view to finding an appropriate solution to the
outstanding issues.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains valid and
continues to be an important legal instrument to
resolve the issue of Kosovo. China supports the
continued work of the United Nations Interim

11-23603

S/PV.6483

Administration Mission in Kosovo in line with the
mandate conferred upon it by the Security Council. We
call for a greater role for it in solving the problems in
Kosovo. All parties concerned must ensure the security
of UNMIK staff and facilitate their work under optimal
conditions.

believe that it is important that all stakeholders
maintain their positive and constructive approach
towards dialogue in order to address and resolve
longstanding
issues,
which
would contribute
significantly to the consolidation of peace, stability and
reconciliation.

China is extremely concerned about the illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo, as indicated in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/43). Any
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law are intolerable. China understands
the reasonable concerns of Serbia and supports the
opening of a United Nations inquiry into this matter.

Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to express its
strong concerns regarding the allegations contained in
the report of Special Rapporteur Dick Marty entitled
“Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo”. Furthermore, we welcome
the willingness of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to consider any evidence
that the Special Rapporteur may have uncovered and to
provide its full support to any future investigation that
may be conducted into the allegations.

Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2011/43) on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
commend
Mr.
Lamberto
Zannier,
Special
Representative of the Secretary General for Kosovo,
for his briefing on recent developments in Kosovo, as
well as the staff of UNMIK for their efforts.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, as well as
Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends UNMIK,
operating within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999) in its role of maintaining peace, security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo. We
appreciate UNMIK’s efforts in encouraging the process
of reconciliation and the facilitation of constructive
dialogue and regional cooperation, as well as its focus
on mediation between the communities and its support
to minority communities.
During
the
reporting
period,
political
developments in Kosovo, in particular the
extraordinary elections of 12 December and their
aftermath, have slowed down the momentum generated
by General resolution 64/298, adopted on 9 September
2010, which welcomed the readiness of the European
Union to facilitate a dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade. We regret that UNMIK was excluded from
the Assembly elections process and could not certify
the results. We also note that the elections were held in
a peaceful atmosphere and did not provoke additional
tensions among the population. In that regard, we

11-23603

We have taken note of the fact that the security
situation in Kosovo has remained relatively calm, in
spite of some incidents, mainly in northern Kosovo,
where the situation continues to be sensitive and
politically delicate, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report. In the context of improving inter-community
dialogue and building confidence among the parties,
we are encouraged by the latest developments in the
five recently decentralized Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities, which have implemented capital
projects at a cost of €1 million each, received from the
Pristina budget, mainly for investments in roads, water,
sanitation and other local infrastructure projects.
Although the number of voluntary minority
returns remains low, we are encouraged by the fact that
there has been an increase in returns as compared to
the previous year. In addition, while stressing the
importance of providing conditions conducive to
sustainable returns, we welcome UNMIK’s efforts to
decrease tensions and draw attention to common needs.
Furthermore, during the reporting period, UNMIK and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees facilitated several “go-and-see” and “goand-inform” visits, which gave an opportunity to
displaced persons to visit their properties and make
first-hand assessments of conditions in the receiving
community.
With regard to the rule of law, we reiterate our
support for the activities of UNMIK and EULEX,
operating within the status-neutral framework of the
United Nations. We also support the existing practice
of cooperation and coordination between UNMIK,

15

S/PV.6483

EULEX, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and NATO — the latter present
through the troops of the Kosovo Force — and we
hope that this practice will continue.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our longstanding position that stability and security in Kosovo
are significant for achieving lasting peace and
prosperity in our region. We believe that the
international community should continue to play an
important role in supporting the aspirations of the
countries of the region towards integration into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures, respectively.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Minister Jeremić and
Acting Foreign Minister Çitaku to the Council and
thank them for their comments. I would also like to
thank Special Representative Zannier for his
comprehensive briefing today.
Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the
people of Kosovo on the third anniversary of their
independence tomorrow, 17 February. In these three
years, Kosovo has demonstrated a commitment to
developing democratic institutions and to playing a
responsible role in the neighbourhood and in the wider
international community.
Let me also take a moment to congratulate the
people of Serbia on the celebration of their national
day on 15 February. Serbia too has demonstrated a
commitment to peace and stability in the Balkans.
The United States supports the aspirations of both
countries to achieve lasting peace and prosperity and to
complete their European integration. To this end, we
look forward to the European Union-facilitated
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo, aimed at
improving the quality of life for their citizens and
supporting both countries as they make progress on
their respective paths to membership in the European
Union.
I would like to make three additional points. First,
in its three years of independence, Kosovo has made
substantial progress in building its democracy. It
administered municipal elections in 2009 and snap
National Assembly elections at the end of last year.
The implementation of decentralization has moved
government closer to the people and Kosovo has
established new Serb-majority municipalities that have
fostered improved political engagement in minority

16

communities. We note, however, that serious
irregularities occurred in some areas during the
December parliamentary elections. That said, Kosovo’s
electoral
and
judicial
institutions
responded
immediately and appropriately to hold orderly re-votes.
Kosovo Serbs south of the Ibar River turned out in
record numbers during the December elections. This is
a welcome sign of the benefits of decentralization and
of the improved security and political situation in
Kosovo. Still, significant work remains to strengthen
the electoral system, and we join international partners’
calls for further electoral reforms. These and other
pressing reforms await the new Assembly and
Government in the coming days.
The story is not as encouraging in northern
Kosovo. The ethnic-Serb community’s engagement in
Kosovo politics and municipal administration is a
critical element for the development of a prosperous
multi-ethnic democracy. We are concerned that Serbs
in northern Kosovo who have engaged with Kosovo
Government institutions have faced organized
opposition from parallel institutions, which use
violence and intimidation to prevent the democracy
and development that has taken root in Serb
communities throughout the rest of Kosovo. It is also
alarming that, as cited in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2011/43), the targeting of international workers in
northern Kosovo has increased.
Secondly, the rule of law is paramount to stability
and progress in the Balkans. The United States takes
any allegations of criminal wrongdoing seriously,
especially with regard to war crimes. We therefore take
the allegations contained in the Council of Europe
report seriously — allegations that had previously been
investigated by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We fully
support the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) leading a comprehensive, thorough
and impartial follow-on investigation. EULEX has a
jurisdiction and mandate to deal with war crimes. It has
dealt with similar issues in the past and it will have the
full weight of the European Union and its partners to
support it. We welcome the declared support of the
Governments of Kosovo and Albania for such an
investigation. We do not believe that an ad hoc United
Nations mechanism is necessary or appropriate in the
light of the EULEX mandate.

11-23603

S/PV.6483

This brings me to my third point. The process of
reconciliation must continue in order to maintain peace
and stability in the Balkans. We were encouraged that
voluntary returns increased in 2010, with nearly twice
as many Kosovo Serbs returning as compared to 2009.
We would also note that NATO’s Kosovo Force
continues to transfer protective responsibilities for
Serbian Orthodox properties to the Kosovo police
without incident. The protection, and support for, the
religious and cultural heritage of all of Kosovo’s
communities is critical to reconciliation efforts. We
commend UNMIK’s efforts to facilitate the work of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission. We also
welcome the efforts of the European Union facilitator
for the protection of religious and cultural heritage and
call on other members to aid in these and similar
efforts. The United States recently allocated
$1.4 million for cultural preservation and restoration
projects throughout Kosovo.
Let me reiterate the commitment of the United
States to a stable, prosperous and democratic Kosovo
that enjoys genuine cooperation with Serbia and the
Balkan region.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora
Çitaku, Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Kosovo, for their presence here today and
for the statements they delivered. I also welcome
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and commend the work he and the
entire staff of his Mission are carrying out in Kosovo.
Tomorrow, Kosovo will celebrate the third
anniversary of its independence. What assessment can
be made of the development of this young State? First
of all, everyone must agree that the fear that chaos
would ensue, expressed by some at the time of the
declaration of independence, was unfounded. The
institutional framework that Kosovo set out for itself is
being respected by its authorities and supported by its
population. Legislative elections were held in
December. They went well overall — better than in
many other countries that are older than Kosovo.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report
(S/2011/43), the level of participation by Kosovar
Serbs in those elections was the highest since 2001.
The Security Council has every reason to congratulate
itself for this. Whatever our positions are on the

11-23603

question of status, this high participation rate proves
the greater maturity on the part of the population and
shows their willingness to share a common future.
To date, 75 States have recognized Kosovo. Each
recognition brings greater stability to Kosovo and to
the entire region. But these recognitions are not enough.
Kosovo must indeed still make progress in many areas.
The rule of law must be strengthened, and this must be
accomplished through a strengthening of institutions
and of the fight against corruption and organized crime.
Judicial institutions must be consolidated.
In his report, the Secretary-General characterizes
the security situation as relatively calm but potentially
volatile. While incidents are, thankfully, less frequent
than they were a few years ago, there are still too many
of them. It is unacceptable that vehicles driven by
Serbs are the target of rock-throwing, even if these
attacks are essentially symbolic.
Moreover, the actions of Serb extremists in the
north of Kosovo are equally unacceptable. Acts of
intimidation and pressure by these extremists directed
against the Serbs in the north of Kosovo and aimed at
preventing them from living on good terms with all of
the communities must not be tolerated. The experience
of Serbs living south of the Ibar River, in particular in
the new municipalities created under the Ahtisaari plan,
shows that peaceful coexistence is possible.
A process of dialogue must be established soon
between the two neighbouring States. The European
Union is ready to facilitate this dialogue, which we
hope to see begin as soon as the Government of
Kosovo is formed. For this dialogue, which will have
to do with technical subjects of common interest, to be
fruitful and bring about concrete results for the
population, it must take place without interference by
one country in the territory of the other.
All of the States of the former Yugoslavia have
been granted the same chance at achieving European
integration. Each one is making progress at its own
pace in this process of European rapprochement. One
of these States has already joined the European Union.
However, the horrors of the war years remain
ever-present for the populations concerned. The
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has carried out exemplary work and has
ensured that justice is done. Two accused remain to be
arrested as soon as possible to answer for their actions.

17

S/PV.6483

A disturbing report adopted recently by the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe
included
allegations
—
presented
in
the
hypothetical — of organ trafficking that allegedly took
place in Kosovo and Albania at the end of the war. An
inquiry carried out several years ago on the basis of the
same rumours failed to confirm those rumours. We
would like for light to be definitively shed on this
matter and for the proof, if it exists — and until now it
has not been presented — to be provided to the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
which has the mandate and capacity to successfully
carry out the necessary investigations.
A new Government will take office in Kosovo. It
must spare no effort in helping the young State
continue to make progress. Many different tasks will
have to be tackled at once: the rule of law, good
governance,
the
fight
against
corruption,
inter-community dialogue, economic reconstruction,
dialogue with Serbia and the strengthening of its
international relations.
For its part, France will continue to closely
follow the situation in Kosovo and will help it come
into line with European norms, as we are also doing
today with Serbia.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremić; and the Acting Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, Mrs. Vlora Çitaku, to the Council Chamber
today.
I would also like to express the United
Kingdom’s gratitude for the role played by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting stability and reconciliation in
Kosovo and for Mr. Zannier’s continued leadership and
hard work.
Kosovo has now achieved 75 recognitions, held
its first national election since independence and
tomorrow will celebrate its third anniversary as an
independent State. I congratulate Kosovo on these
achievements.
The national elections in December in Kosovo
were widely recognized to have been conducted in a
peaceful and stable manner. There were a number of
irregularities and allegations of fraud. Acting Foreign

18

Minister Çitaku has herself recognized this. But the
efficient and responsible manner with which the
Central Elections Commission and the Constitutional
Court addressed these complaints, in line with the
electoral code, is a further sign of Kosovo’s maturing
democracy.
The results have now been confirmed by the
Central Elections Commission. We welcome the
increased participation by the Kosovo Serbian
population. This is reflected in the fact that there will
be 25 minority members of Parliament in the Kosovo
Assembly, which is five above the 20 seats reserved.
The United Kingdom looks forward to supporting the
incoming Kosovo Government.
Three years after Kosovo’s declaration of
independence, the challenges it faces are changing.
Increasingly, they are the same as those of other States
in the region: to foster economic development, to
improve the lives of its citizens and to drive forward
reform in pursuit of European standards. The new
Government should seize the opportunity to address
these challenges and commit itself to the task of
preparing for European Union (EU) membership.
In September, the General Assembly welcomed
the prospect of an EU-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. All parties are committed to
starting the dialogue as soon as possible. Like the
Secretary-General, I am pleased that the European
Union representatives appointed to facilitate the talks
have held preparatory meetings with both sides. My
Government continues to believe that the dialogue is
essential to improving practical cooperation between
Serbia and Kosovo and for making progress towards
both countries’ European perspective. I urge both sides
to engage quickly, in a spirit of cooperation and
compromise.
Some cooperation is already taking place. The
Secretary-General rightly highlights the good work that
is being taken forward on issues such as missing
persons and religious and cultural heritage. I would
like to thank UNMIK and the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their role in this. The United
Kingdom has long supported the work of the United
Nations and the Government of Kosovo to ensure that
returnees feel able to go home. So I am particularly
pleased to see that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has recorded an

11-23603

S/PV.6483

increase in the number of voluntary minority returns,
with the 2010 figures almost double those of 2009.
In January, the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe adopted a report by Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty on inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo. The United Kingdom Government expects
allegations such as these to be treated seriously. I
therefore welcome the decision by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to open
preliminary investigations into the allegations, and the
public commitment by the Governments of Kosovo and
Albania to cooperate fully with the investigation.
EULEX has the mandate, authority and
jurisdiction to take forward a full and independent
investigation. In the light of this, we do not believe that
a Security Council-mandated investigation into these
allegations is necessary.
Progress in Kosovo is irreversible. The world’s
youngest country is a viable, independent State with a
clear future in the European Union. But that future
belongs not just to Kosovo, but also to Serbia and the
other countries of the Western Balkans. The United
Kingdom supports all of them.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in warmly welcoming the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, and the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Kosovo, Mrs. Vlora Çitaku. I would
also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Lamberto Zannier for his briefing.
We appreciate the contribution made by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and commend the dedication and service of
its staff.
Tomorrow, Kosovo will celebrate the third
anniversary of its independence. We congratulate the
people and leadership of Kosovo for the progress that
has been achieved over the past three years. We will
continue our support for a free, multi-ethnic,
democratic and dynamic Kosovo, whose future lies in
Europe.
We welcome the most recent recognitions of
Kosovo as an independent State, bringing the total
number of recognitions to 75. Germany sees those
recognitions as a clear sign that the region has gained
stability since Kosovo’s independence. We call upon

11-23603

States that have not yet done so to recognize the
Republic of Kosovo, as a contribution to peace and
stability in the Western Balkans.
Our common goal in the region is very clear. We
want peace and stability, freedom, the rule of law and
respect for human rights. The prospect of European
Union (EU) membership has facilitated peace and
reconciliation. One day, all countries in the region, as
well as Serbia and Kosovo, should find their place
under a common European roof.
Germany commends and fully supports the
efforts of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy of the European Union, Baroness
Catherine Ashton, and her representatives to facilitate a
process of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, as
supported by General Assembly resolution 64/298,
adopted in September 2010. We welcome the fact that
both parties are ready for that dialogue and we hope
that, after some delays, it will now start quickly and in
a constructive spirit.
We echo the Secretary-General in welcoming the
peaceful conduct of the recent parliamentary elections
in Kosovo. We view the increased overall turnout and
the good participation by Kosovo Serbs and other
communities as a positive sign of the wish of all of
Kosovo’s citizens to jointly participate in building a
sustainable, multi-ethnic future.
We regret that a number of irregularities marred
the voting and counting processes. However, we
welcome the fact that the competent institutions in
Kosovo addressed the irregularities in an efficient and
responsible manner, in line with the existing legal
framework in Kosovo. All unlawful acts related to the
elections have to be investigated and prosecuted so as
to further strengthen the credibility and legitimacy of
the democratic process in Kosovo.
We hope for the speedy formation of a new
Government and the election of the new President of
the Republic. The new Government will face a number
of important challenges, such as addressing the
pressing need for socio-economic development,
strengthening the rule of law throughout Kosovo and
combating corruption and organized crime. The full
integration of representatives of the ethnic
communities in institutions and society, especially the
Kosovo Serbs, and the protection of their religious and
cultural sites will also have to be addressed.

19

S/PV.6483

As the report (S/2011/43) of the SecretaryGeneral underlines, many challenges remain in
northern Kosovo. Although the overall security
situation in Kosovo has remained relatively calm, it
continues to be potentially volatile in the north.
We welcome the continued close cooperation
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force. We fully
support the important work of EULEX and are pleased
that it has extended its presence and activities in the
north of Kosovo so as to guarantee the implementation
of its mandate throughout the territory of Kosovo.
The grave allegations of crimes committed
against Serbian nationals during and after the end of
the armed conflict in Kosovo, as described by the
Special Rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe, Dick Marty, are shocking.
Germany takes them seriously. Those allegations must
be investigated fully and impartially. We call on all
relevant organizations, institutions and individuals to
come forward and present any evidence they have to
allow for a full investigation. We welcome the fact that
the Government of Kosovo and the Government of
Albania are prepared to fully cooperate in the full and
impartial investigation into the allegations made by the
Special Rapporteur.
EULEX has the necessary capacities, competence
and, above all, jurisdiction to carry out those
investigations. EULEX has our full support and
confidence. From our point of view, the setting up of
an ad hoc body or tribunal by the Security Council
would not serve our joint objective of a speedy and full
investigation.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that my country
remains committed to a strong partnership between the
United Nations, the EU and the relevant actors in the
region — a partnership that builds on shared values
and common goals.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for introducing the report (S/2011/43) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We
welcome the participation in today’s Security Council

20

meeting of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and we share his assessments.
We had hoped for a more objective statement by
Mrs. Čitaku.
Russia supports the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. In our view, it is
undeniable that resolution 1244 (1999) remains in full
effect and continues to be binding on all parties as the
international legal basis for a Kosovo settlement and
for ensuring security in the province. Our position of
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence has not changed.
We believe that it is important for the
stakeholders to resume dialogue so as to reach a
settlement of the Kosovo issue. In that connection, the
unilateral actions of Pristina and the international
presence in northern Kosovo are unacceptable. Those
actions are aimed at changing realities on the ground in
order to influence the modalities and outcome of the
upcoming dialogue.
Russia does not consider the Kosovo Assembly
elections held on 12 December 2010 to be legitimate,
as they were organized by the authorities of the selfproclaimed Republic of Kosovo and were not based on
a decision by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as required by resolution 1244
(1999).
We cannot but take into account the fact that from
the beginning, international monitoring organizations
declined to certify the elections. Participation by the
Serb community in the elections was limited. In
northern Kosovo, Serbs essentially boycotted the event.
Observers noted serious violations during the election
process, including tampering with the electoral lists,
the use of counterfeit ballots, multiple votes cast by the
same people and bribery of voters. Also worrisome are
the results achieved at the polls by radical Kosovo
Albanian parties, in particular the Self-Determination
Movement, which advocates for the creation of a
greater Albania.
The security situation in the province remains
tense, owing primarily to growing tendencies among
Kosovo Albanians towards independent and largely
provocative actions. We are concerned at the fact that
the self-proclaimed authorities in the province, as
noted in the Secretary-General’s report, are carrying
out infrastructure projects without coordinating with

11-23603

S/PV.6483

UNMIK, and encouraging Kosovo Albanians to
undertake unregulated and unilateral returns to their
previous places of residence without appropriate legal
authorization. Such actions could seriously exacerbate
the inter-ethnic situation in northern Kosovo.

We agree with the arguments put forward by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia with regard to
that, and support the establishment by the Security
Council of a special international investigation
mechanism accountable to the United Nations.

We share the concern of the Serb authorities and
the Serbian Orthodox Church at the situation that has
developed in connection with the handover by the
NATO Kosovo Force of the duty of protecting the
province’s most significant Serbian cultural and
religious heritage sites to the Kosovo Police. We
believe that those actions could create additional
tensions over security in Kosovo, especially because
further incidents of robbery and vandalism at Serbian
holy sites occurred during the reporting period.

Such an investigation format is necessary since
those activities could go far beyond the region, and
given the extremely unsatisfactory situation in Kosovo
with regard to witness protection, as mentioned in
Mr. Gardetto’s report to the Council of Europe.
According to data contained in the report, in Kosovo,
“there is a real threat of retaliation and key witnesses
being eliminated”. In essence, the only real way to
protect witnesses and their relatives is by relocating
them outside Kosovo.

The situation of the return to Kosovo of internally
displaced persons, including the Serb population,
remains unsatisfactory, for many reasons. One of the
main reasons is that returnees have no assurance of
their own security. We continue to believe that the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, on the basis of its mandate from the Security
Council, should play the most active role possible in
assisting with the Kosovo settlement process.

It continues to be necessary for the Security
Council to play a leading role in the settlement of
Kosovo, as it remains the guarantor of compliance
with international law, the United Nations Charter and
the Council’s own decisions.

UNMIK must also fully carry out its duties in
respect of the external representation of Kosovo in
regional
and
international
organizations
and
mechanisms.
Attempts to discredit UNMIK in the Kosovar
media continue to be unacceptable. The campaign
against United Nations staff threatens the security of
international personnel and prevents them from
fulfilling their duties.
We are deeply alarmed by the information in the
Secretary-General’s report regarding the investigations
into allegations of inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo, as
reported by Special Rapporteur Dick Marty, a member
of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights
of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe. The report not only is timely, but also has
considerable moral and humanitarian significance. We
welcome the adoption of a resolution by the
Parliamentary Assembly in support of investigating the
incidents mentioned in the document.

Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): We too would like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/43) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, a country with which
Gabon is proud to have excellent relations. We thank
him for his statement, the content of which we fully
support.
Throughout the period under review, the political
situation in Kosovo was dominated by the holding, on
12 December 2010, of the first legislative elections
since the contested unilateral declaration of
independence, which took place on February 2008. We
regret that those elections were not organized or
supervised by UNMIK, as provided for in its mandate
under resolution 1244 (1999).

We also regret that the resumption of dialogue
between Serbia and Kosovo, which the General
Assembly recommended in its resolution 64/298, of
9 September 2010, under the facilitation of the
European Union, has been delayed owing to the
holding of those elections. Furthermore, the
Carrying out such a detailed and comprehensive
publication of the Dick Marty report, detailing the
investigation is the duty of the international community.
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in

11-23603

21

S/PV.6483

human organs in Kosovo, is a source of concern to my
delegation. We believe that this is an important issue
that deserves all due attention. Gabon therefore
supports the need for the Security Council to establish
an investigation mechanism answerable to it in order to
shed light on the facts highlighted in the Marty report.
In that regard, we welcome UNMIK’s readiness to
provide the necessary support for those inquiries.
Furthermore, we deplore the deteriorating
environment in Kosovo, in particular in the north,
where UNMIK is subject to hostile and unjustified
reporting by some media. We also deplore the fact that
illegal construction has helped to stoke tension
between the communities. We urge all parties to show
restraint and to favour the path of dialogue in stead.
On the security front, while the situation remains
generally calm, my delegation nevertheless continues
to be concerned about the increase in the number of
murders and cases of illegal possession of weapons.
Organized crime, smuggling and drug trafficking
contribute to an unsafe environment and continue to be
of concern in Kosovo.
My delegation would again like to underscore the
importance of the two parties pursuing talks on the
issue of missing persons, which continues to
undermine efforts at reconciliation among the various
communities. However, we welcome the progress
already made in that regard. We also welcome the fact
that the parties have continued their cooperation on
religious and cultural heritage.
With regard to the issue of the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees, we are concerned
about the financial and material difficulties that hinder
their reintegration. We would therefore urge the
international community to provide consistent
assistance in order to encourage the return of those
people to their places of origin.
I would like to reaffirm that my country promotes
dialogue and consultation to settle crises and conflicts.
In the case of Kosovo, Gabon rejects any unilateral
declaration of independence and continues to strongly
support respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic Serbia.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our
appreciation to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, which

22

continue to play an important role in the context of
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We also renew
our support for the work of all agencies of the United
Nations system present on the ground, including
UNMIK and its entire staff, whose professionalism we
commend.
Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Let me also join
others in thanking His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his very
useful statement this afternoon. We would also like to
thank Mrs. Vlora Çitaku for her statement and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lamberto
Zannier for his comprehensive update on the situation
in Kosovo.
Nigeria welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/43) pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999). We also welcome the continued collaboration
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the other
facilitators in fostering peace and stability in Kosovo
and the region. However, it is evident from today’s
briefings that there are still difficult challenges in
Kosovo and in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). That situation requires the careful
consideration of the Council.
In that regard, we want to observe that UNMIK
continues to operate in difficult circumstances, with
sustained media attacks undermining efforts by the
Mission to fully deliver on its mandate. We deplore
those attacks and urge restraint on the part of the
parties involved. Nigeria believes that UNMIK still has
an important role to play and that its presence and
support is required to bolster efforts at assisting the
communities to overcome their various challenges.
Nigeria shares the Secretary-General’s concerns
about the fragile security situation in northern Kosovo.
Inter-ethnic tensions and attacks against the minority
communities, as well as members of the international
community, undermine the prospects for peace and
stability in the territory. We believe that the
perpetrators of crimes should be properly brought to
justice, and efforts made to reach out to the victims. It
is important to prevent such incidents from reoccurring
by enhancing the necessary mechanisms for the
protection of lives and property and by promoting
mutual tolerance, harmony and coexistence among the
people.

11-23603

S/PV.6483

Nigeria remains convinced that sustained
dialogue is indispensable to achieving a mutually
acceptable solution to all outstanding issues in Kosovo.
The parties should therefore remain fully committed to
dialogue, in furtherance of General Assembly 64/298,
adopted on 9 September 2010. We urge the parties to
redouble their efforts to commence that process in the
shortest possible time, taking into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all communities. The
resulting overall peace dividend would be far-reaching
for Kosovo and the region, as it would not only address
the problem of insecurity but also open up economic
opportunities for the various communities.
On the issue of illicit trafficking in human organs
in Kosovo, highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report, Nigeria considers it a very serious human rights
issue that requires an international investigation, taking
into account the various jurisdictions involved in the
matter. We encourage UNMIK to provide the support
that may be necessary to the process.
We welcome the increased support for returnees
recorded during the reporting period. Efforts should be
deployed to address concerns over the viability of
conditions of return, including security, access to
public services, housing and property rights and
socio-economic opportunities. The absence of these
critical elements will constrain efforts to promote the
sustainable return of displaced persons, as well as
reconciliation,
longer-term
stability
and
the
development of Kosovo.

prosperity. It also draws attention to the work UNMIK
has been doing together with the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and several other players on the
ground in Kosovo.
Portugal would like to convey, as a contributor to
EULEX and KFOR, as well as a country with a long
involvement in the stabilization of the Balkans, our
sincere appreciation for the work accomplished so far.
Our joint efforts remain vital in order to consolidate
peace and to draw the region closer to integration in
the European institutional framework — an ambition
that we share.
As regards political life in Kosovo, the December
general elections are the main event on which to base
an analysis of this period. Unfortunately, the elections
suffered from some serious shortcomings and a high
number of irregularities, as stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The overall climate was peaceful,
however, and the reaction by the Central Elections
Commission and the Election Complaints and Appeals
Panel was swift and managed to overcome some of the
irregularities.
We believe it is important for Kosovo institutions
and international players to continue working together
in order to consolidate democratic institutions and
foster solid commitment to democratic values and
practice. It is also noteworthy that the participation of
the Kosovo Serb community was higher than in 2007,
in spite of scant turn-out north of the Ibër/Ibar River.

We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for their unrelenting
efforts in promoting peace and stability in Kosovo, as
well as the region, and assure the Mission of our
continued support.

I took good note of the Special Representative’s
comments on the pressing economic and fiscal
problems Kosovo is facing and the need to address
these issues, lest they become an added element of
instability.

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank
Special Representative Lamberto Zannier for his very
clear and comprehensive briefing to the Council, and
both His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku,
Acting Foreign Minister of Kosovo, for their
statements and for the elements they have brought to
our attention.

Political uncertainty in Kosovo has also delayed
the much-needed Pristina and Belgrade dialogue.
Portugal urges both parties to start comprehensive
negotiations under the auspices of the European Union,
with a view to settle all of their differences in the spirit
of General Assembly resolution 64/298, and to do so at
the earliest possible occasion. This would undoubtedly
be in the interests of both Pristina and Belgrade, and of
the region and Europe as a whole.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/43) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) presents
us with a picture of a country that is facing serious
challenges on its way — as we all hope — to peace and

11-23603

Beyond the elections, other facts remain — more
enduring and far-reaching in their consequences.
Incidents between communities still occur, with
victims on both sides, and other elements that may

23

S/PV.6483

trigger new tensions abound. UNMIK’s efforts and
dedication to ensure peace and security must be duly
noted and appreciated. We therefore urge all actors on
the ground to work with UNMIK fully and in good
faith and to engage seriously in the process to settle
their differences.
These incidents notwithstanding, it must be said
that several indicators are encouraging, especially with
respect to the development of municipal power. We
hope that further investment in education and human
and financial resources will generate strengthened
institutions and capabilities. We expect that national
and local authorities will find balanced solutions to the
issues that inevitably arise between the communities.
I would also like to stress the importance of the
ongoing cooperation between Kosovo authorities and
EULEX regarding the rule of law. Again, the task
facing Kosovo’s Administration is one of institutionand capacity-building. We commend and support the
efforts of the European Union Special Representative
in this context.
Concerning the report of Mr. Dick Marty to the
Council of Europe, I took note of the Special
Representative’s references to the seriousness of these
allegations and I paid careful attention to what Minister
Jeremić said to the Council on this subject. I took
special note of his comments concerning the possibly
wider regional dimension of this issue and the need to
extend effective protection to witnesses. The
allegations are indeed extremely disturbing, and if
proved would amount to particularly despicable crimes.
They deserve a very thorough investigation. We
welcome the readiness expressed by Kosovo and
Albania to cooperate in that regard.
We fully support EULEX’s investigations on this
matter that are already under way, and we hope that
they will allow for a full clarification of the allegations.
But we also believe that we must follow this issue
closely and keep an open mind on any future action
that the investigations may require. In line with what
we have always maintained concerning other serious
crimes, whether in the region or elsewhere, impunity is
not only intolerable in itself, but also an obstacle to
peace and to a healthy and cooperative political
environment.
The work done by UNMIK in securing religious
and cultural sites in Kosovo stands out as a particularly
successful aspect of this Mission’s mandate. It can be a
very important contribution to interfaith contact and

24

dialogue. Portugal expresses its optimism towards the
continued good results of UNMIK’s work on this issue.
We also praise the role played by the Council of
Europe’s Reconstruction Implementation Commission,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, KFOR and EULEX so that Kosovo’s rich
heritage, which shines well beyond its borders, is
safeguarded from turmoil and endures for centuries to
come.
To conclude, the report we are discussing today
reminds us once more how important it is for Kosovo
and Serbia to start a European Union-facilitated
dialogue. It will eventually close this chapter of their
history, reinforce peace and stability in the Balkans and
help the whole region in fulfilling its European
integration objections.
Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): I would like to join
others in thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zannier for his briefing. I would
also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for his country’s
perspective on the situation in Kosovo. My delegation
has carefully listened to the statement of Kosovo’s
representative, Mrs. Vlora Çitaku.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/43) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) has brought out in detail the
prevailing situation there. We note that with UNMIK’s
facilitation, Belgrade and Pristina have continued to
make progress on some issues, including missing
persons and religious and cultural heritage. We
encourage the two parties to address all of the
remaining issues seriously and expeditiously. UNMIK
should also continue its work on facilitating
communication between the two parties.
We note from the report of the Secretary-General
that, although the overall security situation in Kosovo
is relatively calm, the continued prevalence of
individual as well as organized crime makes the
security situation potentially volatile. In this
connection, the report of the Council of Europe’s
Special Rapporteur, Mr. Dick Marty, which contains
allegations of inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs, merits examination. We
suggest that a thorough and impartial investigation be
carried out by an entity legally empowered to look into
all aspects of the matter.

11-23603

S/PV.6483

The Secretary-General’s report shows that a
considerable number of tasks under pillars 1 and 2 —
concerning police, justice and civil administration,
which are monitored by UNMIK — remain to be
accomplished. Accordingly, we urge the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue to
implement UNMIK’s mandate.
We call on all parties to cooperate fully with
UNMIK and to facilitate its work. We hope that all the
issues concerning Kosovo will be resolved peacefully
through consultation and dialogue. We also support the
extension of UNMIK’s mandate so that it can continue
to work towards the fulfilment of the tasks mandated to
it by the Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Brazil.
I welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and thank him for his remarks. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his briefing, and Mrs. Vlora Çitaku for her
remarks.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General. It is
worth recalling that, under resolution 1244 (1999), the
holding of elections is one of the main responsibilities
of the international civil presence in Kosovo. Attention
also needs to be paid to the remarks made by
international observers regarding complaints and
allegations of irregularities in the voting. The
accusations that the elections in Kosovo failed to meet
international standards need to be investigated.
The Secretary-General’s report also highlights a
number of violent incidents affecting members of the
international community in Kosovo. Although the
overall security situation in Kosovo remains relatively
calm, attacks targeted specifically against international
officers and United Nations staff members cannot be
tolerated. Brazil shares the Secretary-General’s
concern over the continued misrepresentation of
UNMIK’s activities in northern Kosovo and open
challenges to its authority. This situation poses a
concrete threat to United Nations personnel and creates
difficulties in the fulfilment of UNMIK’s mandate.
We also take note of Mr. Jeremić’s comments
regarding the investigation of allegations of inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo. The severity of such allegations
cannot be dismissed. A proper and credible
investigation must be carried out. It would be
interesting to explore possible options that take into
account the need to involve various jurisdictions and
the importance of ensuring consistency with resolution
1244 (1999).

Stability in the Balkans is a matter of serious
concern to Brazil. We see progress and commend the
efforts that have been made to ensure that the region
remains stable and on its way towards further
integration and cooperation. Brazil continues to believe
that resolution 1244 (1999) offers an adequate
framework for a negotiated settlement of the dispute.
We are confident that a fair and legitimate solution can
be reached under the auspices of the Security Council,
In conclusion, we are convinced that the Council
consistent with its authority and primary responsibility should continue to keep political developments in
in matters pertaining to international peace and security. Kosovo under close review. It is our hope that the
Brazil supports the invaluable work carried out European Union-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission and Belgrade can take place without further delay. As
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in implementing its Security envisaged in General Assembly resolution 64/298,
Council mandate. UNMIK has a key role to play in adopted in September 2010, it is vital that these
Kosovo under the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), negotiations bear fruit. Dialogue is the best way to
particularly in promoting engagement among Pristina, resolve outstanding issues and to ensure peace, security
Belgrade and other relevant stakeholders. I wish to and stability.
comment on recent political developments on the
I now resume my functions as President of the
ground that may have an impact on efforts towards a Council.
final settlement.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The 12 December elections for the Kosovo The Security Council has thus concluded the present
Assembly were held in a peaceful atmosphere, as stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
stressed in the report of the Secretary-General
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
(S/2011/43). We are concerned, however, by the fact
that UNMIK did not participate in the preparations for
these elections and that they were not called by the
11-23603

25
