S/2016/391

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 April 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 26 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the thirty-first monthly report of the
Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013). The report covers the period from 24 March to 21 April 2016.
With regard to the destruction of the chemical weapons production facilities
declared by the Syrian Arab Republic, the situation remains unchanged. One hangar
has yet to be destroyed, given that the prevailing secur ity environment continues to
prevent access thereto. In addition, also as a result of the security situation, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat remains unable to confirm the condition of two other
stationary above-ground facilities. However, I take note of the report of the Director
General, in which he states that the Syrian Arab Republic is exploring the
possibility of safe access to one of the two stationary facilities.
With regard to the declaration and related submissions of the Syrian Arab
Republic, I welcome the preparations of the Director General, along with the
Declaration Assessment Team, to engage with senior Syrian officials. It is my hope
that the unresolved issues, including gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies, can be
successfully addressed. In that regard, I take note that the Director General has also
provided an information note on the review by the Technical Secretariat of the
declaration and related disclosures of the Syrian Arab Republic.
I must reiterate my deep concern over the continuing allegations of the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, for which there can be no
justification and for which those responsible must be held accountable. I note that
the OPCW fact-finding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic continues to study all
available information relating to such allegations.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2235 (2015), the OPCW -United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism is proceeding with the investigation of the
nine selected cases. During the reporting period, the Leadership Panel travelled to
Berlin and Tehran for consultations with government officials. Furthermore, the
Panel travelled to Washington, D.C., on 25 April. The Mechanism continued to
receive information relevant to its investigation from Member States. In addition,
and in accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution 2235 (2015), it further engaged
with non-governmental organizations and other entities operating in the Syrian Arab
Republic or with knowledge about the nine cases under investig ation. The
Mechanism has also engaged the services of two forensic institutes that will assist it
in its work as necessary.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-06937 (E)

290416

*1606937*

S/2016/391

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian Chemical Weapons Programme” prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the OPCW Executive Council Decision EC -M33/DEC.1, and the United Nations Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), both
dated 27 September 2013, for transmission to the Security Council (see enclosure I).
My report covers the period from 24 March 2016 to 21 April 2016 and also covers
the reporting requirements of the Executive Council decision EC -M-34/DEC.1,
dated 15 November 2013. Please also find attached an information note on the
review by the Technical Secretariat of the declaration and related disclosures of the
Syrian Arab Republic (see enclosure II).
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/9

16-06937

S/2016/391

Enclosure I
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]

Note by the Director General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementation of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled “Reports
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February
2015) noting the Director-General’s intent to include reports of the Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM), along with information on the Council’s discussion thereof, as part
of the monthly reporting pursuant to United Nations Security Council resolution
2118 (2013). Similarly, the Council, at its Eight -First Session, adopted a decision
entitled “Report by the Director-General Regarding the Declaration and Related
Submissions by the Syrian Arab Republic” (EC-81/DEC.4, dated 23 March 2016),
noting the Director-General’s intent to provide information on the implementation
of that decision.
4.
This, the thirty-first monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance with
the aforementioned Council decisions, and includes information relevant to the
period from 24 March to 21 April 2016.

Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the
requirements of EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
5.

Progress by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:
(a)

16-06937

As reported previously, with respect to the 27 chemical weapons
production facilities (CWPFs) declared by the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Secretariat has verified the destruction of 24, and three remain to be
verified as destroyed. The security situation continues to prevent safe
access to destroy one aircraft hangar and to confirm the condition of at
least one of the two stationary above-ground facilities. The Syrian Arab

3/9

S/2016/391

Republic is exploring the possibility to safely access the other stationary
facility.
(b)

On 15 April 2016, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
twenty-ninth monthly report (EC-82/P/NAT.2, dated 15 April 2016)
regarding activities on its territory related to the destruction of its
CWPFs, as required by paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1.

(c)

The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary cooperation
in accordance with the implementation of subparagraph 1(e) of EC -M33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7 of United Nations Security Council resoluti on
2118 (2013).

Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
6.
As reported previously, all the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab Republic
that were removed from its territory in 2014 have now been destroyed.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
7.
The Director-General has continued to communicate with senior officials of
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by the Coun cil at its
Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated 7 March 2014), the
Secretariat, on behalf of the Director-General, has continued to brief States Parties
in The Hague on its activities.
8.
The Secretariat and the Syrian authorities have maintained their ongoing
cooperation on outstanding issues regarding the Syrian initial declaration, as
encouraged by the Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of EC-76/6,
dated 11 July 2014).
9.
In accordance with Council decision EC-81/DEC.4, the Director-General,
together with the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), has begun preparations to
engage senior Syrian officials in order to address the unresolved issues, including
gaps, inconsistencies, and discrepancies, in the Syrian Arab Republ ic’s declaration
and related submissions, which were identified in the Note by the Director -General,
EC-81/HP/DG.1 (dated 22 February 2016).
10. At the same time, the DAT, in continuation of its efforts to verify the accuracy
and completeness of the Syrian Arab Republic declaration, will also review the
analytical results of the samples taken during its fourteenth visit, which took place
in January 2016, before engaging the Syrian authorities. The analytical results are
expected to arrive from the designated laboratories in the near future.
11. The Steering Committee, which is comprised of representatives from the
OPCW, the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), and the Syrian
Arab Republic, discussed amending the tripartite agreement during its meeting in
Beirut held from 5 to 7 April 2016. Notably, the amendments would accommodate
the extension of support provided by UNOPS to the OPCW mission until the end of
November 2016, and the logistical and administrative support that UNOPS will
provide to the OPCW-UN Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). Also discussed was
the extension of the agreements with contractors involved in the delayed destruction
of the remaining aircraft hangar (CWPF). It is noted that, as at the cut -off date of

4/9

16-06937

S/2016/391

this report, one OPCW staff member was deployed as part of the OPCW mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic.
Supplementary resources
12. As previously reported, a Trust Fund for Syria Missions was established in
November 2015 to support the FFM and other remaining activities, such as those of
the DAT. As at the cut-off date of this report, contribution agreements totalling
EUR 5.6 million had been concluded with Canada, Chile, Finland, France,
Germany, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Switzerland, and the European
Union. Pledges from other donors have been made and are currently being
processed.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
13. In the reporting period, the FFM continued to study all available information
relating to allegations of use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, and will
be guided in its work by Council decisions EC-M-48/DEC.1 and EC-M-50/DEC.1
(dated 23 November 2015), and Security Council resolution 2209 (2015). The OPCW
also continues to extend its full cooperation and support to the JIM.
Conclusion
14. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will be on the implementation of the Council’s March 2016 decision
(EC-81/DEC.4), as well as on the destruction and verification of the remaining
aircraft hangar and confirmation of the status of the two stationary above -ground
facilities.

16-06937

5/9

S/2016/391

Enclosure II
Review by the Technical Secretariat of the declaration and related
disclosures of the Syrian Arab Republic
1.
This information note offers the results of the review of the declaration and
related submissions of the Syrian Arab Republic conducted thus far by the OPCW
Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) of the Organisat ion of the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Background
2.
On 14 September 2013, the Syrian Arab Republic deposited with the Secretary
General of the United Nations its instrument of accession to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling, and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on their Destruction (hereinafter “the Convention”) 1 and declared that
it would comply with its stipulations and observe them faithfully and sincerely,
applying the Convention provisionally, pending its entry into force for the Syrian
Arab Republic.
3.
Accordingly, on 19 September 2013, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted a
disclosure of its chemical weapons programme.
4.
At its Thirty-Third Meeting, held on 27 September 2013, the Executive
Council of the OPCW (hereinafter “the Council”) adopted a decision entitle d
“Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons” (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated 27 September
2013). This was followed by the adoption on the same day by the United Nations
Security Council of resolution 2118 (2013), which endorsed the decision by the
Council. The provisions of these two documents and the participation of the Syrian
Arab Republic in the Convention established the framework for the elimination of
the Syrian Arab Republic’s chemical weapons programme.
5.
As required under the Council’s decision (EC-M-33/DEC.1), on 2 October
2013 the Syrian Arab Republic submitted further information, to supplement that
provided on 19 September 2013, as well as its initial declaration required by Article
III of the Convention on 23 October 2013; this was followed by several a mendments
(dated 28 October 2013, 21 November 2013, 5 December 2013, 16 January 2014,
6 February 2014, 13 February 2014, 7 March 2014, 16 April 2014, 7 July 2014, and
14 July 2014).
Work undertaken by the Secretariat
6.
The Secretariat has undertaken a continuous review of all information
provided by the Syrian Arab Republic in order to ensure that all declaration related
requirements established under the Convention, as well as the above -mentioned
Council decision (EC-M-33/DEC.1), have been met. As a result, the Secretariat
identified a number of gaps and inconsistencies, which were raised with the Syrian
Arab Republic.
7.
To support Syria clarify the inconsistencies noted in its declaration, the
Director General decided to assemble Declaration Assessment Team (DAT),
__________________
1

6/9

The Convention entered into force for the Syrian Arab Republic on 14 October 2013.

16-06937

S/2016/391

comprised of technical experts from within the Secretariat in order to facilitate the
process of engagement with the Syrian Arab Republic on outstanding issues with
respect to its declaration and later submissions. The Syrian officials expr essed their
willingness to enter into constructive sessions with the DAT and as a result the team
first deployed to Damascus in April 2014 and later on for a second mission in May
2014.
8.
Subsequent technical discussions between the DAT and Syrian author ities
from late June to early July 2014 resulted in Syria’s submission of an amendment to
its initial declaration. In this amendment, Syria declared a facility for the production
of ricin as a Chemical Weapons Production Facility. The amendment also includ ed
information regarding three other chemical weapons -related facilities for research
and development.
9.
Given the absence of supporting documentation, in September 2014,
“additional transparency measures” were agreed upon between the Secretariat and
the Syrian Arab Republic, as follows:
(a)

facilitating visits to sites/locations of interest;

(b)

providing written statements prepared and signed by active participants;

and
(c) making relevant personnel from all structures of the chemical weapons
programme available for interviews with the Secretariat.
10. Making use of these additional transparency measures, the DAT has conducted
to date 25 site visits, during which it collected 88 samples in order to validate the
declared nature of activities at those sites. The samples were sealed, and transported
out of the Syrian Arab Republic for further analysis. Appropriate measures to ensure
the integrity and chain of custody of the samples were taken every time samples
were collected and throughout the transportation and analysis process in accordance
with normal working instructions and standard operating procedures set forth by the
Secretariat. The samples have been analysed at OPCW designated laboratories. Each
of the laboratories employed throughout this process has passed rigorous
proficiency tests, following the criteria laid down by the International Organisation
for Standardisation (ISO) 17025 quality system and OPCW quality management
system in order to ensure a high level of confidence and credibility of the analytical
findings and thus qualify as OPCW designated Laboratories. 2 In each instance, the
results of the analysis of samples were shared with the Syrian Arab Republic in a
timely manner. Any anomalies identified by the Secretariat were brought to t he
attention of the Syrian Arab Republic and thoroughly discussed during subsequent
meetings.
11. The Secretariat has also received written statements and letters from the
Syrian Arab Republic addressing various issues under discussion, as well as a short
piece of video footage in relation to one of the topics.
12. In addition to the above, the DAT has conducted 70 interviews with
individuals performing various functional roles within the Syrian chemical weapons
programme. Approximately 94 hours of audio recording were generated from these
__________________
2

16-06937

The results of the last batch of samples collected in January 2016 are yet to be received by the
Secretariat.

7/9

S/2016/391

interviews. The information obtained in interviews has been used, in conjunction
with other information received from the Syrian Arab Republic, to assess the
accuracy of the information submitted by the Syrian Arab Republi c. While most of
the information received in interviews is in line with the narrative provided by the
Syrian Arab Republic, inconsistencies and discrepancies have been identified and
subsequently discussed with representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic.
13. As this work of the DAT progressed over the course of the last more than two
years, new questions have arisen (particularly as a result of the analysis of samples
collected during site visits) concerning a number of gaps, inconsistencies, and
discrepancies with respect to the declaration and related submissions by the Syrian
Arab Republic.
14. The Council at its Eightieth Session in October 2015 underscored the substantial
unresolved issues, including the gaps, inconsistencies, and discrepancies ident ified by
the Secretariat in its report (EC-80/P/S/1) and stressed the importance of fully
verifying that the declaration and related submissions of the Syrian Arab Republic are
accurate and complete, as required by the Convention and EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013. Furthermore, the Council requested the Secretariat and the Syrian
Arab Republic to expedite their efforts to resolve these gaps, inconsistencies, and
discrepancies and further requested that the Director-General provide a report to the
Council before its Eighty-First Session that details all unresolved issues, in particular
specifying those for which no further progress has been possible.
15. In line with this request, on 22 February 2016, the Director -General issued a
report on the work of the DAT which indicated that gaps, inconsistencies, and
discrepancies remained with respect to chemical weapons facilities, activities,
munitions, and chemical materials and outlined 17 unresolved issues, for nine of
which no further progress had been possible (EC-81/HP/DG.1, dated 22 February
2016). The report concluded that the Secretariat was unable at that time to verify
fully that the declaration and related submissions of the Syrian Arab Republic are
accurate and complete, as required by the Convention and EC-M-33/DEC.1.
16. Further to that, at its Eighty-First session in March 2016, the Council
considered and adopted a decision on the above-mentioned report (EC-81/DEC.4,
dated 23 March 2016), in which it expressed concern regarding the findings of t he
above mentioned report of the Director-General and requested the Secretariat,
through the Declaration Assessment Team, to continue its efforts, on an expedited
basis, to verify the accuracy and completeness of the declaration and related
disclosures of the Syrian Arab Republic, and to address the gaps, inconsistencies,
and discrepancies it has identified.
17. It also requested the Director-General, in parallel with the efforts of the
Declaration Assessment Team, to meet with officials of the Syrian Arab Republic in
order to address the unresolved issues as well as to underscore the importance of fully
verifying that the declaration and related submissions of the Syrian Arab Republic are
accurate and complete, as required by the Convention and EC-M-33/DEC.1.
18. In light of this request, the Director General invited officials and relevant
Syrian experts to high-level consultations on the assessment of the declaration and
related submissions of the Syrian Arab Republic. These consultations will consist of
a four-day meeting at OPCW headquarters in The Hague, the Netherlands, between
27 and 30 April 2016.

8/9

16-06937

S/2016/391

19. The Director-General will inform the Executive Council of the outcome of
these consultations with the Syrian authorities in advance of its Eighty -Second
Session in July 2016.
20. In line with the decision of the Council (EC-81/DEC.4), the Director-General
will continue to include as part of his monthly reports to the Security Council made
through the Secretary-General pursuant to United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013) further information on the implementation of the afore mentioned Council decision.

16-06937

9/9
