A/RES/75/257 B

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 July 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 92
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia –
residual functions

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 July 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.107 and A/75/L.107/Add.1)]

75/257.

Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia –
residual functions
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 75/257 A of 31 December 2020,
Recalling also that the expenses of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia shall be defrayed in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia
concerning the Prosecution under Cambodian Law of Crimes Committed during the
Period of Democratic Kampuchea (the Agreement) 2 and that the expenses to be
defrayed by the United Nations in accordance with those provisions shall be borne by
voluntary contributions from the international community, in accordance with
resolution 57/228 B of 13 May 2003,
Welcoming the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Royal Government of
Cambodia to conclude a framework for the completion of the work of the
Extraordinary Chambers, including with regard to the drawdown of activities and the
residual functions requiring performance,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 3

__________________

Resolution 75/257, in section I of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/75/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 75/257 A.
2
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2329, No. 41723.
3
A/75/809.
1

21-09408 (E)

150721

*2109408*

Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia –
residual functions

A/RES/75/257 B

1.
Approves the draft Addendum to the Agreement on the Transitional
Arrangements and the Completion of Work of the Extraordinary Chambers contained
in the annex to the present resolution;
2.
Urges the Secretary-General and the Royal Government of Cambodia to
take all the measures necessary to allow the draft Addendum referred to in paragraph 1
to enter into force in a timely manner, and to implement it fully after its entry into force;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh session on the implementation of the present resolution.
90th plenary meeting
7 July 2021

Annex
Draft Addendum to the Agreement between the United Nations
and the Royal Government of Cambodia concerning the
prosecution under Cambodian law of crimes committed during
the period of Democratic Kampuchea on the Transitional
Arrangements and the Completion of Work of the
Extraordinary Chambers
Recalling the Agreement between the United Nations and the Royal Government
of Cambodia concerning the prosecution under Cambodian law of crimes committed
during the period of Democratic Kampuchea, done on 6 June 2003 at Phnom Penh
(hereinafter the “Agreement”);
Whereas the parties to the Agreement agree that upon the completion of all
judicial proceedings under Article 1 of the Agreement, the Extraordinary Chambers
will need to carry out a number of essential residual functions identified in this
Addendum;
Whereas the parties to the Agreement are convinced that in view of the
substantially reduced nature of the residual functions, the Extraordinary Chambers
should be comprised of such number of staff that is commensurat e with its reduced
functions;
Whereas the parties to the Agreement have engaged in consultations on
transitional arrangements for the completion of the work of the Extraordinary
Chambers and on the performance of residual functions;
Now therefore the United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia have
agreed as follows:
Article 1
Transitional Arrangements
Upon the completion of proceedings before any chamber of the Extraordinary
Chambers, all judges of that Chamber shall be de-installed from the Extraordinary
Chambers. Following their de-installation, the judges shall be remunerated on a prorata basis for any work performed, and they shall work remotely except when required
to be present at the Extraordinary Chambers at the request of the Pres ident of the
Chamber.

2/4

21-09408

Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia –
residual functions

A/RES/75/257 B

Article 2
Residual Functions
1.
Upon the completion of the proceedings under Article 1 of the Agreement,
including any appeals related thereto before the Supreme Court Chamber, the
Extraordinary Chambers shall continue to carry out the following functions for an
initial period of three years: review applications and conduct proceedings for revision
of final judgments; provide for the protection of victims and witnesses; sanction or
refer to the appropriate authorities any wilful interference with the administration of
justice or provision of false testimony; supervise the enforcement of sentences as well
as monitor the treatment of convicted prisoners; maintain, preserve and manage its
archives, including the declassification of documents and materials; respond to
requests for access to documents; disseminate information to the public regarding the
Extraordinary Chambers; and monitor the enforcement of reparations awarded to
Civil Parties, as required.
2.
The United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia shall review the
progress of these functions after the initial three-year period, following which the
Extraordinary Chambers will continue to perform these functions, or some part
thereof, for a further period to be determined between the parties.
3.
An application for revision of final judgment may only be filed during the
lifetime of the convicted person by the convicted person or the co -prosecutors.
4.
If a convicted person is eligible for commutation of sentence, ear ly release, or
parole, the Royal Government of Cambodia shall notify the Extraordinary Chambers
accordingly. There shall only be a commutation of sentence, early release, or parole
if the Supreme Court Chamber so decides on the basis of the interests of ju stice and
general principles of law.
5.
Judges, co-prosecutors, defence counsels and Civil Party Lead Co -Lawyers
shall be remunerated on a pro-rata basis when required to perform the functions
identified in paragraph 1 of this article, and they shall work remotely except when
their functions require their attendance in person at the Extraordinary Chambers. In
the case of the judges, this would be at the request of the President of their respective
chambers. Any judicial plenary sessions shall be conducted remotely and amendments
of the Internal Rules shall be decided remotely by written procedure.
6.
Upon the commencement of the functions identified in paragraph 1 of this
article, the Secretary-General shall undertake to provide a list of nominees for
international judges further to paragraph 5 of Article 3 of the Agreement to ensure
that there are a sufficient number of international judges available to carry out the
functions under paragraph 1 of this article should any appointed international judge
be unavailable to serve when required. The Royal Government of Cambodia shall
similarly ensure the availability of Cambodian judges should any appointed
Cambodian judge be unavailable to serve when required.
Article 3
Archives
1.
The United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia agree that it is vital
to ensure that the archives of the Extraordinary Chambers are preserved in accordance
with international standards and that they are as broadly accessible as possible.
2.
For the purpose of preserving and promoting the legacy of the Extraordinary
Chambers, as part of its residual functions, the Extraordinary Chambers shall provide
electronic access to, and printed copies of, the public archives to the public.

21-09408

3/4

Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia –
residual functions

A/RES/75/257 B

3.
The United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia shall each have a
complete set of the archives of the Extraordinary Chambers, including all documents
and materials. Upon the completion of the proceedings under Article 1 of the
Agreement, the United Nations and the Royal Government of Camb odia shall each
receive a complete set of the public archives. Upon the completion of the residual
functions under Article 2 of this Addendum, the United Nations and the Royal
Government of Cambodia shall each receive any additional public documents and
materials, as well as a complete set of classified documents and materials.
Article 4
Approval
To be binding on the parties, the present Addendum must be approved by the
General Assembly of the United Nations and ratified by the Kingdom of Cambodia.
The Royal Government of Cambodia will make its best endeavors to obtain this
ratification by the earliest possible date.
Article 5
Application within Cambodia
The present Addendum shall apply as law within the Kingdom of Cambodia
following its ratification in accordance with the relevant provisions of the internal
law of the Kingdom of Cambodia regarding competence to conclude treaties.
Article 6
Entry into force
The present Addendum shall enter into force on the day after both parties have
notified each other in writing that the legal requirements for the entry into force have
been complied with.
Done at [place] on [day, month] 2021 in two originals in both the Khmer and English
languages. In a case of divergence, the English text shall prevail.
For the Royal Government of Cambodia

4/4

For the United Nations

21-09408
