United Nations

S/PV.6658

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6658th meeting
Monday, 14 November 2011, 4.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moraes Cabral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Portugal)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Assaf
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Tatham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-59163 (E)

*1159163*

S/PV.6658

country visits so as to enhance cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
increase exchanges of information, engage in joint
meetings and maintain reciprocal representation.

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Cuba, Israel, Japan, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Spain, Switzerland and the Syrian Arab
Republic to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At the outset, Ambassador Baso Sangqu will
make a joint statement on behalf of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004), 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), and 1373 (2001). Following
that joint statement, the Council will hear briefings by
the Chairs of those three Committees.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Baso Sangqu.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): On behalf of the
Chairs of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
dealing with the issue of terrorism, I have the honour
to update the Security Council on the continued
cooperation among the three Committees and their
expert groups, as requested by the Council in its
resolutions 1963 (2010), 1977 (2011) and 1989 (2011)
and in earlier resolutions.
The three Committees continue to attach great
importance to coordination and cooperation between
their respective expert groups, namely, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and the Expert Group of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committees welcome the continued efforts of the
expert groups to cooperate on outreach activities and

2

The Chairs are now providing updates for the
comparative table illustrating the mandates and areas
of competence of the three committees and their expert
groups, which notably reflects the adoption of
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011) on the split of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban components of the 1267
sanctions Committee.
In the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), a
special meeting was held to commemorate the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) 10 years ago.
Joint and coordinated outreach activities and
country visits are important tools for the three
Committees in facilitating the full implementation of
their respective mandates. Those tools strengthen
dialogue with Member States, help to improve their
understanding of the distinct yet complementary
mandates of the three Committees, and assist in the
implementation of the relevant resolutions.
Cooperation among the expert groups has been
maintained and has increased in some areas. Since
May, all three expert groups have been represented in
more than a dozen workshops and other outreach
events, while two of the groups attended additional
meetings, such as the recent workshop sponsored by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), held from 27 to 29 September in Astana,
Kazakhstan, which focused on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in Central Asia. During that
workshop, the Expert Group of the 1540 Committee
and the CTED experts demonstrated not only the
complementary mandates of the CTC and the 1540
Committee with respect to the illicit movement of
weapons and related nuclear, chemical and biological
materials, but also how coordinated efforts are
essential to assisting the Central Asian States in coping
with existing illicit trafficking.
Other examples include a meeting held on 6 and
7 July in St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, for heads
of special services and security agencies, which was
jointly attended by the Chairs of the CTC and the 1540
Committee, as well as by the Executive Director of
CTED and the Coordinator of the Monitoring Team.

11-59163

S/PV.6658

When another United Nations body organizes a
regional workshop, the three expert groups often
participate, as in the case of the workshops sponsored
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; the
subregional workshop on the Security Council
resolutions against terrorism and their implementation
mechanisms, held in Doha, Qatar, on 17 and 18 May;
and the Arab regional workshop on monitoring and
securing movement of goods and individuals from
terrorist threats, held in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, from
6 to 8 June.
The expert groups also participated in the
workshop sponsored by the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) on the regional
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in Eastern Africa, held in Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia, on 27 and 28 July.
An example of jointly attended events hosted by
non-United Nations bodies is the periodic meeting of
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), in which the
three expert groups collaborated in the negotiation of
FATF standards in terms of how they relate to the work
of the three Committees.
Several of the country visits organized by CTED
have included the participation of the 1267 Monitoring
Team and have been mutually beneficial in advancing
the implementation process. The 1540 Committee’s
experts are now able, for the first time, to join a
country visit organized by CTED, to be held from 21 to
25 November in Myanmar, where an intensive dialogue
will be held with the relevant officials. We hope that
there will be future occasions on which the 1540
Committee can reciprocate.
The three Committees have welcomed the
progress made in applying the common strategy paper
of the three expert groups on cooperation with
intergovernmental
organizations,
which
each
Committee had taken note of last year. The coordinated
approach agreed among the expert groups with respect
to selected organizations was enriched by the
significant contribution of the representative of CTED
and the 1267 Monitoring Team at major conferences
late in 2010 and during 2011, which brought together a
large number of international, regional and subregional
organizations to enhance cooperation with the Security
Council Committees and among organizations
themselves to promote the full implementation of the
respective resolutions.

11-59163

The outcome of those interactions is now being
used by the expert groups to refine the modalities for
information exchange, within the existing constraints
of confidentiality, to enhance and sustain coordination
and to further explore the potential of subregional
cooperation.
The CTITF continues to provide the three expert
groups with a platform for cooperation, not only
among themselves but also with more than 30 United
Nations
system
organizations,
agencies
and
programmes concerned with aspects of counterterrorism.
The CTITF retreat held on 12 and 13 May
provided a forum in which to take stock of the progress
made in the coordination and implementation of joint
activities. The expert groups contribute to the work of
several CTITF working groups. The three expert
groups actively participate in the relevant CTITF
working groups. For example, the 1540 Committee
experts collaborated with the Working Group on
Preventing and Responding to Weapons of Mass
Destruction Attacks.
The expert groups also participate in the
Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
initiative, which is co-chaired by CTED. CTED and the
Monitoring Team have also assumed leading roles in
some working groups. For example, CTED is co-Chair
of the Working Group on Border Management and the
1267 Monitoring Team is co-Chair of the Working
Group on Countering the Use of the Internet for
Terrorist Purposes.
Exchange of information among expert groups is
carried out on a regular basis. They have been sharing
information on forthcoming meetings and relevant
activities. CTED has regularly shared with the other
groups its monthly reports to the CTC, including
information on its missions that the Executive Director
submits to the CTC, while the 1540 experts have begun
posting highlights of summary reports on outreach
events on the 1540 website. The three expert groups
continue to hold joint meetings when needed, both
between the heads of each team and between the expert
teams, in order to prepare them for country visits and
relevant workshops and to exchange information on
particular themes or activities in specific regions or
countries.
CTC and the 1540 Committee working group on
cooperation with international organizations have

3

S/PV.6658

reciprocally extended invitations to their meetings
when they arrange briefings by visiting officials from
the inter-Governmental organizations or when thematic
briefings of mutual interest are held. An example of the
Monitoring Team’s active involvement was the town
hall meeting for the three expert groups held on
19 October at CTED premises for a briefing by the
coordinator of the Monitoring Team on the spread of
the Al-Qaida and Taliban aspects of the 1267 mandate.
The three expert groups were included in the special
meeting of 28 September on the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), where an
important outcome document was adopted on the basis
of the global survey on implementation of that
resolution.
Finally, in addition to invitations to the expert
groups to attend briefings of NATO or on border
control, both CTED and the monitoring teams
delivered a joint presentation this month on terrorism
prevention and countering incitement to terrorism
through the Internet.
In conclusion, terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction continue to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. It remains
important to maintain close cooperation and effective
coordination between the CTC, the 1267 Committee
and the 1540 Committee, as well as among the expert
groups. In that respect, the three Committees look
forward to receiving further guidance from the Security
Council on the areas of common interest in order to
better coordinate their efforts and facilitate
cooperation.
I now wish to speak on behalf of the 1540
Committee. Our main developments since the last joint
briefing in May (see S/PV.6536) have been the
adoption of our report on compliance with resolution
1540 (2004) through the achievement of the
implementation of its requirements, as mandated in
resolution 1810 (2008), as well as the adoption of the
tenth programme of work, before addressing other
recent activities of the Committee.
The 1540 Committee adopted its report on
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on
12 September (S/2011/579), and has submitted it to the
Security Council. Notably, the report finds that since
2008, more States have taken more measures to
implement almost every obligation or recommendation
in the resolution. While those trends parallel those seen

4

in the reports of the 1540 Committee in 2006 and 2008,
the 1540 Committee remains aware that much work
remains to be done, and that the urgency of the threat
remains considerable. Therefore, the Committee has
recommended that outreach to promote understanding
of the resolution should continue, with a focus on the
practical ways and means to help States take further
steps to implement the resolution.
On 17 June, the 1540 Committee approved its
tenth programme of work for the period until 31 May
2012. The programme of work incorporates the new
mandate and tasks for the 1540 Committee found in
resolution 1977 (2011). The programme of work
includes detailed objectives and tasks for the four
working groups of the 1540 Committee, as well as
procedures on how the 1540 Committee and the
working groups will operate.
Taking note of the adoption of resolution 1977
(2011) in April and the tenth programme of work
thereafter, the 1540 Committee has conducted activities
focused on implementation, cooperation with
international organizations, assistance, and outreach
and transparency since the joint briefing in May.
As to implementation, although the 1540
Committee did not receive any new first reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during the
past six months, it did receive additional information
on implementation of the resolution from Croatia, Peru
and Qatar. In September, France submitted a national
action plan on the implementation of the resolution.
Many other States have provided additional
information to the 1540 Committee or its experts
during country-specific dialogues and other activities.
In accordance with resolution 1977 (2011), the
1540 Committee increased its efforts to engage in
dialogue with States on their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2011). Based on a December 2010
invitation from the United States to conduct a country
visit and subsequent exchanges, from 12 to
16 September the 1540 Committee visited Washington,
D.C., where the Committee and experts met with
officials from nine Government departments and
several other Government bodies. The Committee and
experts were briefed on the current national measures
to implement the resolution, measures they intend to
take, and their perspective on effective practices. The
1540 Committee will work with the host country on
preparing a draft report on the visit. We can also reveal

11-59163

S/PV.6658

that since May, the Committee has also received letters
of invitation for country visits to Albania, Croatia and
Madagascar. The timing and other modalities for these
visits remain under discussion.

Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, along with a joint
appointment by the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat
and UNODC to a post that may help with the
implementation of the resolution in the region.

The 1540 Committee experts have engaged in
other country-specific missions, for example to
Indonesia, Kenya, and Mexico, in cooperation with the
Organization of American States, and anticipate that
the 1540 Committee will receive more requests for
such missions in the future.

The Committee agreed to allow experts to assist
the
Biological
Weapons
Convention
(BWC)
Implementation Support Unit in the development of the
BWC implementation guide. The Committee also
facilitated
the
development
of
potential
recommendations on combating proliferation financing
with the members of the Financial Action Task Force,
and contributed to the development of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central
Asia.

With respect to assistance, the 1540 Committee
continues to work on collecting and matching State
requests for assistance with offers of assistance, and on
possible next steps in its assistance efforts. Since the
previous briefing, the Committee has received official
information on assistance requests from Armenia,
Guyana and Mexico and on offers of assistance or the
status of assistance programmes from France, Hungary,
Mexico, Portugal and the United States. The
Committee updated a consolidated list of its formal
requests for assistance, which we agreed to share with
the Group of Eight Global Partnership working group
at a meeting in Paris, France, on 10 October.
The 1540 Committee has information on more
assistance requests made informally to it by national
authorities or where States have made requests through
other channels, such as in statements at meetings of
States parties of key non-proliferation treaties or
conventions, or submissions to other United Nations
bodies. Committee members currently have additional
assistance guidelines on match-making activities under
consideration that address procedures to conduct
match-making for assistance requests and to turn
informal requests into formal requests to the 1540
Committee.
With respect to cooperation with international,
regional and subregional organizations, since the last
briefing the 1540 Committee has engaged with many
of the international, regional and subregional
organizations that could provide assistance to it in the
implementation of resolution 1540. The Committee
continues to pursue its work with multilateral
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
In addition, the Committee received new
information on the status of points of contact from the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the United

11-59163

Further, 1540 Committee members and experts
participated in 1540 Committee-related activities with
other
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations and entities, such as the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Caribbean
Community, and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. The Committee has also received
a new commitment to its international efforts through a
United States-European Union joint statement on
resolution 1540 (2004), issued at a 23 October side
event on the resolution organized by the Government
of Poland on the margins of the First Committee.
With respect to outreach and transparency, the
Committee and its group of experts participated in
outreach events at the international, regional and
subregional levels to facilitate implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) over the past six months. These
included a regional workshop in Riyadh; an
international export control conference in Singapore; a
workshop on promoting the global instruments of
non-proliferation and disarmament in New York; the
meeting of the heads of special security agencies held
in St. Petersburg, Russia; a workshop on nuclear
safeguards and verification; a workshop on potential
nuclear security partnerships in South-East Asia in
Vienna; a counter-illicit trafficking workshop in
Tanzania; and an international symposium on
biosecurity and biosafety trends and solutions in Milan.

5

S/PV.6658

The 1540 Committee continues to develop its
media outreach strategy as well. During the country
visit to the United States, the representative of the
Chair made a press statement and participated in a
press conference about the visit. She also spoke at a
meeting with civil society organizations that included
participants from the media. This was done at the
request of the host country.

South Africa welcomes the introduction of sunset
clauses in resolution 1989 (2011), adopted in June.
South Africa welcomes the recommendations that were
proposed by Mr. Emmerson, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on human rights and counterterrorism, in particular concerning the provision of
concrete evidence as a requirement for the listing of
individuals and entities.

In order to promote transparency, the Chair
briefed a September meeting of the Africa Group on
the work of the Committee. Information notes on
events have been posted on the Committee website. We
have also begun to redesign the Committee website this
month, with the support of UNODA and the
Department of Public Information.

South Africa reiterates that any unauthorized
access to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),
materiel and facilities by non-State actors, including
for terrorist purposes, is a threat to international peace
and security. We should all be concerned over the
existence of networks dealing in the illicit transfer of
WMD-related technology that could be used in the
manufacture of such weapons. South Africa is therefore
pleased that, in resolution 1977 (2011), not only was
the mandate of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) extended for a period of
10 years, but the Council also recognized the risk that
non-State actors may acquire, develop, traffic in or use
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and their
means of delivery.
In short, we are hopeful that it is
a small contribution to the fight against the belief that
WMDs are legitimate instruments.

In conclusion, the Committee is discussing two
important tasks in line with resolution 1977 (2011).
The Committee intends to present recommendations
for the Committee and the Group of Experts in
accordance with paragraph 5 (b) of resolution 1977
(2011). The Committee remains engaged in discussions
on these recommendations, which will help define the
support capabilities available to the Committee with its
new 10-year mandate. The Committee also has begun
the process of drafting an annual report to review the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in line with
the requirements of operative paragraph 9 of resolution
1977 (2011). The completion of these two tasks will be
a major focus of the work of the 1540 Committee over
the next few months.
Permit me to make a few remarks in my national
capacity.
Much success has been achieved in the first
10 years since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001),
which, among other things, established the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) as the custodian of the
resolution. We also avail ourselves of the exceptional
support provided by the CTC and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate. South
Africa welcomes the commemorative event held on
28 September, which took stock of the first decade of
resolution 1373 (2001). The political declaration
adopted at that event is forward-looking and seeks to
address those areas that remain a challenge to
countering the scourge of terrorism globally. The event
further served as a useful means of exchange between
the Committee and the entire United Nations
membership on the work carried out by the Committee.

6

The President: I thank Ambassador Sangqu for
his briefings.
I shall now give the floor to Ambassador Peter
Wittig, Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): In today’s briefing, I
would like to provide an update on the activities and
achievements of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) since my last
briefing in May (see S/PV.6536).
In my briefing, I would like to focus on the
following three aspects: first, reflecting the current
threat of Al-Qaida; secondly, enhancing the
implementation of measures; and thirdly, implementing
the enhanced mandate of the Ombudsperson. A more
detailed version of this statement will be distributed as
hard copy today and made accessible on the
Committee’s website.
In June, the Security Council decided to split the
former list related to sanctions under resolution 1267

11-59163

S/PV.6658

(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban by
adopting resolution 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011). As
of 17 June, the Al-Qaida sanctions list has included
only the names of those individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with Al-Qaida. At
the same time, and in line with resolutions 1988 (2011)
and 1989 (2011), Taliban individuals formerly
designated under the 1267 consolidated list were
transferred to the sanctions regime established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) — the Taliban sanctions
Committee. As the Chairperson of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), I have
communicated my intention to brief this Council in
January 2012 for the first time since the establishment
of the Committee and thereafter every six months.
Since 17 June, the Committee, supported by the
Secretariat and the Monitoring Team, has been
committed to implementing step by step the provisions
of resolution 1989 (2011. The Committee aims at
concluding consultations over new guidelines before
the end of this month. The new guidelines will be made
available on the Committee’s website.
I turn now to the first aspect of the Committee’s
work that I should like to highlight, namely, reflecting
the current threat of Al-Qaida. The Committee
Members share the view that the threat posed by
Al-Qaida continues to evolve. Therefore, the
Committee, with the assistance of the Monitoring
Team, will continue to analyse the threat and take
necessary decisions to ensure that the evolving nature
of the threat is reflected adequately in the list in a
timely manner.
The Al-Qaida sanctions list currently has 344
entries, comprised of 253 Al-Qaida individuals and
91 Al-Qaida entities. Since the last Chairman’s briefing
to the Security Council, the Committee has added the
names of eight individuals and four entities. Over the
same period, it has amended eight entries based on
additional information gathered, and removed
12 individuals and three entities from the list.
The Committee will continue its efforts aimed at
keeping the list up to date. The Committee has
concluded its first specialized review of reportedly
deceased individuals pursuant to resolution 1904
(2009), and will conduct a number of specialized and
periodic reviews in line with the provision set out in
resolution 1989 (2011).

11-59163

The Committee relies on the cooperation of
Member States for the successful conduct of these
reviews. As Chair of the Committee, I would like to
thank all Member States for their continued willingness
to cooperate constructively in recent reviews. The
Committee will make every effort to devise review
modalities that will allow for an effective and credible
review process, without over-burdening Member
States.
Regarding linkages between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, the Committee has received the Monitoring
Team’s 90-day report pursuant to resolution 1989
(2011). The Committee continues to analyze the report
in a comprehensive manner and is drafting a position
paper on the recommendations presented by the
Monitoring Team, to be transmitted with the
Monitoring Team’s 90-day report to the Security
Council in due course. The Monitoring Team will
continue to report periodically on linkages between
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The Committee, recognizing
that there are linkages in some cases between Al-Qaida
and the Taliban, will continue to consider questions
related to those linkages in a comprehensive manner.
The Committee has continued its cooperation
with INTERPOL and has approved a new agreement on
areas of cooperation beyond the issuance of
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices.
Allow me to turn now to the second aspect of the
work of the Committee, namely, enhancing the
implementation of measures. The Committee has taken
note of information provided by the Monitoring Team
in accordance with its mandate regarding cases in some
Member States where sanctions have not yet been fully
implemented. The Committee will request the
Monitoring Team to provide custom-tailored proposals
for working together with the States in question on
further enhancing the implementation of sanctions
measures. The Committee would like to take advantage
of today’s open briefing and remind all Member States
of their obligation to fully implement the sanctions
measures stipulated in resolution 1989 (2011).
Coming to the third aspect of our work, namely,
fair and clear procedures and implementing the
enhanced mandate of the Ombudsperson. At the outset,
the Chair would like to highlight the fact that the
Committee, with the valuable assistance of the
Monitoring Team, has succeeded in making publicly

7

S/PV.6658

available narrative summaries of the reasons for all
listings on the Committee’s website in all the official
United Nations languages. That marks an important
milestone regarding transparency in the work of the
Committee.
With the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) the
Security Council established the Office of the
Ombudsperson. As of today, the Ombudsperson has
forwarded 18 de-listing requests to the Committee. She
has submitted eight comprehensive reports to the
Committee.
The
Committee
commends
the
Ombudsperson for her continued commitment and for
her substantive contributions to the work of the
Committee.
The Committee has concluded its consideration
of six of those comprehensive reports on specific
de-listing requests, resulting in the de-listing of four
petitioners. In one case the petitioner withdrew his
request before a decision of the Committee. That
clearly indicates that the Ombudsperson process
continues to deliver substantive results. The members
of the Committee also take note that the comprehensive
reports of the Ombudsperson provide the petitioner
with an opportunity to be heard and to present his or
her view of the matter. At the same time it is important
to note that the Committee has so far provided to the
Ombudsperson reasons for all its decisions on
de-listing requests submitted through the Office of the
Ombudsperson.
Through the adoption of resolution 1989 (2011)
the Security Council has further and significantly
strengthened the mandate of the Ombudsperson. The
Ombudsperson is now mandated to provide to the
Committee a recommendation on each de-listing
request. Since the adoption of those new procedures in
June 2011, two individuals have been de-listed on the
basis of the Ombudsperson’s recommendation.
Furthermore, resolution 1989 (2011) stipulates
that in cases where the Ombudsperson recommends
de-listing, the petitioner is removed from the Al-Qaida
sanctions list 60 days after the Committee has
completed its consideration of the comprehensive
report, unless there is consensus in the Committee to
retain the listing, or a member of the Committee
requests a referral to the Security Council. With that
provision the Security Council has substantially raised
the bar for members of the Committee who do not
share the Ombudsperson’s recommendations to de-list,

8

by requiring unanimity to retain the listing. The Chair
notes that this new provision has provided a new
dynamic of decision-making within the Committee.
Resolution 1989 (2011) introduced the same
decision-making process with a reversed consensus
requirement when de-listing requests are submitted by
designated States. That should similarly facilitate
de-listing in cases where an individual no longer meets
the listing criteria. So far the Committee has not
received a de-listing request pursuant to the new
provisions set out in paragraph 27 of resolution 1989
(2011).
The Committee would like to take this
opportunity today to encourage all Member States to
ensure that those important and substantial
improvements are made publicly known. At the same
time the Committee underlines that it is essential to
continue to ensure that procedures are fair and clear,
that the Office of the Ombudsperson is adequately
resourced and that its comprehensive reports are
translated into all official languages in a timely
manner. We are satisfied that work is underway to
ensure that that continues to be the case.
Allow me to conclude with some words on the
work of the Monitoring Team. The Monitoring Team
continues to actively support the Committee in all
areas of its work. On behalf of the Committee I would
like to thank Coordinator Richard Barrett and the entire
team for their dedicated work and commitment. A
detailed overview of the activities of the Monitoring
Team since the last briefing in May 2011 (see
S/PV.6536) will be included in the hard copy of the
Chair’s briefing and made accessible on the
Committee’s website.
That concludes my briefing, but allow me to add
some comments in my national capacity regarding the
work of the three counter-terrorism committees.
Regarding the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
Germany remains committed to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery to non-State actors. The 1540 Committee is an
important tool in this regard.
In our view, one priority is the provision of
assistance, channelled through the Committee. We also
attach great importance to the effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and resolution 1977 (2011).
Therefore Germany stands ready to continue

11-59163

S/PV.6658

supporting the Committee’s work by facilitating the
Working Group on monitoring and implementation. We
welcome its constructive and extremely informative
country visit to the United States in mid-September.
We expect the Committee to make more use of that
important new tool.
We are planning to organize a seminar related to
resolution 1540 (2004) in Germany in April 2012. The
German Foreign Ministry and other competent
agencies are jointly preparing an outreach event for
international, regional and subregional industry
associations, in close cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. We are
convinced that business associations can significantly
contribute to the implementation by States of
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). We will stay
in close touch with the Chair and other members of the
1540 Committee in the course of further preparations.
About the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, recognizing that promoting human rights
and countering terrorism are mutually reinforcing,
Germany would like to encourage that Committee and
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate to further enhance activities aimed at
promoting human rights while countering terrorism,
including through integrated country visits. Germany
would like to reiterate its view that the General
Assembly and the Counter-Terrorism Task Force, in the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, should play a leading role in the
field of terrorism prevention.
I wish to say a last word on the work of the 1267
and 1989 Committee — the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee. The Al-Qaida sanctions list must reflect
the evolving threat of the terrorist network. Germany
has a preference for keeping the focus of the list on key
activists. As Chair of the 1267 Committee and the 1989
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee, Germany attaches
great importance to ensuring that the Ombudsperson’s
current mandate is fully implemented and that the
Office of the Ombudsperson will continue to be
adequately resourced. Regarding implementation,
Germany would like to see the Committee, assisted by
the Monitoring Team, take a more proactive role in
working with Member States to ensure the full
implementation of measures.
The President: I thank Ambassador Wittig for his
briefing.

11-59163

I shall now give the floor to Ambassador Puri,
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I have had the
honour to chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
since the beginning of this year. It has been an
extremely eventful year, and today it gives me great
pleasure to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee since the previous briefing in May
(S/PV.6536).
Perhaps the most significant event of the year for
the Counter-Terrorism Committee was the special
meeting held on 28 September to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001). Representatives of Member States, United
Nations entities and other international and regional
organizations had a comprehensive exchange of views
on counter-terrorism during the day-long event, which
was held at United Nations Headquarters. The
Committee also adopted an outcome document in
which it urged
“all Member States to ensure zero tolerance
towards terrorism and take urgent action to
prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations through the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant international instruments relating
to terrorism”.
The outcome document will be circulated as a
document of the Security Council and is also available
on the Committee’s website. A separate event for
members of civil society was also held on the margins
of that meeting.
Coinciding with the special meeting, the
Committee issued an updated global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States, prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) at the request of the
Security Council on the basis of information available
as of 31 May. The survey provides a comprehensive
overview, on a regional as well as a thematic basis, of
the status of counter-terrorism efforts around the world
as they relate to the implementation of the resolution.
The survey evaluates Member States’ strengths
and
vulnerabilities,
identifies
gaps
in
the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and

9

S/PV.6658

recommends future action. It underscores, among other
concerns, the fact that Member States continue to
struggle to secure porous borders, monitor financial
systems, strengthen their judicial systems and
prosecute or extradite terrorist suspects. Inadequate
funding and training constrain the ability of many
States to be as effective as they would wish. The
survey expresses concern that terrorists are
increasingly turning to the Internet and other new
technologies to recruit, incite and raise funds for their
activities. Another area of concern is the link between
terrorist networks and organized crime.
Despite these challenges, however, States have
made significant progress since the adoption of the
resolution, which, over the past decade, has
strengthened solidarity and dialogue among Member
States in their efforts to counter the terrorist threat.
The survey offers several recommendations
aimed at strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). It is essential that Member
States address terrorism by means other than law
enforcement. Prevention is critical and a condition for
the effectiveness of any comprehensive strategy to
counter terrorism, as noted in the survey. Effective
responses will necessarily include other aspects of
legal and social policy. Development, education, social
integration, the rule of law and human rights are
among the key components of such responses.
The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant resolutions, especially 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010), and continues to play a
critical role in promoting and facilitating their
implementation. Pursuant to resolution 1963 (2010),
CTED is currently preparing a global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) for
submission by 31 December.
The Committee continues to focus on regionspecific discussions and on issues identified in the
2011 global survey. It also continues to organize and
participate in discussions and workshops on thematic
issues. Some of the major issues considered by the
Committee during the past six months include
facilitating the provision of technical assistance to
Member States, and the challenges involved in
adopting and implementing counter-terrorism measures
relating to legislation and law enforcement, with an
emphasis on prevention and emergency response.

10

With the Council’s permission, I would now like
to make a brief statement in my national capacity.
It is important that the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) continue to explore ways
and means to enhance their synergies in the fight
against terrorism. International cooperation and
concerted action against terrorists and their sponsors —
including the complete dismantling of terrorist safe
havens, sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures — are the critical
imperatives needed to defeat this scourge.
The outcome document adopted by the CounterTerrorism Committee at its special meeting on
28 September is a major milestone in providing
strategic direction for the work of the Committee to
strengthen the capacity of States in their counterterrorism efforts. The outcome document introduces a
new zero-tolerance paradigm in the international
community’s fight against terrorism and will be helpful
in raising the bar in the fight against terrorism to a
higher level.
Speaking at the general debate at the sixty-sixth
session of the General Assembly, our Prime Minister,
Mr. Manmohan Singh, said:
“The fight against terrorism must be unrelenting.
There cannot be selective approaches in dealing
with terrorist groups or the infrastructure of
terrorism. Terrorism has to be fought across all
fronts.” (A/66/PV.22, p. 11)
Indeed, our entire region, South Asia, has been
racked by the activities of the biggest terrorist
organizations and entities in the world, be they
Al-Qaida, elements of the Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba or
others. It is our expectation that the splitting of the
1267 sanctions regime in June this year will enable the
Afghan Government to have a greater say in
confronting the challenges emanating from those
constituting a threat to the peace, security and stability
of Afghanistan. We are concerned that the functioning
of the 1267 Sanctions Committee continues to be
subject to political pulls and pressure. This is a
scenario that we can ill afford in our fight against
terrorism.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) and the 1267 and 1989 Committee, both
newly created, are in the process of formulating

11-59163

S/PV.6658

guidelines for the conduct of their work. We hope that
these will address the deficiencies in the existing
guidelines for these Committees. It is critical that all
sanctions regimes established by the Council ensure
due process in their working procedures and decisionmaking. The decision-making process should be swift,
fair and transparent. The process of listing and
de-listing must be guided by the same set of principles:
fairness, credibility and transparency.
The 1267 and 1989 Committee and the 1988
Committee must continue to focus on the linkages
between Al-Qaida and the Taliban, which pose a
serious threat to international peace and security. The
Monitoring Team should examine the linkages between
Al-Qaida and the Taliban comprehensively and
objectively,
and
submit
its
reports
and
recommendations periodically, as mandated by
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011).
India supports the international efforts to prevent
non-State actors and terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of
delivery. We are conscious of the dangers that the
transfers of such WMDs to non-State actors could
entail. Given the evolving complex challenges to
international peace and security emanating from
non-State actors, such risks are greater than ever
before.
The international community must join hands to
eliminate the risks relating to sensitive materials and
technologies falling into the hands of terrorists and
non-State actors. The international response to the
threat needs to be national as well as multilateral and
global. We support the work of the 1540 Committee in
accordance with its mandate.
Finally, I apologize for having taken up so much
of the Council’s time.
The President: I thank Ambassador Puri for his
briefing.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Ambassadors Sangqu, Wittig
and Puri for their briefings, and I associate myself with
the statement to be made later by the deputy head of
the delegation of the European Union.
We recently commemorated the tenth anniversary
of the 11 September attacks. Even though Osama Bin
Laden is dead, terrorism, whether related to Al-Qaida
or not, remains a major threat to international peace

11-59163

and security. To counter this continually evolving
threat, the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, in keeping with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must adapt so as to devise the most appropriate tools to
deal with it.
It was in that spirit that the Security Council
decided to reform the sanctions regime against
Al-Qaida last June. We had several objectives. It had
become necessary, more than 10 years after the
regime’s establishment, for developments in the
situation on the ground to be reflected in its
architecture. In addition to the fact that the Taliban and
Al-Qaida have fundamentally different objectives, the
relationship between them had become increasingly
strained as the historical leaders of both movements
died off. It was thus no longer relevant to deal with
them in the same manner. It was also important to
ensure that the regime against the Taliban had a more
direct impact in terms of incentivizing the quest for a
political solution to the situation in Afghanistan.
Lastly, we welcome the fact that this review is in
line with the process of ensuring procedural
improvements. Resolution 1989 (2011) strengthened
the role of the Office of the Ombudsperson regarding
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime by ensuring it a decisive
role regarding the delisting of individuals and entities.
This not only represents an advance in terms of the
rights of the individuals and entities on the list, but
also enhances the credibility of the sanctions regime.
By removing from the list individuals and entities that
no longer belong on it, we have transformed the list
into a living mechanism that reflects the current status
of the threat.
Combating terrorism at the international level
also requires the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions. For more than 10 years now, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) has been giving in-depth
consideration to the resources and needs of each
Member State with respect to combating terrorism.
That task could not have been carried out without the
support that has been provided since 2004 by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
whose outstanding work, guided by its Director, Mike
Smith, I should like to commend.
The review of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is coming to an end and must now be

11

S/PV.6658

followed up on a regular basis. The Committee has at
its disposal a number of effective mechanisms for
monitoring the process of identifying gaps and
achieving improvements in the legislative apparatus of
Member States. The promotion of the rule of law and
of a judicial approach to combating terrorism are
essential in that respect. I would mention here the
workshop organized by the CTED, held in Ankara last
July, which brought together prosecutors specializing
in counter-terrorism.
Finally, in the context of the regionalization of
the terrorist threat, closer cooperation between the
affected States and more consistent international
support should underpin our work. The United Nations
has a key role to play in that respect and must continue
to do so by taking advantage of its activities at the
regional level, as is the case in West Africa with regard
to transnational threats and in particular the terrorist
threat in the Sahelian region.
Nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical
terrorism remains one of the main threats to our
security. As emphasized in the report just submitted to
the Council by the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
progress has been made in addressing those threats.
The challenges and activities related to resolution 1540
(2004) have since 2004 largely been mainstreamed
within the United Nations, and States have taken
numerous measures to implement the resolution.
However, a great deal remains to be done, and we
welcome the fact that the mandate of the 1540
Committee has been renewed for 10 years.
Resolution 1977 (2011) provided the Committee
with the resources to more effectively carry out its
mandate, but they must be put to use. We must
formally establish a group of experts, and the
Committee itself must work to that end by submitting
its recommendations to the Council as soon as
possible, in accordance with the resolution. The
Committee must also set out, as provided for in the
resolution, specific priorities for its work in its annual
programme and work on sharing experiences and best
practices.
It is only by fully utilizing these new instruments
that we will enhance the effectiveness of the 1540
Committee and help countries to counter terrorism in a
concrete manner.

12

France is determined to promote the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We recently
submitted to the Committee our national action plan,
which outlines our actions at the international level in
support of the resolution and the competences that we
can mobilize to lend assistance to the countries that
request it.
During its presidency of the Group of Eight
(G-8), France was active in the dialogue of the G-8
working group with the 1540 Committee experts, in
particular regarding issues relating to assistance. As
members know, my country coordinates the
Committee’s Working Group on Assistance, and
progress has already been made in that respect. The
Committee thus has a follow-up mechanism for
requests for and offers of assistance, which includes a
regularly updated database, as outlined at the
G-8 meeting held in October.
We also welcome the specific visits made to
countries, with the holding of a first visit to
Washington, D.C., in September and several others at
the preparation stage. Moreover, a number of areas are
under consideration with a view to improving the
Committee’s procedures in terms of assistance, better
responding to the needs of countries in that regard, and
continuing dialogue with all relevant organizations.
Lastly, we should also continue our efforts to
achieve coordination among the United Nations bodies
that are involved in counter-terrorism and strengthen
cooperation with other entities, such as, for instance,
the recently established Global Counterterrorism
Forum. We are counting on the work of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to help move
this cooperation forward.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
wish at the outset to thank Ambassadors Puri, Wittig
and Sangqu for their briefings.
In September, the Secretary-General hosted an
extremely productive high-level symposium on
counter-terrorism, marking the tenth anniversary of the
events of 11 September 2001. That event allowed
Member States to speak about the different
contributions that the United Nations has made over
the past decade to counter and prevent terrorism in all
its forms and build a global community to speak out
against it. The symposium also demonstrated broad
support for United Nations efforts to counter violent
extremism.

11-59163

S/PV.6658

Much of the focus was on the United Nations
Global
Counter-Terrorism
Strategy,
the
only
universally approved approach to combating and
preventing terrorism, and on the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which, since its
creation in 2005, has played a key role in strengthening
cooperation and coordination among the now 31 parts
of the United Nations system with a role in supporting
implementation of the Strategy. The adoption of the
Strategy and the institutionalization of CTITF, as well
as the recent establishment of the United Nations
Centre on Counter-Terrorism within the CTITF office,
represent milestones in the evolution of the United
Nations counter-terrorism programme and deserve our
strong support.
Also in September, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) hosted an
event marking the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
that resolution and the establishment of the CTC. Over
the past decade, the Council has shown a remarkable
commitment to promoting the implementation of a
resolution that helped galvanize the global movement
to strengthen national and regional legal policy and
institutional counter-terrorism frameworks.
Since the Council established the CounterTerrorism Committee, in the fall of 2001, the CTC has
developed tailored interactive counter-terrorism
dialogues with States. That has led to the gathering of
unprecedented amounts of information on national
efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001), in what
has essentially been a worldwide audit of counterterrorism capacities. Partly as a result, many States
have revised existing counter-terrorism laws, or
adopted new ones, and ratified and implemented the
universal instruments related to terrorism. In addition,
the CTC has succeeded in identifying capacity gaps
and in engaging with a range of assistance providers to
help countries receive the training that they need.
The evolution of the United Nations institutional
counter-terrorism framework, culminating with the
establishment of the United Nations Centre on
Counter-Terrorism, has been encouraging. We hope
that it will continue to evolve with the appointment of
a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator to serve
as both the chair of the CTITF and the SecretaryGeneral’s special adviser on counter-terrorism issues.

11-59163

With that enhanced political and institutional
support within the United Nations system, we hope that
there will be even more flexibility for the CTC and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to address some of the critical counterterrorism challenges. For example, more work remains
to strengthen national sanctions regimes to take action
against a broad range of terrorism threats and in
countering the increase in kidnapping for ransom as a
means of financing terrorism and other criminal
activity.
The United Nations also faces challenges in
securing unmanned borders, which allow terrorists to
travel with impunity, and in strengthening the capacity
of civilian courts to prosecute terrorists. The United
States is pleased to support CTED-led projects that
bring together practitioners to address common
counter-terrorism challenges.
The United States would particularly like to thank
CTC Chair Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri, as well as
Executive Director Mike Smith, for their strong
leadership. The United States looks forward to
intensifying our efforts with CTED and other relevant
stakeholders, including civil society organizations, to
ensure that the United Nations responds flexibly to the
ever-changing terrorist threat.
With regard to Al-Qaida sanctions, the United
States welcomes the significant enhancements to the
listing and delisting processes of the regimes of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
outlined most recently in resolution 1989 (2011). The
establishment of an independent Ombudsperson
empowered to make recommendations to the
Committee on de-listing petitions has begun to ensure
that such procedures are fair and transparent.
Similarly, we applaud the Committee’s ongoing
efforts to undertake regular reviews of its list to make
certain that the sanctions remain relevant and up to
date. We believe that it is imperative that the
Committee not lose sight of the need to ensure that
such sanctions are fully implemented and appropriately
calibrated to address current threats from Al-Qaida and
its affiliates. Ensuring a fair process is important, but
no less important are advancing our efforts to promote
full implementation and ensuring that cases of
non-compliance are adequately addressed. We look

13

S/PV.6658

forward to working with the Committee and its
Monitoring Team to examine the effectiveness of
existing measures and to identify practical ways to
enhance implementation efforts.
Let me thank Ambassador Wittig and his team, as
well as the Secretariat and the Ombudsperson, for their
tremendous efforts. They have worked tirelessly to
implement the reforms, and we are grateful for their
efforts. I also thank the Monitoring Team of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) for its important work in proposing
recommendations for improving the Committee’s work
and in strengthening Member States’ implementation of
the regime.
Regarding the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on
non-proliferation, we want to express our continuing
support for Chairman Sangqu. We look forward to
2012 as the Committee takes a more robust role in
providing a strong and consistent voice for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). That will
require strategies to ensure that all States requesting
assistance receive it, and active collaboration with key
stakeholders to conduct implementation workshops and
training sessions. To ensure greater implementation,
the United States has made a voluntary contribution of
$3 million to the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA). We continue to
encourage Member States and regional organizations to
contribute to the UNODA Trust Fund and to the
implementation activities of the 1540 Committee. Such
implementation has matured beyond an initiative that is
primarily report-focused. We now need to concentrate
on implementation. In September, the United States
hosted a visit by the 1540 Committee and its Group of
Experts to observe our domestic efforts to implement
the resolution. We hope that other States will invite the
Committee to conduct such visits.
Finally, we warmly thank the European Union
(EU) and its Polish presidency for their cooperation on
the joint United States-EU declaration on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and a fruitful
First Committee side event focused on the resolution.
The United States strongly encourages additional
efforts to improve the overall effectiveness of the 1540
Committee’s
operations,
particularly
improved
matching of implementation assistance requests with
offers of assistance.

14

The General Assembly presidency and the
support of its global partnership will help to make
strong partnerships across that spectrum. In addition,
we emphasize that the work of the Chair, the
Committee, the Group of Experts and UNODA must be
better integrated and coordinated within intergovernmental
and regional organizations to maximize implementation.
We are pleased by the progress made by the
Committees under the capable leadership of the Chairs.
The Council’s counter-terrorism efforts will guide and
reinforce actions of Member States to deter terrorism,
including the threats posed by Al-Qaida and its
affiliated groups and the proliferation efforts of
non-State actors.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representatives of India, Germany and South Africa
for their reports on the work of the Committees under
their leadership.
Russia considers the future stepping up of efforts
under the Committees as a precondition to enhancing
the effectiveness of the Security Council’s contribution
to countering global terrorism, which remains one of
the main threats to international peace and security. We
will continue our active and dynamic work with those
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council. Among the
activities of the Committees in the period following the
May briefing in the Council (see S/PV.6536), we note
the following.
The high note of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) was the first-ever
holding, on 28 September, of an open special meeting
commemorating the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001) and the CTC’s establishment.
During the event, on the basis of careful and
transparent analysis of the Committee’s 10 years of
activity, its important role in and the significance of
establishing a counter-terrorism substrategy within the
United Nations, under its aegis, was acknowledged.
The relevance of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001), including those on counter-terrorism, was also
recognized. We stand ready to support that high-profile
body and the resolution.
In preparation for that event, the Committee
prepared and presented to the Council, together with
the outcome document of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, an updated global survey on the

11-59163

S/PV.6658

implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) (see
S/2011/463, annex). Russia actively participated in the
drafting of that document. The report objectively
reflects the ongoing work on terrorism, achievements
and gaps in implementing the resolution, and the
defined modalities for future efforts of the CTC and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) for positive cooperation with Member States
on future implementation and the elimination of
identified shortcomings.
The Committee continued its efforts to encourage
States to more actively implement resolution 1624
(2005) on the basis of the CTC plan of action initiated
by the Russian Federation. On the basis of the plan, we
stand ready to identify priorities for the CTC, such as
combating the ideologies of terrorism, preventing the
radicalization of societies and fighting violent
extremism,
terrorist
organization
recruitment,
incitement to terrorist acts and the use of media and the
Internet by terrorists.
In line with the plan, the Committee will conduct
a series of regional seminars on resolution 1624
(2005), the first of which, for African States, will take
place at the end of November in Nairobi. By the end of
the year, the CTC will also prepare a global review of
the implementation of the resolution to define the
status of the situation with regard to priorities. We
attach great importance to that work.
We note the effective expert support provided to
the CTC by CTED. We believe that the work of the
Directorate on assessing terrorist threats and the risks
associated with weapons of mass destruction, in
particular man-portable air-defence systems from
Libya, is in line with the Russian-initiated resolution
2017 (2011).
With respect to the sanctions regime implemented
under resolution 1267 (1999), the Russian Federation
hopes that the resolution’s modification in June will
serve to push the Government of Afghanistan to carry
out a strategy of national reconciliation and provide
additional impetus to achieving internationally agreed
upon objectives for reaching a settlement in that
country. The Committee must continue to be one of the
key mechanisms of the Council in counter-terrorism.
We continue to be convinced that, making a clear
distinction between enablers of Al-Qaida and the pure
Taliban is very difficult. That is the reason for the
existence of duplicate listings on the two sanctions

11-59163

lists, which were unavoidable for objective reasons. We
also believe that the adoption of sanctions with respect
to individuals or organizations participating in terrorist
activities must continue to be done on a case-by-case
basis and in line with relevant procedures. We believe
that the expanded prerogatives of the Ombudsperson in
de-listing under the assigned Security Council mandate
and the new procedures for processing de-listing
requests seem, at the present stage, exhaustive and
reflect optimal levels of transparency in the work of
the Committee, which should be commensurate with
the threats emanating from Al-Qaida, which, as
experience has shown, continue to be significant.
It is well known that in the final analysis the
effectiveness of sanctions in countering terrorism
depends on the implementation by States of their
international obligations in this area. Unfortunately, we
must note that there are significant problems in that
regard. For instance, the July sanctions list included
the terrorist organization Imarat Kavkaz, whose
mouthpiece is their website, Kavkazcenter.com, which
is hosted by an internet provider in Stockholm. In
accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 1989 (2011),
that provider should be subject to financial sanctions to
hamper its activities as a provider of internet hosting
services. To date, the Swedish authorities have not
been able to implement the Council’s decision in that
regard. The website continues to disseminate terrorist
propaganda and religious animosity, which is most
regrettable.
We value the work of the 1540 Committee and its
Group of Experts during the reporting period. We
welcome the intention of Ambassador Sangqu to make
the Committee’s action more consistent and well
planned. The Committee has continued its assigned
activities to implement its mandate in all areas,
including taking into account the new objectives of
resolution 1977 (2011).
It is important to note that after difficult
negotiations an outcome document was adopted that
reflects the Committee’s and the international
community’s successes in fulfilling the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004) over the past three years. We
believe that resolution 1540 (2004) is a key
international legal instrument in the effort to stem
terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), their means of delivery and related materials.
The objectives of the resolution guide States in
strengthening national monitoring systems in

15

S/PV.6658

non-proliferation by adopting measures to prevent the
illegal production, trafficking and transfer of WMDs
and their means of delivery by ensuring accountability
and the safety and security of dual-use goods through
export control and border exchanges.

China supports the CTC in taking measures, such as
holding regional symposiums and facilitating technical
assistance, to continue to maintain dialogue with
Member States and help them with capacity-building in
counter-terrorism.

Resolution 1977 (2011) strengthened the leading
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in
coordinating multilateral efforts in that regard, spurring
the scaling up of such efforts. We believe it is
important that the Committee continue to give priority
to assisting States in implementing resolution 1540
(2004) by coordinating international endeavours to
those ends.

Last April, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1977 (2011), which added a new
request to the work of the 1540 Committee. China
welcomes the Committee’s submission of its work
report covering the period from 2008 to 2011, its
adoption of its tenth work plan and the achievement of
positive progress in promoting the implementation of
the resolution in carrying out assistance and outreach
activities.

For our part, we stand ready to support
assistance, particularly in the context of our
cooperation on issues related to resolution 1540
(2004), for Member States that are part of the
Commonwealth of Independent States.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Ambassadors Wittig, Singh Puri and
Sangqu for their briefings. I also wish to express my
appreciation for their leadership in contributing to the
progress of the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism (CTC) and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), respectively.
The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee is an
important counter-terrorism tool of the Security
Council. Over the past period, the Committee has done
a lot of work in splitting the sanctions list, improving
the listing and de-listing procedures and updating its
work guidance, thus laying a good foundation for the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1989
(2011). China supports the Committee in carrying
forward the periodic review of the sanctions list as
planned and hopes that Member States will cooperate
with the work of the Committee in an active manner, in
a joint effort to preserve the authority and effectiveness
of the sanctions regime.
On 28 September, the CTC held a special meeting
in commemoration of its tenth anniversary. The
meeting once again demonstrated the firm resolve of
the international community to work together to
combat terrorism and injected new impetus to the work
of the Committee. China welcomes this turn of events.

16

China supports the Committee in continuing with
its sound and steady work in promoting the
achievement of the goals of resolution 1540 (2004) in a
comprehensive, balanced and effective manner and in
assisting countries in fulfilling their obligations under
the resolution.
China hopes that the Committee will successfully
complete its two important tasks in the coming period
and come up with recommendations on the
establishment of the panel of experts as soon as
possible and successfully hold the first annual review
of the implementation of the resolution. China is
willing to continue to work with others’ support and
take an active part in the Committee’s work in a joint
effort in favour of the continued progress of the
international non-proliferation process.
Terrorism is the common enemy of the
international community. As a victim of terrorism,
China is opposed to all forms of terrorism and to the
practice of double standards in counter-terrorism
efforts. We hope that the international community will
continue to strengthen cooperation in a joint effort to
defend against and combat terrorism. China supports
the United Nations and the Security Council in playing
a central role in international counter-terrorism
cooperation.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. We also thank
Ambassadors Sangqu, Wittig and Singh Puri for their
briefings and for their skilful leadership of the key
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
In the past decade, the role played by the Security
Council in the fight against terrorism has grown and

11-59163

S/PV.6658

quickly involved. To continue making progress, a
stronger dialogue with the wider United Nations
membership is indispensable. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has gone a long way in assisting
Member States to overcome their shortfalls in
implementing the measures set out in resolution 1373
(2001). We encourage the Committee to continue to
develop mechanisms to facilitate technical assistance
to countries that request it. We also commend the
adoption of a regional approach. Attention to the
specificities of each region provides us with a clear
understanding of the challenges, and results in
recommendations that are suited to each country’s
reality.
Brazil gladly notes that further progress has been
made in the work of the Sanctions Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011), in particular with regard to due process
and the consideration of listing and de-listing requests.
The decision taken by the Council in June to strengthen
the role of the Ombudsperson reaffirmed our common
interest in pursuing working methods that are more in
tune with human rights considerations. We encourage
the Committee to continue to reach out and take into
account the views of other Member States, especially
those of the residence and nationality of listed
individuals and entities.
Turning to the issue of non-proliferation, we
commend the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), particularly in
implementing assistance, cooperation and outreach
efforts. Brazil also believes that the Committee should
work, as much as possible, in close cooperation with
other international organizations such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
in order to avoid duplication of effort.
We also welcome the standing cooperation
between the 1540 Committee and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs. At the same time,
Brazil stresses that only a world free of weapons of
mass destruction will be able to completely eliminate
the threat of the proliferation and use of those weapons.
Commitments and efforts on non-proliferation have to be
met by the fulfilment of disarmament obligations.
Brazil is confident that the subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council will continue to foster cooperation
among Member States and help them to overcome

11-59163

obstacles to the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The delegations of India,
Germany and South Africa can count on our full
support of that work.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Germany, India and
South Africa for their very insightful briefings on the
activities of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
respectively.
Nigeria commends the 1373 Committee, under
the dynamic leadership of Ambassador Hardeep Singh
Puri, on the success of its special meeting held on
20 September to commemorate the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). The meeting
afforded us all an opportunity to review the progress
made in achieving the objectives that we established
10 years ago. There is no gainsaying that significant
efforts have been made in the past 10 years in
facilitating technical assistance and promoting outreach
activities and cooperation among States and other
stakeholders.
We pay special tribute to the diligent efforts of
the Committee as well as of Mr. Mike Smith and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and its Monitoring Team. The efforts of the
Committee in updating the global survey on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) are also
commendable.
Despite those improvements, much more needs to
be done to enhance the institutional capacity of many
States, strengthen the existing framework of
international cooperation and build new partnerships,
particularly in and among regions.
In the same vein, greater emphasis is needed on
conditions conducive to the existence and spread of
terrorism. Nigeria believes that the effectiveness of our
efforts in fighting terrorism correlates with our ability
to successfully address the economic, social and
political conditions that feed that phenomenon. It is
therefore essential that preventing and countering
incitement to commit terrorist acts, including that
motivated by extremism and intolerance, mark a point
of departure in finding a durable solution to the threat
of terrorism.
In that regard, we call on the Committee to
expedite action on the preparation of a global survey of

17

S/PV.6658

the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). There is
no doubt that a proper assessment of the different
levels of experience and challenges that exist within
countries and regions on the implementation of the
resolution would greatly enhance the work of the
Committee.
The 1540 Committee plays a crucial role in
enhancing the efforts to counter proliferation-related
threats. We appreciate the work done by Ambassador
Baso Sangqu and the Committee, as well as its Group
of Experts, since our last meeting in May (see
S/PV.6536). We believe that the Committee worked
assiduously in promoting greater understanding of
resolution 1540 (2004) among stakeholders, and more
visibility for the Committee.
We welcome the adoption of the report (see
S/2011/579) of the Committee on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as its tenth
programme of work.
The conclusion of work on the establishment of a
group of experts is needed to underpin those efforts.
Nigeria appreciates the clearing house role of the
Committee. The Committee has made great strides
forward in improving its procedures for matching
offers and requests for assistance. It should strive to
sustain those efforts, particularly those aimed at raising
awareness of assistance needs and requests by States.
The active engagement of all States is vital in
ensuring the effective implementation of resolutions
1540 (2004) and 1977 (2011). In that connection, we
commend the Government of the United States of
America for hosting the Committee in September. Such
country visits are helpful in promoting dialogue,
information sharing and cooperation between the
Committee and Member States. It is our hope that the
visit by the United States will engender more requests
for that type of mission.
Nigeria attaches great importance to the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). We commend Ambassador Peter Wittig, the
Committee and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for sustaining reforms of the
sanctions regime. The continuous improvement of the
sanctions regime will go a long way in ensuring a
reliable and transparent procedure.
We reiterate the importance of consulting affected
States during the listing and de-listing of individuals

18

and entities from the consolidated list and of
consistencies with international standards of due
process, international law and respect for human rights,
in order to reinforce the credibility of the sanctions
regime.
The decision of the Council to split its regime
relating to resolution 1267 (1999) has positioned the
Committee for better performance. This will also help
to refocus attention on preventing and addressing
existing threats in a more effective manner. The
Committee should conclude the process of revising the
guidelines and the conduct of its work in order to
ensure that evolving Al-Qaida threats are adequately
addressed.
The giant stride to improve the working methods,
including the decision to publish narrative summaries
of reasons for listings on its website and the addition of
the Ombudsperson’s recommendation to cases
reviewed by her Office, are important developments in
the Committee’s reform process. We welcome the
remarkable efforts of Ms. Kimberly Prost in assisting
the Committee’s work.
Nigeria is pleased with the close cooperation
among the three Security Council Committees and with
other organizations, within and outside the United
Nations. We encourage them to sustain their joint
efforts to improve information-sharing and to
coordinate relationships with relevant international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations
and
participation within the framework of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa, Ambassador
Wittig of Germany and Ambassador Singh Puri of
India for their detailed reports on the activities of the
counter-terrorism Committees and for their dynamic
and excellent efforts in leading those activities. The
recommendations and analyses in their briefings
deserve our careful attention.
The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) are essential mechanisms to ensure
the implementation of the obligations derived from
those instruments. It is therefore essential to continue
coordinating their activities, to continuously assess
their working methods and to revitalize their tools in

11-59163

S/PV.6658

order to facilitate assistance and cooperation to
Member States.
The 1540 Committee has shown a positive trend
in the implementation by States of measures to prevent
nuclear, chemical and/or biological weapons and their
delivery systems from falling into the hands of armed
non-State actors, and to prevent the spread of such
weapons
by
strengthening
the
international
non-proliferation regimes.
Among the Committee’s activities, two deserve
special mention: the adoption of the report (see
S/2011/579) on compliance with resolution 1540
(2004), submitted in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1810 (2008); and the adoption of its tenth
programme of work. In addition, the four working
groups created in 2009 as part of the Committee’s
eighth programme of work, which focus on national
monitoring and national implementation, assistance,
cooperation with international organizations and
transparency and media outreach, respectively, have
proven to be very useful in making the work of the
Committee more efficient and effective.
The organization of outreach activities at the
national, subregional and regional levels has been
useful to efforts to promote Member State
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
spirit, Colombia will hold, next March in Bogotá, a
regional workshop for representatives of Governments,
the private sector and civil society. This will be a
valuable opportunity to promote and facilitate
interaction between Member States and international,
regional and subregional organizations.
The 1540 Committee has been an important
partner in the context of non-proliferation. Its
cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional organizations has made an effective
contribution to improving border and export controls,
increasing technical assistance and building national
capacities. We recognize, however, that much remains
to be done. The threat remains extremely serious and
we can confront it only by adopting appropriate and
effective measures.
Regarding the 1267 Committee, Colombia
welcomes the reforms of the regime introduced in
resolution 1989 (2011), which are aimed at improving
respect for due process, transparency and quality of the
information contained in the consolidated list.

11-59163

The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson and the strengthening of its mandate in
resolution 1989 (2011) have been fundamental steps in
efforts to strengthen and ensure the legitimacy of the
regime. The number of de-listing requests processed by
the Office, the reports that it has presented to the
Committee and the decisions taken to date as a result
of its efforts show that this is an essential entity that
could be replicated in all sanctions committees.
In order to benefit the sanctions regime, two
areas need to be strengthened: the quality of
information submitted by States when proposing names
for inclusion on the sanctions list, and the provision of
technical assistance to States in order to facilitate the
full implementation of their obligations.
I will now refer to the 1373 Committee. We agree
with Ambassador Puri on the relevance of the special
meeting commemorating the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the outcome
document adopted, which reflects the issues on which
there is consensus within the Organization.
We also highlight the publication of the global
implementation survey of resolution 1373 (2001),
updated to 2011, which provides an overview of the
progress achieved in implementing the various aspects
of the resolution and assesses the evolution and
emergence of risks. Despite the deficiencies and gaps
identified in the survey, States have clearly made
significant progress and now have more appropriate
legal and operational frameworks to fight terrorism.
That is why the Committee must strengthen its
dialogue with Member States and work closely and in a
coordinated manner with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and other United Nations
bodies, which have the experience and the mandate to
assist States in capacity-building to implement the
numerous international instruments related to the fight
against terrorism, including the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We agree with the Chair of the 1373 Committee
that there is a need to continue paying particular
attention to respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism. In that regard, we
highlight the emphasis given in resolutions 1624
(2005) and 1963 (2010) to this core aspect of
international counter-terrorism efforts. Colombia is
convinced that more attention needs to be given to

19

S/PV.6658

defending and protecting the rights of victims. We must
ensure that the voices of the victims are heard and that
States have appropriate mechanisms for redress. To
that end, targeted measures should be promoted in
order to protect, promote and recognize the rights of
victims.
My delegation welcomes the briefing given to the
1373 Committee by the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism. We
trust that the Committee will hold more such
exchanges and continue to cooperate closely with his
office.
In conclusion, and stressing the importance that
Colombia attaches to defending and protecting the
rights of victims of terrorism, I would like to draw
attention to the forthcoming publication of the
handbook on criminal justice responses to terrorism,
prepared by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in collaboration with some States, including
Colombia. We hope that the handbook will provide the
basis for the capacity-building activities undertaken by
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate to ensure that the voices of the victims are
heard in criminal proceedings.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank the Chairmen of the three Committees, the
Permanent Representatives of India, Germany and
South Africa, for their comprehensive briefings and
ongoing efforts with all members of the Security
Council to promote international counter-terrorism
cooperation. I would like to make the following
comments.
First, with respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities, we commend the measures adopted by
consensus by the Security Council in resolution 1989
(2011) to enhance the transparency and fairness of the
working methods of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
and to guarantee the fundamental rights of the
individuals and entities on the sanctions list. Those
objectives will be achieved, in particular, by promoting
and enhancing the mandate of the Ombudsperson,
whose recommendations for the listing and de-listing
of names have now essentially become decisive. That
will put an end to cases of arbitrary listing.

20

The number of requests submitted to the
Ombudsperson to date attests to her important role. We
therefore believe it necessary to provide the
Ombudsperson with all the logistical resources
required to carry out her duties and fulfil her mandate.
We also commend the efforts of the Committee
and its Monitoring Team, which have led to the
publication, on the Committee’s website and in the six
official languages of the Organization, of the reasons
for the listing of all names. We further emphasize the
importance of continuously updating the consolidated
list and removing the names of individuals with
insufficient identifying information, as well as the
names of entities that have ceased to exist. That will
help to promote the reliability and accuracy of the list
and enhance the implementation of sanctions by
various States. In the same context, we believe it
necessary for the Committee to justify all of its
decisions. Lebanon insists that sanctions always be in
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and
its human rights provisions.
Secondly, with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), we commend the efforts of Committee and its
Executive Directorate to promote the legislative and
institutional capacities of States to combat terrorism,
which continues to develop in various forms and
means. We also encourage continued dialogue,
cooperation and coordination with States and regional
organizations to implement resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant resolutions, because combating terrorism
can be complemented by national, regional and
international measures.
We welcome the 2011 global survey on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by Member
States (S/2011/463, annex), which evaluated the
progress achieved in implementing that resolution in
various geographic areas. It addressed the developing
challenges and risks and discussed existing gaps in
implementation and how to tackle them. We look
forward to the issuance of a similar study on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) by the end of
this year.
We also emphasize the importance of the meeting
of this Committee on the tenth anniversary of its
establishment, which provided an opportunity for all
States and international and regional organizations to
express their position on counter-terrorism. We call for

11-59163

S/PV.6658

taking into consideration the various points of view
offered during that meeting in the next stage of the
Committee’s work.
Thirdly, I turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We welcome the
most recent report of that Committee (S/2011/579) and
its tenth programme of work. We emphasize the
importance of supporting and cooperating with it in
order to achieve the objectives set out in resolution
1977 (2011). We especially support current efforts to
implement operational paragraph 5 (b) of that
resolution.
With Lebanon’s membership in the Security
Council coming to a close, it is important for us to
stress the importance of paragraph 17 of the final
document on the Committee’s 2009 comprehensive
review (S/2010/52, annex), which discusses the
importance of efforts that can be carried out by States
in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) after their
membership on the Committee has ended.
We also commend the efforts of the four Working
Groups, on Monitoring and National Implementation,
Assistance,
Cooperation
with
International
Organizations, and Transparency and Outreach. We
further find that the assistance provided by the
Committee and expert groups to countries that request
it is more than a principal factor in the implementation
of the resolution. That assistance also enhances the
exchange of expertise and capacity-building for taking
effective measures at the national level to prevent
terrorists and non-State actors from reaching sensitive
materials and technologies related to the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, whether nuclear,
chemical or biological.
We would like to remind members of the efforts
of the League of Arab States in this context and to
emphasize the importance of making the Middle East a
zone free of such weapons. We welcome the
appointment of a facilitator to prepare for the 2012
conference on establishing a zone free of nuclear
weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East, in implementation of the action plan set
out in the Final Document of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
Lebanon knows very well the dangers of
terrorism because of the attacks it has suffered over so
many years. We emphasize our continued constructive

11-59163

cooperation with the three Committees and our full
support for international efforts to combat terrorism.
Furthermore, in the face of continued horrible
terrorist attacks today, which have also targeted United
Nations offices and its various bodies, we are more
convinced than ever that the success of counterterrorism efforts will above all require addressing the
root causes of terrorism and the removal of the factors
that nurture it by eliminating areas of tension and
double standards in the implementation of international
legitimacy, as well as by putting an end to foreign
occupation, ignorance and poverty. We also encourage
promoting the culture of acceptance of others, along
with dialogue between various cultures and religions,
as an indispensable tool for the success of
anti-terrorism efforts.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We are
reminded every day that terrorism still represents an
undefeated, challenging and demanding threat of our
times. Therefore, the fight against terrorism holds the
highest priority. We are certain that only our joint
efforts and coordinated and decisive action can lead to
its ultimate defeat.
We thank Ambassador Wittig, Ambassador Puri
and Ambassador Sangqu for their leadership in those
efforts as Chairs of the committees that hold and play
an essential role in the overall counterterrorism
framework. Their detailed briefings have provided us
with an opportunity to re-evaluate tools and measures
taken, as well as to consider future steps in order to
further improve the Council’s efforts in countering this
global and ever-present threat.
The past six months brought considerable
changes to the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), with the
primary focus on strengthening and further enhancing
its procedures and specific elements. Resolutions 1988
(2011) and 1989 (2011), adopted in June this year,
were a direct result of the changing dynamics in the
maintenance of international peace and security and
our fight against terrorism. The split of the 1267
regime was a necessary response to different
requirements and the evolved threat of terrorism, where
somewhat specific new approaches and perspectives
were needed for our fight against terrorism to be more
efficient.
My country fully supported the reform of the
sanctions regime, as resolution 1989 (2011) further

21

S/PV.6658

reinforced and strengthened substantial improvements
introduced in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009).
I particularly wish to emphasize the additionally
enhanced role of the Ombudsperson and the new
delisting procedures as crucial aspects in the
continuous demand for a more clear, fair and effective
overall system.
As we focus on the implementation of those
newly introduced elements, we are also aware that
upholding the credibility of the sanctions regime by
means of its effectiveness, transparency and fairness
requires our constant attention and the careful
consideration of future steps.
The date of 28 September was significant in both
2001, when resolution 1373 (2001) was adopted, and in
2011, when States reconfirmed the essential role and
importance of that resolution in the overall counterterrorism framework. As we put special emphasis on its
full implementation and the further strengthening of its
key aspects, together with resolution 1624 (2005), we
unconditionally support every effort of the CounterTerrorism Committee, together with the valuable
assistance of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, in that respect.
Thematic discussions and regional presentations
within the Committee bring more focus on challenges,
deficiencies and difficulties in the implementation of
the respective resolutions. We are pleased to see that
the plans of the Chair are moving in the direction of
continued engagement of the Committee in those
discussions and making enhanced use of its outcomes
and results. That can significantly complement the
monitoring component and appropriately direct the
delivery of technical assistance. We also note with
satisfaction that regular briefings for Member States
proved to be a step in the right direction and an
indispensable tool in enhancing transparency and
efficiency, creating a wider forum for the exchange of
views and recommendations.
The prevention of proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery, especially their potential acquisition by
non-State actors, is critical to international peace and
security. With the unanimous adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) and the 10-year extension of the mandate
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), the Council sent a strong message that
resolution 1540 (2004) remains an important

22

instrument of the global non-proliferation and counterterrorism regimes.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
attaches
great
importance to the role played by the 1540 Committee
and its Group of Experts in promoting the
implementation of the resolution. We welcome in this
respect the Committee’s report (see S/2011/579) on
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004), submitted to
the Security Council in September. The report
acknowledges that, while important progress has been
made, further efforts are required to fully implement
resolution 1540 (2004). The report also contains
important recommendations that should serve as a
basis for the Committee’s future work.
We all are aware that the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) requires
continuous long-term efforts at the national, regional
and international levels. We also need to bear in mind
that,
for
many
States,
the
comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) presents a
very complex and costly process. Therefore, we look
forward to the Committee’s efforts to strengthen its
role in channelling assistance to States in need and
matching requests with States providers of assistance.
Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate our call upon Member States to
extend their financial contributions in order to support
States in identifying and addressing their needs in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
In conclusion, terrorism is a global phenomenon
and no country can defeat it on its own. The
complexity of terrorism requires an equally complex
and comprehensive response, while cooperation and
coordination among all relevant stakeholders are sine
qua non conditions. Bosnia and Herzegovina will, for
its part, continue to give its fullest support and
contribute to the overall international efforts in
countering terrorism, through our actions at both the
State and the international levels.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): The threat of terrorism continues to loom over
international peace and security. The heinous terrorist
acts recently committed in Nigeria highlight their
perpetrators’ contempt for human life and all the values
we hold dear. I take this opportunity to express yet
again, and vehemently, my country’s strong
condemnation of such acts and those who commit
them. The ongoing threat remains so strong that to

11-59163

S/PV.6658

defeat the scourge of terrorism will require increased
focus and vigilance on the part of the Council. My
delegation thanks Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and
Sangqu for their briefings on the work of the
Committees they chair.
We express our firm support for the actions and
mechanisms of the fight against terrorism put in place
by resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) on
Al-Qaida sanctions, 1373 (2001), which led to the
creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and
resolution 1540 (2004) on weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery.
I would like to say a few words about the work of
the Committees. Regarding the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated persons and
entities, my delegation commends the Council’s
17 June adoption of resolution 1988 (2011) and 1989
(2011), creating new sanctions regimes for the Taliban
in Afghanistan and Al-Qaida, respectively. We also
applaud the commitment of the Committee, with the
help of the Secretariat and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, to implement resolution
1989 (2011), in particular by carrying out the
provisions governing its working methods.
Moreover, strengthening the mandate of the
Ombudsperson in the de-listing persons and entities on
sanctions lists is a significant and welcome step
forward, especially in allowing the Ombudsperson to
make recommendations to the Committee on those
cases. My delegation believes that the Ombudsperson
and the Monitoring Team must continue to lend their
valuable support to the Committee in order to bolster
its effectiveness, transparency and fairness.
The
Committee
must
also
maintain
communications with the Member States in order to
improve its grasp of the difficulties they face.
Increased contact at the regional and subregional levels
would contribute greatly to enhanced cooperation,
facilitating implementation by States of resolution
1989 (2011). Continued cooperation in informationsharing between the Committee and INTERPOL
remains essential. We encourage the Committee to
continue reviewing the lists for entities that no longer
exist and for listings that are not sufficiently warranted.
Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), established by resolution 1373 (2001), of which
my country chairs subcommittee C, the special event

11-59163

commemorating the tenth anniversary of resolution
1373 (2001) organized by the CTC and CTED on
28 September focused on the principle of zero
tolerance and the need to take a multidimensional
approach in the fight against terrorism, which we
welcome.
In that regard, Mr. President, my delegation
would like to thank you for your initiative to address
the role of peacekeeping missions in the fight against
terrorism. It is also encouraging to note that the
Committee updated the global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), assessing
the nature and degree of the difficulties countries have
in fully implementing that resolution.
We take this opportunity to stress that Gabon
believes that strengthening the capacities of States in
confronting terrorism is essential to an effective global
strategy to fight terrorism, because in places where the
State security structure is in crisis an increase in
terrorist acts is always a serious threat. Effective
measures aimed at strengthening national capacities,
bearing in mind specific needs and known threats,
should be urgently undertaken.
Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation welcomes its
presentation on 12 September 2011 of its report
(S/2011/579) on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and on 17 June of its tenth programme of work.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
serious threat to international peace and security. In
that regard and pursuant to its programme of work, the
Committee will have to better promote international
instruments of non-proliferation and disarmament to
effectively fight that phenomenon.
The Committee should also improve its dialogue
with the 1267 and 1989 Committees and the CounterTerrorism Committee, maintaining sufficiently close
cooperation to confront threats specific to some States
or regions, such as the illicit movement of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. It should
also promote cooperation with international, regional
and interregional organizations, as well as education,
collaboration and assistance to drive forward the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
In conclusion, the fight against terrorism
demands more engaged international cooperation, and
we must make sure that the relevant mechanisms fulfil
their role in building the capacities of States that are

23

S/PV.6658

ill-equipped to effectively engage in the fight against
the scourge. Our efforts in the fight must combine in a
global approach that strictly honours the obligations
imposed by international law, human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), and of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and
Sangqu, for their comprehensive briefings today and
for their effective leadership of those Committees.
We have passed an important milestone since we
last met in this format. In September we marked the
tenth anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the
subsequent adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). The
attacks of 9/11 changed the way we viewed terrorism.
It was the first time we had faced such a global
terrorist threat, and it provided an essential impetus to
strengthening international cooperation.
Much has been achieved by the CounterTerrorism Committee over the last 10 years. This
includes
building
counter-terrorism
legislation,
strengthening law-enforcement bodies and helping to
create units to tackle terrorist financing. The United
Kingdom supports the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
continuing cooperation with Member States as they
build their capacity to deal with terrorism in all its
forms.
Let me now turn to the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011) in June
this year was an important step in our collective
endeavour to ensure that sanctions against Al-Qaida
remain effective, responsive and fair.
Resolution 1989 (2011) introduced important
changes in how the regime works. Most notably, it
further strengthened the Office of the Ombudsperson
by introducing the power to make recommendations on
de-listing, by urging States to provide information,
including confidential information, and by encouraging
individuals challenging their listing in courts to submit
their cases to the Ombudsperson. The United Kingdom
also welcomed innovations in de-listing processes,
particularly through the introduction of two so-called
smart sunset clauses.

24

We believe that these changes have helped the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime maintain its relevance.
Nimbler and more transparent de-listing procedures
mean that the regime is better placed to respond to the
evolving terrorist threat, while protecting the rights of
individuals. We believe that the procedures the Council
introduced will lead to a more targeted and focused
tool.
As we work together in combating terrorism, we
do not forget the challenges posed to our collective
security by proliferation. All countries, regardless of
whether they hold chemical, biological or nuclear
materials, have a responsibility under resolution 1540
(2004) to take action to prevent proliferation. We were
encouraged that most States have provided initial
reports to the Committee, but it is important that all
States provide updates as they make progress in
implementing the resolution. States should also
recognize that action undertaken, for example, when
improving border security, is relevant to resolution
1540 (2004), and making such linkages will enable
more effective reporting to the Committee.
I would like to close by reiterating the importance
that the United Kingdom attaches to the Security
Council’s fight against terrorism, as well as our
ongoing commitment to the work of the 1989, 1373
and 1540 Committees.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Portugal.
First, I would like to thank Ambassadors Sangqu,
Wittig and Puri for their comprehensive briefings, and
also to commend them for their work, leadership and
commitment in chairing the three Security Council
Committees focused on the fight against terrorism.
I would also like to say that Portugal aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered later by the
representative of the European Union.
Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), we are pleased to note that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), assisted by
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate (CTED), continues to pursue its very
productive work. We note with particular appreciation
the recent special meetings of the Committee, with
wide participation by States and international
organizations, including a separate event for members
of civil society. The issuing of the 2011 edition of the

11-59163

S/PV.6658

global survey on universal implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) (S/2011/463, annex) also
represents a very welcome and useful achievement.
I would like to focus in particular on the
following elements contained in the report, to which
we attach special importance. First is the preventive
aspects of the fight against terrorism. We are pleased to
note their relevance to the CTC’s current framework of
activities, and we encourage the Committee to pursue
this direction. Secondly, on human rights and the rules
of law, we strongly believe that by promoting and
protecting human rights while fighting terrorism, States
and other international actors contribute solidly to
preventing terrorism by addressing the conditions
conducive to its development and spread. Thirdly,
regional approaches, cooperation with international
organizations and capacity-building programmes are
key tools already well incorporated into the guidelines
and practice of the CTC and CTED’s actions, which we
strongly encourage and support.
Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), we very
much support the positive reported achievements,
particularly as regards, on one side, the publication on
the website of narrative summaries of the reasons for
all listings, and on the other, the important
developments concerning the activities of the Office of
the Ombudsperson. These achievements are good news
and significantly enhance due process and the
transparency of the sanctions regime.
Taking into account the new framework for action
established by resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989
(2011), we also congratulate the Committee and its
Monitoring Team for the action taken in re-evaluating
the links between Al-Qaida and the Afghan Taliban. It
represents an important element in updating the
assessment of the terrorist threat and provides a useful
contribution to more focused action by the 1267 and
1989 Committee, together with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
As for the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I welcome all the work done
since resolution 1977 (2011) was adopted in April. I
welcome in particular the ongoing efforts to better
outline the annual review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), with a forward-looking
perspective that will provide useful information to the
Council on matters that might need further attention, as

11-59163

well as on practical guidelines to facilitate the
matchmaking between requests for and offers of
assistance. I also share the sense of urgency in
achieving agreed recommendations, in accordance with
paragraph 5 (b) of resolution 1977 (2011), on expertise
requirements,
broad
geographic
representation,
working methods, modalities and structure, including
consideration of the feasibility of a coordination and
leadership position of the group of experts.
Lastly, I wish to underline the importance of the
joint European Union-United States declaration in
October regarding resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977
(2011), reaffirming our strong commitment to full and
comprehensive implementation of their provisions, as
well as to strengthening of the role and capacity of the
1540 Committee.
In a final word, I would like to welcome the
cooperation among the three Committees, which we
strongly support and encourage. Sharing information,
joint visits and assessments, enhanced coordination of
efforts and initiatives and further interaction in matters
of common interest, including within the framework of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, are
indeed very important tools for maximizing the
effectiveness of the action developed by each of the
three Committees mandated to fight terrorism.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to pay tribute to the Chairs of the Council’s three
counter-terrorism-related
Committees
for
their
informative
and
comprehensive
briefings
on
developments during the last six months.
We commend the successful holding of the
Secretary-General’s symposium on international
counter-terrorism cooperation, and the special meeting
held in September of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) and to advance international cooperation
in that area. As this year marks a milestone in our
collective efforts to combat terrorism, we feel
confident that those meetings provided a good
opportunity for the international community to reflect
on and review the progress made to date in the fight
against terrorism.

25

S/PV.6658

We also welcome the fact that the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) has been officially
launched, at the initiative of the United States of
America, and has already begun its activities. The
GCTF is a new and unprecedented forum intended to
foster discussion on counter-terrorism measures. We
expect that through the sharing of experience and good
practices through candid discussion in the five working
groups under the GCTF, international cooperation in
the area of counter-terrorism will be further
strengthened. We also hope that close cooperation and
constructive dialogue between the GCTF and the three
Committees will contribute to a more coherent and
holistic implementation of counterterrorism measures.
We welcome the recent remarkable progress in
the field of counterterrorism, including the deaths of
Al-Qaida leaders Osama Bin Laden and Anwar
Al-Awlaki. Such successes notwithstanding, we must
bear in mind the fact that the deaths of some of
Al-Qaida’s executive members do not mean that
Al-Qaida itself has been annihilated, and we must
remember that Al-Qaida still has the capacity to
conduct serious terrorist attacks.
Terrorism continues to be an imminent and global
threat. The deep-seated problems surrounding
terrorism, such as radicalization and terrorism
financing, must be addressed in an appropriate manner.
To eradicate terrorism, a multifaceted approach by all
stakeholders is also vital. The three Committees have
played a significant role in this context and should
further enhance their efforts in this field.
We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1989 (2011), by which
sanctions against Al-Qaida and the Taliban are divided
and implemented separately. In particular, the
enhancement of the Ombudsperson’s role in the
process of delisting some persons from the
consolidated list is highly appreciated. We believe that
this measure will improve the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations counter-terrorism
measures. In order to improve the effectiveness of
sanctions, it is essential to ensure the credibility of the
consolidated list. In that regard, we wish to underscore
the importance of the continuous review of the
consolidated list. The Government of Japan is ready to
cooperate actively with the work of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and

26

associated individuals and entities, the Ombudsperson
and the monitoring team.
We welcome the publication of the report by the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). The importance of global
efforts in the area of non-proliferation cannot be
overstated. In order to ensure sufficient support from
Member States, it is essential that they be requested not
only to take measures to implement the resolution but
also to make the activities of the 1540 Committee
known and to enhance transparency. In support of the
work of the 1540 Committee, Japan hosted in May
2011 a seminar on non-proliferation and disarmament,
aimed at increasing awareness and promoting the
sharing of knowledge and experiences among Member
States. As a follow-up to this effort, we will organize
another seminar on 5 December.
It is critical that all Member States make a
concerted effort for the full implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions through measures
such as introducing legislation on export control and
strengthening their capacity in this area by increasing
the levels of relevant personnel and reinforcing the
relevant organizations. It is equally important to
involve all Member States in discussions on how to
achieve such objectives. Japan will continue to
cooperate closely with the activities of the 1540
Committee.
In conclusion, we strongly hope that the three
Committees will make a determined effort to enhance
their mutual cooperation while avoiding any
duplication of work, as well as to cooperate with
Member States and other relevant organizations for our
common goal of eradicating terrorism. The
Government of Japan will continue to take all possible
measures to counter terrorism and to cooperate
positively in the efforts of the three Committees.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
felicitates you, Mr. President, for your excellent
stewardship of the Security Council. We also
congratulate Ambassador Joy Ogwu and the Permanent
Mission of Nigeria for their successful presidency of
the Council during October 2011.
We are grateful to the Chairs of the Committees
for their briefings, which are a valued form of direct

11-59163

S/PV.6658

interaction between
Committees.

Member

States

and

the

In the interest of brevity, I shall read out an
abridged version of our statement; the full text will be
circulated to delegations.
Pakistan strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes. Terrorism and
extremism should not be associated with any religion,
race, ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.
No religious tradition or doctrine should be depicted as
encouraging or inspiring acts of terrorism.
Pakistan, as the biggest victim of terrorism, has
paid an enormous price in blood and treasure in the
fight against this scourge.
Pakistan has made considerable progress in
countering the financing of terrorism. Pakistan has
become a party to the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and has
enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering bill. A
financial monitoring unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to monitor suspicious financial
transactions.
We welcome the split of the sanctions regime
under resolution 1267 (1999) into the Al-Qaida
Committee and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011),
focusing on the Taliban with its country-specific
regime. We hope that the separation of Committees
will go a long way towards refocusing the energies of
the international community in a more precise manner.
Pakistan appreciates the fact that the role of the
Ombudsperson has been enhanced in Security Council
resolution 1989 (2011).
We believe that Security Council resolution 1977
(2011), which extended the mandate of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), should have been negotiated after an open
debate in the Security Council in which all Members of
the United Nations would have had the opportunity to
express their views, inter alia, on scope, limitations,
future direction, tenure of mandate and experiences on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Such an
open debate would have provided a sound basis for
negotiating the extension of the 1540 Committee. An
open and inclusive process for discussing the
resolution would have helped to increase the level of

11-59163

confidence of all States Members of the United Nations
in this process, as they are the ones that ultimately are
required to implement the resolution, which has its
roots in State-driven efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
appreciate this opportunity for my delegation to
participate in this open debate on the activities
undertaken by the three Security Council Committees
involved in the fight against terrorism. In that regard, I
associate myself fully with the statement to be made
later by the representative of the delegation of the
European Union.
Terrorism is an aggressive, ever-changing
phenomenon that requires us to continue to promote
and strengthen cooperation at every level, with no
room for complacency. We must be able to face new
threats such as terrorism’s growing links with
international organized crime and illegal trafficking,
the risk of nuclear terrorism and cyberterrorism.
Unilateral or improvised solutions are not a valid
alternative; a legitimate and systematic perspective
based on international cooperation is required. We can
congratulate ourselves for having contributed to the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the
international legal instruments in force.
The United Nations system has been carrying out
important work in the fight against terrorism and
should continue to play a significant role as the
guarantor of international law. We believe that the
Security Council’s work should be carried out in
complementarity with the efforts of the General
Assembly, as the forum in which the responses of the
international community to the global problems of our
time should be addressed.
I should like to reiterate the firm commitment of
Spain to the fight against all forms of terrorism,
whatever its motivations or manifestations, and my
Government’s wish that this undertaking have ongoing
priority in the context of the agenda of the United
Nations.
I should like also to reiterate our full support for
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, which
during its six years of existence has become an
instrument of preventive diplomacy with political,

27

S/PV.6658

social, judicial, economic, religious, media and
security dimensions, as well as in the area of
intercultural dialogue. Political and moral reasons
should influence us in providing assistance and support
to victims of terrorism. The convening by the
Secretary-General of a new symposium in support of
victims of terrorism, as a continuation of the one held
in 2008, would be greatly appreciated by Spain.

The adoption of resolution 1963 (2010), which
extended the mandate of the Executive Directorate,
will increase its participation in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
make it the great facilitator of technical assistance to
strengthen the capacities of States, thereby
strengthening the desired coordination in the fight
against terrorism.

I would like to thank the Chairs of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for the information provided and for the work
that they have carried out together with their respective
expert groups.

The proliferation and possession of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors or by States on
the margins or in violation of international legality are
serious threats to international peace and security. We
therefore express our support for the efforts of the 1540
Committee to draw up mechanisms to monitor the
implementation of that resolution and to work to
extend its universal application. Spain welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which
extends and strengthens the mandate of that Committee
in the vital context of Member States’ full and strict
compliance with their obligations and commitments in
relation to arms control, disarmament and the
non-proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems.

First, Spain would like to highlight the work of
the 1267 Committee. We value its efforts to increase
the transparency of the review and updating of the
names of persons and entities on the consolidated list
to the sanctions regime. The Council’s adoption of
resolution 1989 (2011) led to an improvement of the
Committee’s proceedings and the quality of the list. We
underscore the need to continue to ensure the
impartiality and transparency of those proceedings and
the important role of the Ombudsperson in improving
that impartiality and transparency. We also wish to
emphasize the important work of the Monitoring Team
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), and we welcome
the extension of its mandate for another 18 months.
Spain also wishes to highlight the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate (CTED) to monitor compliance with
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010)
and to facilitate technical assistance to countries that
request it. The work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate in the past
10 years has been of great importance in promoting
and monitoring compliance with resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). The efforts of CTED to meet
its mandate should be commended. Convinced of the
great value of its contributions, we consider it desirable
to reinforce its human and material capacities in order
to have a stronger direct presence and assistance on the
ground in recipient countries.

28

Allow me to underscore the importance of the
framework’s entities that answer to the Security
Council and those under the Secretariat, and more
closely linked to the General Assembly, maintaining
sufficiently flexibility and coordination to enable a
consistent, complementary and integrated action in our
efforts to eradicate terrorism. We are ready to continue
the necessary consideration and discussions to further
improve the framework that we have established.
I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the
efforts of the three Committees to improve the
effectiveness of their work. The increasing awareness
of the need to respect the rights of individuals in all
measures is also encouraging. With that essential
respect for human rights, the international community
must demonstrate its strong determination to confront
the barbarity of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. I would also like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Chairpersons
of the counter-terrorism committees for their
informative briefings.

11-59163

S/PV.6658

Today’s meeting is an opportunity to put out a
call for effective and collective action in the fight
against terrorism around the world. That is an
imperative for the international community. Divided,
we cannot address the core challenges of terrorism;
united, we can; and for the sake of our children and our
common security, we also must do so.
Last September, the Security Council adopted an
outcome document to commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
It highlighted the close links between terrorists and
criminal networks, illustrating the clear connection
among terrorist activity, money-laundering and illegal
arms and narcotics trafficking. Time and again, we see
that terrorists will take advantage of any weakness in
governance and international cooperation to advance
their aims.
A gap in any State’s counter-terrorism capacity is
a weak link that can be exploited, with potentially
devastating consequences for the rest of the world. We
must face that challenge together. The United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides an
important framework for collective action. Each and
every Member State must recognize its role in
advancing the full implementation of that Strategy,
along with all other relevant Security Council
resolutions.
The recent global survey by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (CTC) of the
implementation of the resolution (see S/2011/463,
annex) illustrates the great challenges that still lie
ahead. Large areas of the globe remain vulnerable.
Many States have failed to enact national counterterrorism legislation that meets international standards.
Issues such as border control, incitement and the
financing of terrorism remain pressing concerns.
Like the illicit trade in arms, drugs and persons,
terrorism and radicalization take place in areas where
the rule of law is dormant. We must pay greater
attention, at both the legislative and the law
enforcement levels, to the increasing links between
terrorist organizations, such as Hezbollah, and
international criminal networks. Those dangers are
tightly woven together and the criminal-terrorist fabric
must be addressed as a whole.
Technical assistance is another area where there
are significant opportunities for improvement. I would

11-59163

like to reiterate my country’s call to conduct a new
assessment of technical assistance for counterterrorism. The need for such a study is clear. The
international community needs to develop a knowledge
base so that it can tailor technical assistance
programmes more effectively, efficiently and
constructively. We must understand the extent of
participation in existing programmes and how they
improve States’ long-term ability to fight terrorism. In
cases where the benefits of technical assistance have
not materialized, we should ask difficult questions.
Successful models should be shared as best practices.
Israel continues to share its unique expertise with
others in that global fight. We are closely engaged in
capacity-building initiatives with a number of States
and regional organizations in Africa, South and Central
America, East and Central Asia and other regions
around the world. Such collaborative efforts span a
range of issues from terrorist financing to aviation
security and from money-laundering to border
protection.
The Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities has
made several important changes in its procedures since
the Council’s last briefing. In June, the Council
empowered
the
Ombudsperson
to
offer
recommendations for de-listing. That is an important
step forward. Israel supports the ongoing efforts to
increase fairness, transparency and due process in the
Committee’s work.
We must develop more effective international
standards to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and dual-use items. The international
community has a clear duty to do whatever it takes to
keep the world’s most dangerous weapons out of the
hands of its most dangerous terrorists and regimes. In
that regard, I wish to reiterate Israel’s support for
resolution 1540 (2004).
We also cannot turn a blind eye to those States
that continue to actively sponsor terrorism, such as Iran
and Syria. Today, Iran serves as the world’s central
banker, primary sponsor and chief trainer of terrorists.
The flow of advanced weapons to terrorists in our
region is growing in scope and scale. Those weapons
contribute to instability and fuel violent attacks on
civilians. As we sit here today, rockets fired by
terrorists in the Gaza Strip continue to rain down on

29

S/PV.6658

the people of southern Israel. Yet, the Security Council
has not uttered a single word of condemnation against
those continuous and brutal acts of terrorism. This
silence speaks volumes. The victims of terror are part
and parcel of any debate on counter-terrorism. Their
voices must be heard. Elie Wiesel once wrote,
“Even when faced with the murderous madness
of criminals, and in the presence of the silent
agony of their victims, it is incumbent upon us to
choose between escape and solidarity, shame and
honour.”
There is no grey area. Turning a blind eye to
terrorists is to choose terrorism. Promoting or
overlooking incitement is to choose to educate the next
generation of terrorists. No declarations or statements
to the contrary can deny these simple truths. The time
has come for all responsible members of the
international community to speak the complete,
unvarnished and sometimes difficult truths about those
who support terrorism. It is time for all States to join
together and take effective action. The challenges
before us are clear. The opportunities to work together
are apparent.
We urge all Member States to set aside their
differences in this fight, to renounce short-term and
short-sighted policies in favour of international
cooperation, and to realize that complacency is not an
option in this struggle. If we truly join forces, the
international community can decisively stem the rising
tide of terrorism and build a brighter future for our
children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Chairs of the three Committees for the
information provided. Our country, as all know, strictly
fulfils the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), and will continue to do so.
Cuba reiterates its firm commitment to fighting
terrorism and its deepest rejection and condemnation of
all terrorist acts, methods and practices in all their
forms and manifestations by whomsoever committed
against whomsoever, wherever they are committed, and
whatever their motivations, including those acts
committed by States that may be directly or indirectly
involved.

30

State terrorism is also one of the most abominable
forms of terrorism. The measures to eliminate
international terrorism must be based on strict respect
for the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.
Cuba fully supports the position of the
Non-Aligned Movement, opposing the unilateral
formulation of lists that accuse States of supposed
support for terrorism, since such lists are incompatible
with international law and resolutions of the United
Nations. Despite Cuba’s proven and transparent record
in fighting terrorism, the Government of the United
States persists in its arbitrary decision to include my
country in a list of States that sponsor international
terrorism in an ever more pathetic annual ritual, given
that the impossibility, since these claims are false, to
objectively substantiate the stigma that they attempt to
impose on us. If it were not for the enormous cost of
sanctions added to the blockade that this unfair
designation imposes on the Cuban people and the
dangers that this decision entails, it would simply be a
mockery of the international community and nothing
more than a typical effort to conceal the lack of
seriousness and the political nature of all decisions
taken by the United States in relation to Cuba.
Cuba vigorously rejects the inclusion of our
country on this unilateral and spurious list, which is
politically motivated and corrupt in its conception,
having been prepared by the United States Department
of State. Like other lists drawn up without authority by
an international organization, it is in complete violation
of international law. The shameful inclusion of a State
like Cuba, which fights terrorism, further discredits
this unilateral mechanism and compromises the
credibility of the United States in its fight against this
scourge.
Since resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted, Cuba
itself has undertaken practical measures to guarantee
its full application. Our country does not possess and
has no intention of possessing weapons of mass
destruction. The possession of such weapons will never
be part of our national defence strategy and never has
been. On the contrary, we support the urgent
prohibition and total elimination of these weapons
worldwide. Our national nuclear, chemical and
biological programmes have always been for strictly
peaceful means and have been used to the benefit of
the well-being of the Cuban people.

11-59163

S/PV.6658

In fulfilment of the provisions of resolution 1267
(1999), the competent Cuban authorities are regularly
informed of the updates to the consolidated list drawn
up by the Committee established pursuant to the
resolution. Cuba has maintained broad and sustained
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We have given detailed and transparent reports on
seven occasions of the measures adopted by our
country to ensure the prevention of and the fight
against terrorism, as stipulated in resolution 1373
(2001).
For years now, our country has presented the
Security Council with detailed information regarding
terrorist actions against Cuba. Unfortunately, to date
our denunciations have not received a concrete
response. Terrorism against Cuba has taken the lives or
seriously hurt thousands of our fellow countrymen and
countrywomen. For six years now, Luis Posada
Carriles, a self-confessed murderer, has enjoyed the
official protection of the Government of the United
States of America, and from North American territory
announces future crimes with complete impunity.
Nevertheless, for trying to prevent terrorist
attacks and share information with the Government of
the United States, five Cuban anti-terrorist compatriots
were unjustly convicted and are serving cruel prison
sentences in the United States; one of them is not
allowed to return home, under the absurd excuse of a
parole arrangement. It is high time that we end this
two-faced morality and double standards in this
important matter. Terrorism must be rejected under all
circumstances. Closer cooperation among States is
needed in order to fight against this scourge.
Finally, we reiterate the firm, tireless readiness of
the Government and the people of Cuba to cooperate in
multilateral efforts to put an end to all terrorist acts,
methods and practices in all their forms and
manifestations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I have the honour of
addressing the Security Council on behalf of the
informal group of like-minded countries, which have
taken a specific interest in strengthening fair and clear
procedures for targeted sanctions and in making United
Nations sanctions regimes more effective. This group
is comprised of Austria, Belgium, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the

11-59163

Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Switzerland.
Let me join others in thanking the Chairs of the
three Committees for their informative briefings. As
the focus of our group lies in targeted sanctions and
fair and clear procedures, my remarks will concentrate
on the sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. In
this regard, I should underline that our group supports
and fully recognizes that targeted sanctions are a useful
and necessary tool for effectively combating
international terrorism. Our position on the issue of
sanctions reform is guided by the aim of strengthening
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
Let me begin by welcoming the adoption of
resolution 1989 (2011) in June. The resolution
enhances due process for listing and de-listing
procedures alike. The like-minded group can only
stress the significance of these latest reforms towards
granting an independent and effective remedy to
anyone who believes himself or herself to be wrongly
labelled as being associated with Al-Qaida.
Read against the background of past
improvements to the 1267 regime — notably the
establishment of the focal point, the introduction of
narrative summaries, the comprehensive review
undertaken and, of course, the establishment of the
Office of the Ombudsperson itself — the new
amendments have contributed considerably to the
overall fairness and effectiveness of the Al-Qaida
sanctions system.
Likewise, the like-minded group takes this
opportunity to commend the Ombudsperson, Judge
Kimberly Prost, for the excellent quality of her work
since she took office in the summer of 2010. There is
now a strong built-in presumption, which is widely
shared, that the Ombudsperson’s presentations are
based on in-depth analysis, well founded and well
received by the Committee when deciding de-listing
requests presented by her Office. The result is an
Ombudsperson who is more likely to gain access to
case-relevant information, and a designating State that
is more likely to be able to implement what its own
national or regional courts require it to do.
Now that these reforms have been put into place,
there is a strong need for all actors involved to
cooperate and ensure that they deliver the envisaged

31

S/PV.6658

results. The Ombudsperson cannot be successful
without the support of Member States. Cooperation
with the Office of the Ombudsperson, including the
provision of confidential information in individual
cases, will therefore be key. Legal and practical ways
of allowing the Ombudsperson’s access to all relevant
information regarding a particular listing should be
actively explored, such as through the conclusion of
confidentiality agreements or arrangements. Among the
like-minded countries, Switzerland, Belgium and Costa
Rica already have arrangements in place with the
Office of the Ombudsperson. They stand ready to
answer — on a bilateral basis — any question the
wider membership might have in that respect.
Of equal importance is the provision of adequate
resources to the Ombudsperson. We therefore call upon
all Member States to look favourably upon the
budgetary requests of the Office of the Ombudsperson
for additional staff and additional resources so as to
enable her to continue to process the increasing
number of petitions fully, effectively and in a timely
manner. Adequate resources are essential if the
Ombudsperson is to be able to fulfil her reinforced
mandate in full accordance with fundamental
requirements of the rule of law, such as the translation
of relevant documents into a language familiar to the
petitioner.
Finally, we note that the effectiveness of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime will also be judged by the
number of appeals to the Security Council. The
Council retains the authority to oppose a de-listing
recommendation under its ordinary decision-making
rules. We appeal to the members of the Sanctions
Committee that such appeals, if any, will not be made
unless there are exceptionally compelling and
comprehensible reasons. The perception of fairer and
clearer procedures, as obtained through resolution 1989
(2011), could be compromised if appeals were to
become a common and successful routine.
Despite all of the improvements, the 1267
sanctions regime continues to be perceived as failing to
conform to due process standards. National
parliaments, as well as national and regional courts,
tend to scrutinize the regime critically. Examples of
recent challenges to the implementation of United
Nations sanctions decisions in Europe include the Kadi
decision of the General Court of the European Union
of September 2010, which is still under appeal, and the
case of Nada v. Switzerland, which is pending before

32

the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human
Rights.
On the basis of the aforementioned, the group of
like-minded States encourages the Security Council to
proactively continue its efforts to improve fair and
clear procedures. We recall our recommendations in
our letter of April this year, including the idea of
introducing a sunset clause for all listings.
In that context, the group takes note of the
decision of the Security Council to establish a separate,
country-specific sanctions regime for those constituting
a threat to peace, security and stability in Afghanistan,
in particular the Taliban and associates. We note further
that some of the institutional features designed to
increase the fairness of procedures in the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, including the authority of the
Ombudsperson, do not apply to the new regime
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
We take note of the different procedures in
different sanction regimes. The like-minded countries
reaffirm their strong view that the question of fair and
clear procedures is relevant to all Sanctions
Committees, and that any improvement in the fairness
of procedures will contribute not only to the
observance of human rights but also to the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the Security Council’s action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): Events this year
have focused attention on our collective progress over
the past decade in combating international terrorism
and stimulated frank assessments of the challenges still
to be faced.
Since 2001, we have had success in disrupting
and dismantling international terrorist networks, and in
establishing robust legal, normative and institutional
frameworks at the national and global levels. But the
recent attack on United Nations facilities in Abuja,
Nigeria, showed the threat terrorism still poses to the
values of this Organization and to the interests of all
Member States.
Al-Qaida has been weakened globally, but its
affiliates still pose significant threats in several
regions. Moreover, terrorist networks have proved
adaptable and resilient, shifting tactics, adopting new
technologies and identifying new resources and
methods of financing to maintain their operations. All

11-59163

S/PV.6658

of this makes effective international cooperation to
counter-terrorism as important now as ever.

Terrorism Prevention Branch workshops on law
enforcement cooperation.

The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and their associated work programmes play vital roles
in combating international terrorism. The past year has
seen significant developments in the work of all three
Committees. New Zealand hopes that the decision in
June to separate the 1267 Committee’s consolidated list
into separate designations for the Taliban and Al-Qaida
will provide the new Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) with flexibility to ensure that
de-listing decisions are consistent with realities on the
ground and can complement Afghanistan’s national
reconciliation efforts.

We
also
support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s emphasis on the role of regional
cooperation. A recent table-top exercise for South-East
Asian practitioners to support implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism was one of a number of
practically-focused initiatives with regional partners
that we have supported in the past few years.

Also important were changes to the de-listing
procedures of the 1267 and 1989 Committees,
including a significant strengthening of the
Ombudsperson’s role. They make it all the more
important for the Ombudsperson to be sufficiently
resourced to carry out this enhanced role and for
Member States provide her their full support, including
through the provision of relevant information.
New Zealand hopes that the 10-year extension in
April of the 1540 Committee’s mandate will facilitate a
longer-term
approach
to
supporting
national
implementation. We welcome the Committee’s
increased emphasis on targeted technical assistance and
its efforts to coordinate this with assistance for other
relevant national capacity-building priorities. That
approach is particularly important for small States with
limited institutional capacities.
Capacity-building is integral to the partnership
underpinning international counter-terrorism cooperation.
New Zealand participates in a wide-ranging
programme of capacity-building focused on supporting
partners in the Pacific and South and South-East Asia.
The targeted approach taken by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
providing technical assistance has helped many States
to strengthen their counter-terrorism frameworks. New
Zealand has partnered with CTED on several such
initiatives, supporting workshops in the Pacific and
South-East Asia — including one held in Auckland
earlier this month — on cash couriers and preventing
terrorist abuse of the non-profit sector. We also helped
fund the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

11-59163

In May, we hosted the seventh annual meeting of
the Pacific Islands Forum working group on counterterrorism. As the only dedicated regional counterterrorism forum, the working group provides important
opportunities to coordinate activities and share best
practice. This year, it was held back-to-back with the
Pacific’s second regional counter-terrorism exercise,
Ready Pasifika II.
Two other recent developments have potential
consequences for all three Committees. New Zealand
welcomes Saudi Arabia’s generosity in funding a
United Nations centre for counter-terrorism to support
international counter-terrorism cooperation. Once
established and fully integrated into the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture, it promises to further
strengthen United Nations counter-terrorism capacities
in key areas.
New Zealand is also a founding member of the
Global
Counterterrorism
Forum
launched
in
September. The Forum should further boost
international
counter-terrorism
capacity-building
efforts, complementing work under way within United
Nations frameworks, particularly CTED. We are
pleased that Indonesia and Australia will chair a Global
Counterterrorism Forum South-East Asia working
group, ensuring that the Forum has a truly global focus.
We can look back over the past decade with a
degree of satisfaction at what has been achieved and,
more importantly, what has been prevented. But our
work is far from complete, and with considerable
challenges ahead, New Zealand is committed to
working with the Council, its Committees and all
Member States to strengthen our collective resilience
and to build the capacities of all States to prevent,
disrupt and bring to justice perpetrators of terrorist
acts.

33

S/PV.6658

The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: The candidate countries Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova align themselves with this
statement.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to be present here today at this timely and important
briefing on issues of crucial significance to the
European Union (EU) and its member States. I also
thank the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive
and informative briefings.
Terrorism remains a serious threat to the
international community. The attack on the United
Nations Office in Abuja in August took the lives of
some of our United Nations colleagues who — as the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his reaction —
were those who devote their lives to helping others.
The EU has a long-standing record of support for
a wide range of counter-terrorism undertakings and
will continue to uphold that record. Last week,
Ms. Mara Marinaki, Managing Director for Global and
Multilateral Issues in the European External Action
Service, took part in a number of meetings in New
York with relevant United Nations entities in order to
foster our cooperation and set up the way ahead for
joint EU-United Nations efforts to better tackle the
challenge of terrorism.
The EU stands firm on the position that the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime continues to play an
important role and is proving its effectiveness. We
fully believe in the importance of an effective
sanctions regime to disrupting the financial flows
financing terrorist acts. We express our support for all
improvements of the United Nations system aimed at
reassuring that the procedures for designating
individuals are fully compliant with fundamental
rights. In order to improve transparency and visibility,
narrative summaries of reasons for listing represent a
particularly appropriate tool.

34

We supported the Security Council’s decision of
17 June to create a new sanctions regime for
Afghanistan, while maintaining and improving the
existing 1267/1989 counter-terrorism regime focused
on Al-Qaida. Therefore, we welcome the adoption of
the resolution 1988 (2011) creating a new sanctions
regime targeted at the Afghan insurgency, and of
resolution 1989 (2011), adopted on 17 June, amending
the existing 1267 sanctions regime to target individuals
and entities associated with Al-Qaida alone. We
especially commend the work of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, which provides individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities with an opportunity to have
their listings reviewed in an independent and impartial
manner.
Regarding
resolution
1989
(2011),
we
particularly welcome the fact that the Ombudsperson
now has the possibility to present recommendations
with a view to de-listing concerned individuals and
entities to the Committee. We also welcome the new
and improved form of interaction between the
Ombudsperson and the Committee. This enhanced
procedure will further improve the effectiveness of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Moreover, resolution 1989
(2011) will also provide greater transparency in the
process being followed by the Committee, including
the possibility of bringing a particular case to the
attention of the Security Council upon request of any
Committee member.
In this regard, access to relevant information is
key to the Ombudsperson’s ability to carry out her
mandate. In particular, we note with satisfaction the
first arrangements between the Office of the
Ombudsperson and member States for access to
confidential and classified information, which is often
an indispensable precondition for a comprehensive
analysis of the case. The way the Ombudsman Office
performs its duties will be meaningful from the due
process perspective regarding the implementation of
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) in
international, regional and national Courts.
Regarding
resolution
1373
(2001),
we
congratulate the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
on the successful special event commemorating the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution, and
we note with interest the establishment of the United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism. Moreover, the
EU fully supports the focus on deliverance of counterterrorism capacity-building to the counter-terrorism

11-59163

S/PV.6658

efforts of countries. The EU looks forward to receiving
the final report of this meeting. The European Union
has developed specific instruments to support countries
in their counter-terrorism efforts, and cooperates
closely with the United Nations on this work.

declaration also highlights the need for reinforcement
measures for domestic visits to States by the 1540
Committee’s Group of Experts in order to gather and
exchange information on best practices and lessons
learned for implementing the resolution.

The EU fully appreciates the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and its Executive Director, Mike Smith. The
EU has long-standing, excellent cooperation with
CTED. The EU welcomes the updated global survey of
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
European Union and its member States implement the
various provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), in
particular in the EU legal framework concerning
border control, migration, asylum, police and judicial
cooperation. The EU counter-terrorism strategy of
2005 provides the overall approach regarding the
prevention of and fight against terrorism. In terms of
thematic priorities, the EU supports the implementation
of the specific recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force on terrorist financing. In terms of
geographical focus, the EU strategy for the Sahel,
which combines security and development actions,
fosters a global approach to countering terrorism.

The EU is also working on initiatives in support
of resolutions 1540 and 1977 (2011), with special focus
on country visits and providing long-term solutions to
challenges on the ground. These initiatives, together
with the EU’s capacity-building — especially
concerning the establishment of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear centres of excellence
throughout the world, including the Maghreb, the
Middle East, the Caucasus, and soon in Central Asia
and South-East Asia — are mutually reinforcing
measures that provide a tangible contribution to the
field of counter-terrorism.

The EU is a key provider of counter-terrorism
capacity-building to many countries, especially in the
areas of the rule of law, criminal justice, law
enforcement, countering violent extremism and
terrorist financing. The EU fully supports the United
Nations and its Member States in their efforts to
implement the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, and the risk that non-State
actors, in particular terrorists, could gain access to such
weapons continue to be a major threat to international
peace and security that calls for a global approach, in
addition to actions at the national and regional levels.
We therefore commend the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We also
welcome the adoption of resolution 1977 (2011).
Only last month, we signed a joint EU-United
States declaration aimed at further supporting the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1977
(2011). The declaration confirms our focus on
supporting countries in developing legislation related
to weapons of mass destruction materials control, and
developing relevant training programmes. The

11-59163

Let me take this opportunity to once again
express our gratitude for the whole spectrum of vitally
important tasks undertaken by the Security Council
committees, aimed at tackling the threat of terrorism.
The European Union and its member States stand firm
in their support for all of these actions, and remain
committed to enhancing cooperation with the United
Nations in this regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We listened with great interest to the briefings
given to the Council by the Chairs of the three
subsidiary Committees at this meeting. We thank them
for their presentations.
Syria has never stopped reaffirming its
condemnation of terrorism, given that it is a criminal,
aggressive and unjust act that takes aim at the lives of
innocent people and at their property. Syria has called
for action at all levels to confront international
terrorism in all of its forms and manifestations, in
accordance with the purposes and principles enshrined
in United Nations Charter and in international law.
Syria reasserts that terrorism poses an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. We also
reiterate our commitment to relevant international
resolutions on combating terrorism. Syria is convinced
of the central role that the General Assembly must play
in fighting terrorism internationally and of the need to
reach international consensus in that regard.

35

S/PV.6658

Syria believes that the Security Council
Committees on counter-terrorism can also contribute to
the coordination of international efforts to fight
terrorism by using transparent, fair and impartial
mechanisms. The objectives of concerted international
actions to address the phenomenon of terrorism will
not be achieved as long as we remain silent on one of
the most serious forms of terrorism — State terrorism.
The clearest example of that is obviously seen in the
crimes perpetrated daily by Israel, the occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people since the
occupation of the Arab territories.
The most recent act of aggression against Gaza
occurred in international waters and targeted the peace
flotilla that was attempting to deliver humanitarian
assistance to a people under siege and suffering from
daily acts of violence and terrorism, not to mention the
killing of key national Palestinian figures in third
countries and nuclear terrorism in the countries of the
region.
Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan have
also been victims of practices that have been classified
and documented as war crimes, which provides a
crystal-clear example of State terrorism that violates
international law, resolutions of international
legitimacy and human rights instruments.
In the light of its suffering as a result of the
terrorist acts carried out in its territory, and in the
conviction that the United Nations plays a central role
in combating international terrorism, Syria is
cooperating fully with the three Committees
established by the Council in resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). Syria has established
national joint commissions to ensure that the
provisions of those resolutions are optimally
implemented.
References to the dangers of terrorism and the
need to address them are not based on theories alone.
My country continues to suffer from that scourge.
Armed groups are committing heinous terrorist acts
against civilians, the military and intellectuals. They
are burning and destroying both public and private
facilities, because they are prompted to do so and are
financed and protected by foreign sources in an effort
to undermine Syria’s domestic security and stability, as
well as to implement agendas that serve neither
domestic peace nor regional stability.

36

Last Saturday, upon instructions from my
Government, I sent letters to the President of the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the
co-Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Those
letters contain detailed information on the trafficking
across the Syrian international border of weapons
destined for terrorists and on operations that would
facilitate communication through the use of
sophisticated devices, with support from external
parties.
Syria was among the first signatories to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), in 1968. Syria opposes the possession of
nuclear weapons by any State or party. Syria also
signed a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in 1992.
It is well known to all that Israel is the only State in the
Middle East that possesses a significant nuclear arsenal
and that refuses to accede to the NPT or to submit any
of its nuclear facilities to any monitoring authorities
associated with the International Atomic Energy
Agency. That was clearly evident at the 2010 NPT
Review Conference, held in New York.
The accumulation of those negative and
dangerous points in terms of Israel’s refusal to accede
to the NPT is an indication of its non-compliance with
resolution 1540 (2004), the IAEA and the efforts of the
Committees combating the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. I should now like to refer to a recent Englishlanguage article in the Israeli press on that subject,
which shows very clearly to what extent Israel is not
adhering to any moral, political or legal standards,
including with respect to the States that are protecting
it.
(spoke in English)
Speaking during an interview that was published
in Jerusalem on Friday, Professor Martin van Creveld
said that Israel could avenge the Holocaust by
annihilating millions of Germans and other Europeans,
and that it had the capability of hitting most European
capitals with nuclear weapons. “We possess several
hundred atomic warheads and rockets, and could
launch them at targets in all directions, perhaps even at
Rome”. He added, “Most European capitals are within
range of our air force”. Van Creveld, a professor of
military history at Hebrew University in Jerusalem, has
pointed out that collective deportation was Israel’s only
meaningful strategy to get rid of the Palestinian people.

11-59163

S/PV.6658

Van Creveld said that he was sure that Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon wanted to deport the
Palestinians. He said, “I think it is quite possible that
he wants to do that. He knows that nothing else we do
will succeed”.
Asked if he was worried about Israel becoming a
rogue State if it carried out a genocidal deportation
against Palestinians, van Creveld quoted former Israeli
Minister of Defence Moshe Dayan, who said that Israel
must be like a mad dog — too dangerous to bother. Van
Creveld argued that Israel would not care much about
becoming a rogue State. Then he said, “our armed
forces are not the thirtieth strongest in the world, but
rather the second or third; we have the capability to
take the world down with us”. It is a long article. I will
not go through it all.
My last comment pertains to the military
exercises that Israel is undertaking right now through
the air space of some European countries. Those are
military exercises being conducted publicly. Yet, there
has been no statement, no condemnation, no
denunciation from anyone. The aim of those military
exercises is to train Israeli pilots to conduct aggression
against other countries, sovereign States Members of
the Organization. I will not name the country targeted,
because everyone knows about whom I am talking.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked to make a further statement. I invite her to take a
seat at the Council table and I now give her the floor.
Ms. Schonmann (Israel): The previous speaker is
deaf to the cries of freedom that continue to come from
the Syrian people in the streets, in broad daylight and
even as we speak. Listening to him just now brings to
mind George Orwell’s 1984, where war is peace,
freedom is slavery, and ignorance is strength.
That Syria continues to gun down and terrorize
its own people is well known and well documented.
That Syria is one of the world’s primary sanctuaries for
terrorist organizations is no secret either. It is common
knowledge that it continues to support, finance and
provide safe haven for terrorist organizations, and that
Damascus is the global headquarters of numerous
terrorist organizations.
While in Israel there is an open and vibrant press,
freedom of speech and a pluralist democratic society,
the Syrian people continue to be oppressed, only
dreaming of living in a democracy. Indeed, whenever a

11-59163

Syrian representative speaks about terrorism, we
should all appreciate the unique opportunity to gain
some insight into the mind of a State sponsor of
terrorism.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked to make a further statement. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and I now
give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for asking for the floor once more.
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX)
considers occupation as the worst form of the crime of
aggression. The content of that resolution therefore
provides the optimal response to what was just said by
the representative of the Israeli occupation of the Araboccupied territories.
Israeli State terrorism is distinguished in this
international Organization because it is documented. It
began with the assassination of the representatives of
the United Nations, starting with Count Bernardotte, in
1948, and continued with the terrorist political crimes
committed
against
Palestinian
leaders,
the
assassination of children at Qana, in southern Lebanon,
on two occasions, and the assassination of Palestinian
and Arab leaders outside Palestine — and we all know
what they did in Dubai and whom they killed there.
The documentation of Israeli State terrorism therefore
really needs an encyclopedia, a specialized one that
would focus attention on Israeli war crimes and Israeli
crimes against humanity perpetrated by every
Government of Israel since its establishment in
Palestine, in 1948. The paradox here is that those who
preach and talk about their pain as a result of the Nazi
Holocaust, which is not of Arab making, as all
members know, blatantly and openly say that they want
the Palestinian people to taste the bitterness of a new
holocaust, but this time it is one of Israeli making.
We are not the only ones who say that Israel is a
State that commits war crimes and crimes of
extermination. There are prominent western officials
who agree with us, including some senior officials of
the United Nations, many of whom have testified
before the Council. President Jimmy Carter was not
alone in saying that Israel was exercising apartheid
against the Palestinians; Bishop Desmond Tutu and
Special Rapporteurs Ian Sinclair, John Dugard and
Richard Falk also have said it. Israel remains the only
State in the world that adopts policies of targeted

37

S/PV.6658

killing and allocates financial resources in its national
budget for them — something that is condemned all
over the world. That budget is approved publicly by the
Israeli Knesset. I respect the fact that it is late, and I
will stop there.

38

The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

11-59163
