S/PV.7906

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7906th meeting

Thursday, 23 March 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Johnson/Mr. Rycroft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Selim
Ms. Zemene
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Amendola
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ali
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
16 December 2016 to 1 March 2017) (S/2017/224)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-07635 (E)
*1707635*

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 16 December 2016 to
1 March 2017) (S/2017/224)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives to the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of South Sudan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairman of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission and Former President
of Botswana; and Ms. Betty Sunday, Coordinator of
the Women’s Monthly Forum on Peace and Political
Processes in South Sudan.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of participants to
document S/2017/224, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan covering the period
from 16 December 2016 to 1 March 2017.
Following consultations with the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:
“The Security Council expresses deep alarm
at the situation in South Sudan, stresses again that
there is no military solution to the conflict, and
renews its condemnation of continued fighting
across the country. The Security Council reiterates
its call upon all parties to immediately adhere to the
permanent ceasefire as called for in the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan
(“the Agreement”), reminding all parties that
implementation of a ceasefire is critical for the
success of any genuine, inclusive political process.
2/24

23/03/2017

“The Security Council is deeply alarmed
that famine was declared in parts of South
Sudan, that many more South Sudanese face
severe food insecurity, and is deeply concerned
about the actions of all parties to the conflict
that are perpetuating the humanitarian crisis. In
this regard, the Security Council condemns any
undermining of the ceasefire and restrictions
and attacks on humanitarian personnel and their
facilities as well as on the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, especially
to famine-affected locations, and calls for an
immediate cessation of such actions and immediate
and unhindered access to all those in need. The
Security Council further calls for all parties to take
appropriate measures to protect United Nations and
foreign premises and personnel and other civilians
in South Sudan. The Security Council commends
countries in the region who continue to receive and
host refugees.
“The Security Council condemns reported
human rights violations and abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law, as applicable,
and expresses deep alarm at the numerous and
ongoing reports of sexual and gender-based
violence and recruitment and use of children in
violation of international law in South Sudan. The
Security Council underscores the pressing need
for accountability for any violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. The Security Council calls for
swift implementation of chapter V of the Agreement,
and expects all relevant parties mentioned in the
Agreement to take all necessary steps towards
the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South
Sudan. The Security Council also stresses that the
Commission of Truth, Reconciliation and Healing,
as stipulated in the Agreement, is a critical part of
the peacebuilding process in South Sudan.
“The Security Council underscores its
conviction that a political solution to the conflict
is essential, underscores its support for regional
and international efforts to find such a solution
in order to advance the Agreement. The Security
Council supports the Joint Press Statement by the
African Union (AU), Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations
of 29 January 2017, which commends the work
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7906

performed by the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (JMEC) Chairperson Festus Mogae,
and encourages the AU High Representative for
South Sudan Alpha Oumar Konaré to undertake
active shuttle diplomacy towards ensuring the
implementation of the Agreement and the inclusivity
of the National Dialogue in close consultations
with the JMEC Chairperson, IGAD, and the United
Nations. The Security Council calls on all parties
to fully cooperate with Presidents Konaré, Mogae,
and the United Nations in their efforts to advance
peace in South Sudan.

IGAD towards ensuring the implementation
of the Agreement and the inclusivity of
the National Dialogue as outlined in their
29 January 2017 statement.

“The Security Council notes the announcement
on 14 December 2016 by President Kiir of the
launch of a National Dialogue process. The
Security Council notes that an immediate ceasefire
by all parties is vital for any National Dialogue to
be credible and recalls statements by Presidents
Mogae and Konaré, that an inclusive political
process must also be authentic, autonomous, and
impartially led by a credible facilitator accepted
by the people of South Sudan, and which supports
the Agreement. The Security Council agrees
that an inclusive political process is necessary to
improve and maintain the security in the country.
The Security Council emphasizes that an inclusive
political process would include representatives
of all the main parties to the conflict, the full
and effective participation of women as well as
representatives for a wide range of stakeholders
and constituencies.

“5. Immediate cessation of obstructions to
and attacks on all national and international
humanitarian
personnel
and
facilities
endeavouring to provide life-saving assistance
throughout South Sudan.

“The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the failure of the parties to fully adhere
to their commitments to implement the Agreement,
and in this regard, the Security Council calls for
the following steps to be taken:
“1. Immediate adherence to the permanent
ceasefire by all forces of the parties to the
conflict and all other armed groups.
“2. Urgently address the challenges faced
by humanitarian personnel in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance throughout South
Sudan and specifically to famine-affected
areas, including through meetings of the
Humanitarian High Level Oversight Committee
and urgent implementation of its decisions.
“3. Unconditional support of all parties for
the endeavours of the United Nations, AU, and

“4. Immediate removal of obstacles to
UNMISS and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism
(CTSAMM) operations including obstacles
to the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force and attacks on UNMISS and
CTSAMM personnel.

“The Security Council expresses its intention
to review progress on the steps outlined above no
later than 30 April 2017.
“The Security Council expresses concern that
the Government of South Sudan has not upheld all
of its commitments towards implementation of the
4 September 2016 Joint Communiqué and renews
its invitation to Government to update the Security
Council on the Communiqué’s implementation.
“The Security Council stresses that actions
which threaten the peace, security or stability of
South Sudan may be subject to sanctions under
resolutions 2206 (2015) and 2290 (2016).
“The Security Council reaffirms its unwavering
support for the people of South Sudan.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/4.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence here today for this important meeting
on South Sudan.
Before we turn to today’s agenda, I would like
to once again express our sincere condolences to the
people and the Government of the United Kingdom
on the loss of life and injuries suffered in yesterday’s
terrorist attack in London. The United Nations stands
with the people of the United Kingdom, as we do
with all those who have suffered from the menace of

17-076353/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

terrorism around the world. Our thoughts are with the
victims and their families.
The conflict in South Sudan continues to generate
profound suffering. The Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) and the opposition are conducting
military operations in a number of areas, with
devastating consequences for civilians, who face
seemingly endless violence and are being forced to
flee their homes. At present, the situation is especially
alarming in the greater Upper Nile area, with military
clashes along the banks of the River Nile in and around
Malakal, in the famine-affected counties of Unity
and in previously stable areas of northern Jonglei. In
the past three months, the greater Equatoria region
has also continued to see high levels of fighting and
insecurity, with retaliatory operations by the SPLA and
its allied militias against suspected rebel groups and
communities that are perceived to support them.
Civilians continue to be subjected to horrendous
attacks, including rape and the recruitment of children.
More than 1.9 million people have been displaced
internally, more than 220,000 of whom are seeking
safety in protection sites of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS). Some 1.6 million people
have sought refuge in neighbouring countries. The
humanitarian crisis continues to deepen, with 100,000
people enduring famine, 1 million on the verge of that
fate and 5.5 million who may be severely food-insecure
by the summer. At least 7.5 million people across South
Sudan — almost two thirds of the population — need
humanitarian assistance. Three years of conflict have
eroded livelihoods and disrupted farming, including in
the Equatorias, the country’s breadbasket. Humanitarian
compounds and supplies have been repeatedly looted.
The Government continues to impede deliveries of
lifesaving assistance, including through denial of
access and bureaucratic impediments. Most recently,
the Government decided to institute a massive hike in
the price of work permits for aid workers.
Yet despite the alarm sounded by the United Nations
and the international community over the crisis, the
Government has yet to express any meaningful concern
or take any tangible steps to address the plight of its
people. On the contrary, what we hear most often
are denials — a refusal by the leadership to even
acknowledge the crisis or fulfil its responsibility to
end it. The peace process remains at a standstill. While
President Kiir’s statements regarding his intention to
hold a national dialogue are welcome, they are not
4/24

23/03/2017

convincing in the context of the ongoing hostilities,
the absence of consultations with key stakeholders, the
systematic curtailment of basic political freedoms, the
restrictions on humanitarian access and the growing
fragmentation on both sides of the conflict.
Under-Secretary-General Hervé Ladsous returned
just yesterday from a trip to South Sudan, where he
visited the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
acknowledged the important work that our courageous
staff are undertaking in the country. He was
accompanied by the Under-Secretary-General-designate
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
who will take up his duties after 1 April. Mr. Ladsous
met with President Kiir, the First Vice President
and Cabinet Ministers, and emphasized the critical
importance of an inclusive political process for ensuring
the well-being of the country’s people. Indeed, credible
dialogue cannot take place at the point of a gun. When
civil-society and opposition members cannot meet
or speak freely, when a significant proportion of the
population cannot participate in discussions and
when numerous communities are displaced or facing
starvation, dialogue efforts are unlikely to succeed.
The same holds true for elections, which can take place
only once stability has returned.
The United Nations is working with the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to reinvigorate the political
process and to resolve long-standing intercommunal
disputes in South Sudan and the subregion. We support
both the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, President Festus Mogae, and the African
Union High Representative for South Sudan, President
Alpha Konaré, in their respective roles. The United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
country team are supporting intercommunal dialogue
and local peace conferences. We also continue to work
for the deployment of a regional protection force, despite
continuing obstacles imposed by the Government of
South Sudan.
But no such force and no amount of diplomacy can
substitute for a lack of political will among those who
govern the country. There is a strong consensus that
South Sudanese leaders need to do more to demonstrate
their commitment to the well-being of the country’s
people, who are among the poorest in the world. If
there is to be any hope that those leaders will change
their current calculations, greater pressure is needed.
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7906

That means, first and foremost, that the region and the
Security Council must speak with one voice.

humanitarian situations in South Sudan have steadily
deteriorated to unacceptable levels.

Let us not underestimate the dangers of South
Sudan’s trajectory. Atrocity crimes have occurred with
impunity, and the potential for serious deterioration
remains very real. Credible mechanisms for
accountability are a must. For every child who dies,
for every woman or girl raped with impunity, for every
young boy conscripted into fighting and fed only
hatred, there is an angry mother, father, sister or brother
plunged into sorrow, feeding the cycle of vengeance.

The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism now reports deliberate, planned
conflict between the main parties to the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
in Government, and the SPLA in Opposition, which is
loyal to Mr. Riek Machar, as well as other emerging
armed groups, engage in the destruction of lives and
communities in total violation of the ceasefire. Across
the board, there is a heightened sense of alarm about
the fact that the situation is slipping out of control. It
is time for the international community to condemn in
the strongest possible terms the violence, the killings,
the human rights abuses and the destruction of homes.
We must now stand together to do something about it.

To pull the country back from the abyss and back
from a widening famine, we must collectively focus
our energies on three immediate objectives. The first
is achieving an immediate cessation of hostilities. The
second is restoring the peace process, which means
ensuring the representation of and consultation with
the opposition, civil society and all South Sudanese,
regardless of ethnicity, in the transition and in the
proposed national dialogue. The third is ensuring
unrestricted humanitarian access, including freedom
of movement for UNMISS and a future regional
protection force.
In two days, the IGAD Heads of State will meet in
Nairobi. I urge the members of the Security Council
and the leaders of IGAD to unanimously declare their
support for those three objectives and to press the
South Sudanese parties to implement them. All of the
optimism that accompanied the birth of South Sudan
has been shattered by internal divisions, rivalries and
the irresponsible behaviour of some of its leaders. As a
result, a country that saw a brief glimmer of hope for a
better future has plunged back into darkness. We have
to do everything in our power to change that.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank the President of
the Security Council, the British Foreign Secretary,
Mr. Boris Johnson, for his kind invitation to brief the
Council today. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his accurate and detailed description of
the current situation in South Sudan. I do not intend to
cover the same ground with what little time we have.
Suffice it to say that in the eight months since the
outbreak of violence in July, the security, economic and

Whether by design or default, a war is being waged
across South Sudan, and I wish to spell out the three
defining questions that we all face right now. How do
we stop the fighting? How do we stop innocent people
from dying of starvation? And how do we ensure
that the interest and consent of all South Sudanese
communities are fully represented and considered?
Peace, relief and inclusivity — those three issues are
wholly interconnected. The humanitarian crisis, now
officially a famine, is the direct result of insecurity
and of the violence done by all parties to the ceasefire
agreement. The insecurity and armed violence are a
direct result of the perceived political exclusion from
the peace process and of the reality of that exclusion.
Only when all the peoples and communities of South
Sudan see that their interests and consent are being
addressed, therefore, can peace return to the country
and the people return to normal life.
There can never be a military solution in South
Sudan, nor can a military or political regime be imposed
on any side by any other. To find a genuine and durable
political solution, the South Sudanese leadership must
be willing to listen, accommodate and compromise. In
the interim, we must urgently look again at all possible
practical measures that we can take to alleviate the
desperate suffering that millions of people are facing
every day. Women especially have suffered the greatest
injustices and won the greatest battle of the conflict.
All parties to the peace agreement are failing in their
basic duty to protect the South Sudanese people.

17-076355/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The international community must acknowledge
that since the events of July 2016, a split in the SPLA
in Opposition has resulted in two clear opposition
factions: one loyal to Mr. Riek Machar, which is still
fighting and has been excluded from all agreements
and institutions at the present time, and the other loyal
to General Taban Deng Gai and which is cooperating
with the Government. I have had important discussions
with the President of South Sudan, primarily focused
on the national dialogue initiative, and the need for it
to be genuinely and sincerely inclusive, not simply a
discussion with those who agree with the Government.
I reiterate my view that the national dialogue must
be authentic, autonomous and impartially led for it to
be credible and deliver a reliable representation of all
views and concerns. A national dialogue conducted in
such a fashion would contribute to the peace process in
the spirit of the agreement.
I remain firmly convinced that the peace agreement
remains the only viable framework through which to
recover the peace process, drive inclusive engagement
and re-establish momentum. However hard it may be, I
urge all parties, guarantors and partners to continue to
support the peace agreement and the implementation
of its provisions. With regard to the implementation
of the agreement, I can report only modest progress.
The National Constitution Amendment Committee
started slowly, but is now on course to complete the
review of the Constitution before the end of this month.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism is monitoring and investigating
violations of the ceasefire, but is regularly denied
freedom of movement by all armed groups. The Joint
Military Ceasefire Commission, the Joint Integrated
Police and the Strategic Defence and Security Review
Board continue to develop their plans very slowly, but
to the exclusion of the pro-Machar Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition.
I have called on the Transitional Government of
National Unity to demonstrate commitment to the
agreement institutions by providing the required
resources and facilities and allowing accelerated
delivery, and I encourage the regional and international
partners to support them.
Beyond the establishment of the technical committee
for the national consultative process on the establishment
of the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and
Healing, there has been no further progress on
establishing mechanisms and institutions under chapter
6/24

23/03/2017

V of the peace agreement. I have yet to hear from the
African Union Commission on the establishment of
the hybrid court for South Sudan. These are matters
of great concern. Given the escalation of the conflict,
progress towards chapter V mechanisms is needed now
more than ever before, and I appeal to all parties to
move with haste to enable their swift establishment.
Finally, my recommendation is that we, the
international community, must demand peace and the
total cessation of violence around the country with one
voice. We must activate the immediate deployment of a
regional protection force and support the implementation
of chapter II transitional security arrangements. We
must demand the full and credible inclusion of all
parties and stakeholders in the peace process. We must
constantly encourage the Government to conduct a
genuinely inclusive and impartial dialogue. We must
endeavour to achieve an immediate improvement of the
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and ensure a renewed effort to create the hybrid court
for South Sudan and thereby establish the mechanism
for the prosecution of those who perpetrate atrocities
and human rights abuses.
In conclusion, therefore, and in the face of an everworsening situation, I believe that only a resolute and
unified approach by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole can restore
hope to the people of South Sudan.
The President: I thank Mr. Mogae for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sunday.
Ms. Sunday: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
us, representatives of the civil society of South Sudan,
to brief the Security Council on the current situation
in our country. It is important for those here to hear
directly from civil society in South Sudan, including
women’s organizations, on the security threat that we
are facing and our recommendations for durable peace.
Today, I represent the Women’s Monthly Forum,
which was founded in 2014. Women from all walks of
life come together to push for inclusion in the peace
processes and to coordinate our voices with that of the
negotiator during the peace negotiations in Addis Ababa.
Since then, we have continued to advocate for women’s
inclusion in the implementation and monitoring of
the peace agreement. The security threats for South
Sudanese women continue to be extremely dangerous.
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.7906

We cannot move freely to fetch water or get food owing
to the repeated incidents of rape and other human rights
violations. That is happening throughout the country,
including in the camps for the protection of civilians.
Women also continue to face challenges in their efforts
to be heard, even in Government institutions.

of the Republic of South Sudan is a public call for full
participation by all citizens in the quest for a lasting
political solution to our country’s political challenges.
We urge that the dialogue be inclusive and facilitated by
a reliable ceasefire that can ensure a secure environment
in which all citizens can participate safely.

If the peace agreement were implemented, women
could go about their life without fear. Their children
could go to school, and they could collect food and
tend their gardens. The peace agreement cannot be
allowed to die. It is a very important document for
the South Sudanese. We have fought hard for it, and
now we want it to come to life. It contains provisions
that will enable women to play a role in determining
the peaceful future of the country. The political will
for the implementation of the peace agreement needs
to come from all sides within South Sudan, as well
as from the international community, including the
Security Council. South Sudan cannot do it alone. We,
civil society, need solution-oriented meetings, because
we have seen numerous meetings that end with the
adoption of position papers that are not action-oriented.
We urge the Council and the Government to cooperate
in seeking a peaceful and lasting solution to the political
crisis in our country.

Fifthly, as a member of the United Nations,
South Sudan has an obligation to fulfil its duties
and responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. We are aware that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) is approaching the renewal
of its mandate. We ask that the new UNMISS mandate
enable it to provide capacity support to the Government
of South Sudan for human rights protection and the rule
of law, for compliance with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) and for the professionalization of policing
services. Sixthly, we are pleased that the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have committed to
coordinating efforts to seek a political solution to the
challenges our country faces. We urge the Council to
partner with our Government with the aim of making
a reality of the stipulations in the AU-United NationsIGAD joint communiqué of 29 January.

We are here in the meeting today to urge the
Council to decide on action on the following key issues.
The first is the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The peace agreement offers great opportunities
for our political transformation, but the challenge is
that the parties to the agreement face issues of political
will and good faith, because they focus too much on
power-sharing. Secondly, thanks to the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Council is aware of
the incidences of sexual and gender-based violence in
South Sudan. We urge the Council and the Government
to cooperate to actualize the joint communiqué signed
by the President and the United Nations.
Thirdly, the current humanitarian situation,
including the famine in some parts of the country that
has been declared by the Government, is disturbing.
We therefore urge the Council to provide humanitarian
support to those in need with all possible speed, and we
urge our Government to provide the necessary support
for facilitating humanitarian access and protecting
humanitarian workers and property. Fourthly, the
announcement of a national dialogue by the President

We urge the Council to be proactive in engaging
the Government of South Sudan so as to realieze the
political expectations contained in the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, and we urge the conflicting partiesn to commit
to abiding by the decisions of the Council.
The President: I thank Ms. Sunday for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom.
As we sit safely in the Council Chamber, villages
in South Sudan are being raided, plundered and set
ablaze. Thousands of men, women and children are
being driven from their homes, separated from their
families and forced to endure terror and hunger as they
seek safety in squalid camps. The toll of suffering in
South Sudan has grown inexorably. At the close of
2015, some 2 million people had been displaced. Today,
that figure has risen to 3 million, almost half of whom
are refugees in neighbouring countries, including up to
1 million in Uganda.
Last month alone, the brutal cycle of raiding,
retaliation and counter-retaliation compelled another

17-076357/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

23/03/2017

80,000 people to flee and, most telling of all, famine
has been declared in areas of former Unity State — the
first famine in the world in six years. Any visitor to
that region of South Sudan will know that its green and
fertile plains are watered by the tributaries of the White
Nile. Nature and geography therefore cannot explain
why famine has struck. Only the avarice and folly of
human beings are to blame. I am reminded of the words
of the hymn by Bishop Heber: “Though every prospect
pleases ... only man is vile”. We should be in no doubt
that famine could blight other areas if the fighting does
not stop. Against that background, no member of the
Security Council can escape the responsibility to renew
our efforts to restore peace in South Sudan.

they so desperately need by blocking humanitarian
deliveries, including in Unity State, where famine has
struck. We should all make clear that denying food
to the starving is simply unconscionable; nor can we
accept a situation in which the Government or any
armed group obstructs aid agencies in their efforts to
deliver emergency supplies or United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in its efforts to protect
civilians. We should also spell out with unity, clarity
and conviction the progress that we expect from the
Government. We must back that up by resolving that the
Council will consider alternative measures, including
an arms embargo and targeted sanctions on individuals,
if that progress fails to materialize.

Today, and each day afterwards, we must
demonstrate the unity of the Council over what needs
to be done. The peace accord of 2015 must be revived
in order to deliver a genuine political process that
embraces all people of South Sudan and begin the task
of reconciliation and healing. There are three key steps
to achieving that. First, there can be no real dialogue as
long as South Sudan is ravaged by fighting. All parties
must respect an immediate cessation of hostilities. As
President, Salva Kiir is responsible for taking the first
step and others must follow.

The United Kingdom remains convinced that an
arms embargo would serve to protect ordinary South
Sudanese from the worst excesses of military power,
and on a future occasion we will ask the Council to
reconsider that measure. Our strength of feeling arises
partly from Britain’s profound ties of history and
friendship with the people of South Sudan. We were a
guarantor of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement of
2005, which paved the way for South Sudan to achieve
independence. The United Kingdom was a witness to
the peace accord of 2015 that sought, unavailingly, to
end the current conflict. We are now the second biggest
bilateral donor to South Sudan and we are strengthening
UNMISS peacekeeping by deploying almost 400
British military engineers, medics and a field hospital.

Secondly, there must be impartial leadership of the
effort to revive the political process. Lastly, any talks
will bring long-term peace only if all South Sudanese
are represented. That means including not only the
opposing forces but also other armed groups, political
parties, displaced people, refugees, young people and
women. President Konaré, the High Representative
of the African Union (AU) for South Sudan, Prime
Minister Hailemariam Dessalegn, Chairman of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
and Secretary-General António Guterres have resolved
to drive the process forward together. I also welcome
President Mogae, Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, responsible for enforcing the
implementation of the peace agreement.
We in the Security Council must demonstrate
our wholehearted support for their efforts, and those
responsible for atrocities must be brought to account
through the establishment of a hybrid court. Given the
scale of the suffering, all of the opposing forces have
a special responsibility to enable the delivery of aid
wherever it is required, anywhere in the country. I am
deeply concerned about the reports that the Government
of South Sudan has denied its own citizens the help
8/24

The Council is aware that more than 200,000
civilians have taken shelter inside United Nations sites
across South Sudan, unable to leave those barbed-wire
confines lest they be murdered for no other reason than
their ethnicity. Day after day, UNMISS tries to protect
those civilians, and I know that British peacekeepers
will help UNMISS fulfil that task. But South Sudan’s
people should not have to rely on outside protection.
And if our efforts falter, the Council should be in no
doubt that South Sudan’s tragedy could become even
worse. There is an urgent need for collective action,
particularly by neighbouring countries, who are already
hosting 1.4 million refugees. As Ms. Sunday has just
told the Council, the innocent and the most vulnerable
are enduring the greatest suffering in this war.
We are all here today because we have an obligation
to act, and we cannot leave this meeting believing that
our work is done. We should acknowledge that a terrible
failure of political leadership lies behind the bloodshed.
At every level we must therefore place pressure on the
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

leaders of South Sudan, both in Government and in
opposition, to act in the best interests of their people.
We — the Security Council, the United Nations,
IGAD and the AU — must help the South Sudanese to
come together and agree on a common vision for their
country’s future. And we should all stand ready to make
that vision a reality.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
on behalf of my Government, I would like to to express
my condolences to the people and the Government of
the United Kingdom for the heinous terrorist attack that
has cost the lives of innocent people. The expanding
area where such acts occur shows how terrorist
organizations are trying to instil fear and despair in
our societies. It behoves us all to take measures and
resolutions aimed at frustrating such murderous plans.
I would like to warmly thank the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today’s important meeting, and to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General, the Chair of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for South
Sudan and the representative of civil society for their
informative briefings.

S/PV.7906

political transition is crucial, both pre- and postindependence. We fully recognize the dangerous
repercussions of this crisis for peace and stability in
East Africa, and its enormous human and economic
toll. The crisis could spill into the neighbouring States
that are shouldering the majority of the responsibility
for humanitarian assistance if it is not contained in a
just and comprehensive manner.
The most important question is how to deal with the
current situation and avoid the earlier mistakes of the
international community in dealing with South Sudan
since its independence, which means working to put
an end to the suffering caused by displacement, sexual
violence and famine. In that regard, our vision is based
on a comprehensive approach. It includes a number of
principles and measures that should be taken together
in order to deal with the crisis and its root causes:
First, all efforts should be based on the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, signed in August 2015, as a comprehensive
reference point for all the efforts to achieve a political
settlement. The agreement includes all the basic
elements necessary to reach a political solution and a
peaceful transition of power.

On 9 July 2011, the world witnessed the Republic
of South Sudan’s declaration of its independence in
response to the will of its people. It was a crystallization
of the aspirations of its people and their hopes for a better
future. However, less than three years after the birth of
that State, those hopes suffered a setback. The country
found itself in a dilemma, beset by armed violence that
arose from acute political divisions, exacerbated by a
devastating economic crisis. Those divisions have led
some parties to the conflict to become focused on and
trapped by their ethnicities and thereby disregard the
aspirations expressed by the people of South Sudan in
July 2011.

Secondly, the call for a comprehensive national
dialogue issued by President Salva Kiir is an opportunity
that must be taken advantage of, as it provides an
alternative forum for all parties to renounce violence
and deal with divisions in a political context. We should
therefore seek to enable such a dialogue to succeed
without marginalizing any political or ethnic group.
The responsibility of the international community is
to provide political support for that dialogue. In that
regard, Egypt is ready to use its historic relations with
the region and all of the regional parties to provide
whatever assistance the people of South Sudan need, to
help to facilitate a dialogue and to arrive at results that
can set the country on the road to peace and stability.

For six years — the age of the nascent State of
South Sudan — the causes of the conflict became
more acute, while the international community failed
to fully recognize the extent of the challenges that
South Sudan was facing. It was as if the responsibility
of the international community had ended with the
declaration of independence, without anyone taking
stock of the deep-rooted causes of conflict. The
subsequent developments in South Sudan have shown
that international support for countries that are in

Thirdly, all parties have an urgent moral, legal and
human obligation to put an end to all forms of violence,
abide by international law and its related relevant
principles, assume their responsibilities towards
civilians, and help facilitate the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
which requires that it be able to reach all affected
areas immediately and without restrictions in order to
implement the Council’s mandate. Creating obstacles to
humanitarian efforts will only lead to more suffering,

17-076359/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

increase the human costs of the struggle and erode the
regional and international efforts aimed at reaching
a political settlement for the crisis and at ending the
suffering of the civilians.
For its part, Egypt has intensified bilateral talks
with the Government of South Sudan and has received
President Salva Kiir in Cairo wth the goal of supporting
all efforts to achieve a political solution. In the past few
weeks, President Al Sisi has continued to make efforts
to that end, including by visiting Uganda and Kenya
and dealing with the active regional parties in order to
strengthen the efforts to put an end to the conflict and
support stability. We have seen that our brother countries
appreciate the role that we have played in this conflict.
At the same time, we emphasize the importance of the
coordination between the regional and international
efforts being undertaken by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council to revive
the political process as an alternative to violence. We
must understand that no political effort will succeed
unless it includes a set of measures that deal with the
root causes of the problem.
We must enhance the strength and capacity of
State institutions and their organizational structure
and reform them, as well as creating the Commission
for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing, in accordance
with chapter V of the peace agreement. All efforts must
focus on the most important purpose — strengthening
the concept of citizenship and transcending the tribal
affiliations that have been exploited both internally
and externally, in order to increase stability and
address those divisions. It is vital to avoid a collapse
of the country’s State institutions and to maintain and
strengthen them in the future. In that regard, sanctionsbased approaches are unwise. They have not been
useful and could worsen the situation. Egypt has seen
the possible consequences of the collapse of States in
its region close-up. We know that such a vacuum can
be filled only by anarchy and armed groups that are
extremely difficult to control.
In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its commitment to
deploying every possible effort to reach a comprehensive
settlement through the current membership of the
Security Council, as well as our membership of the
United Nations as a whole and of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, taking into consideration
the excellent relations that link Egypt with all the
parties to the conflict in South Sudan.
10/24

23/03/2017

Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I would first like to
thank this afternoon’s briefers. We value Mr. Mogae’s
regional perspective, and I would also like to sincerely
thank Ms. Betty Sunday for her testimony here today.
It is important to bring those first-hand accounts to the
Security Council’s attention.
I was here less than six years ago and I distinctly
remember the celebrations, the dancing and the jumping
for joy when South Sudan gained its independence and
joined the United Nations. Since then, the hopes and
dreams of the people of South Sudan for achieving
peace and prosperity have been shattered. The current
conflict is predominantly a man-made disaster that
could have been avoided. It has caused too much
suffering, led to innumerable violations of human
rights and triggered a humanitarian crisis of immense
proportions. It must end.
I would like to highlight three aspects that I
believe we should focus on as we work to end this
horrific conflict. First of all, the fighting must stop and
the civilian population must be protected. We know
that the primary responsibility for that lies with the
Government and the parties to the conflict. We, the
international community, acting through the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), must work closely
together and assist in finding a political solution to the
conflict. In that regard, I welcome the leadership of
the Secretary-General, President Konaré and President
Mogae. The joint consultative meeting between the
African Union, IGAD and the United Nations on the
margins of the AU Summit is an example of the kind
of coordination that is necessary to put real pressure
on the parties to the conflict. The crisis in South Sudan
is also part of a complex set of challenges facing the
Horn of Africa. I again want to underline the need for a
holistic regional approach, as we have also heard from
previous speakers.
Secondly, the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan of August 2015 must
remain the cornerstone of our efforts. The increasing
fragmentation of the parties to the conflict and the
reports of growing tensions between various ethnic
groups underscore the importance of complementing
the continued implementation of the Agreement with
an inclusive political process. The proposal for a
national dialogue could offer a way forward. However,
the legitimacy and effectiveness of such a dialogue
can be assured only if it includes representatives of all
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

parties to the conflict and other stakeholders in South
Sudanese society. Simply put, genuine inclusivity
is of paramount importance. In particular, we must
ensure that women — half of the population — have
an equal say in the dialogue. For the past few years,
Sweden, together with UN-Women, has worked with
the Women’s Parliamentary Caucus of South Sudan.
We have sought to strengthen their ability to represent
grass-roots women and generate new ideas to advance
the peace process. The voices of the members of the
Caucus deserve to be heard at the international level,
including by the Council.
Thirdly, the immensely difficult situation for
women and girls in South Sudan must be addressed. It
should improve drastically and without further delay.
The alarming number of cases and accounts of sexual
and gender-based violence are absolutely harrowing
and are a sad reminder of my duties during my time
at the United Nations as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
perpetrators of such acts must be brought to justice and
their victims must receive care and compensation. In
that regard, the hybrid court for South Sudan envisaged
in the peace agreement could be an important measure
for fighting impunity. Furthermore, the unprecedented
level of recruitment and use of children by the parties
to the conflict is unacceptable and should be addressed
without delay.
I want to pay tribute to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
country team for their invaluable efforts to protect
civilians, including the steps they have taken to increase
the safety of women and girls. It is unacceptable that
UNMISS is being hindered from fulfilling its mandate,
and that deployment of the regional protection force has
been delayed.
We must work jointly and resolutely to ensure that
the hopes and dreams of a whole generation are not
lost. The urgency of ending the conflict in South Sudan
cannot be overstated. It must remain at the top of the
international agenda.
Mrs. Zemene (Ethiopia): We would once again like
to thank the United Kingdom presidency for organizing
today’s meeting on the situation in South Sudan. We
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for all the efforts that he has made
since assuming office to address the security and
humanitarian situation in South Sudan as one of his top

S/PV.7906

priorities. We are also pleased to see President Mogae,
and we are very grateful to him for his unwavering
commitment and dedication to discharging his heavy
and difficult responsibilities as Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission. We in the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the region are very indebted to him. We would also
like to thank Ms. Sunday for her detailed briefing.
Though not all the causes may be exactly the same
as in Somalia, in South Sudan there is also a looming
humanitarian catastrophe in which millions are at risk
of food insecurity. The situation is exacerbated by the
high levels of insecurity that have resulted from the
continued fighting and intercommunal violence in
the country, coupled with a drought and a deepening
economic crisis. Famine has already been declared
in some counties, and saving lives through urgent
international humanitarian assistance has become a
top priority. In that regard, unhindered humanitarian
access is indeed critical if we are to come to the rescue
of the millions of South Sudanese in need of urgent
lifesaving assistance. We welcome President Salva
Kiir’s expressed commitment to restore freedom of
movement to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and humanitarian actors.
South Sudan has suffered for far too long, and the
situation can be alleviated only through a cessation
of all hostilities and violence in the country. That is
why we remain extremely concerned by the reports of
continued fighting between Government and opposition
forces in several parts of the country and of its
devastating consequences for the civilian population.
Without genuine and inclusive political dialogue, there
can be no end to the violence and the situation is bound
to get worse. No cause is so noble that it should hinder
our unity in helping South Sudan to achieve national
reconciliation, security and peace.
The Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan of 2015 remains an
important framework for ending the conflict in South
Sudan and bringing sustainable peace to the country.
The lack of meaningful progress in its implementation
has been a source of great concern, and Mr. Mogae’s
briefing today demonstrates only too clearly that there
is reason for even greater concern. It emphasizes the
importance of reinvigorating the peace process with
the goal of ensuring full implementation of the peace
agreement and restoring peace and security through
greater inclusivity, forgiveness and reconciliation.

17-0763511/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The national dialogue initiative announced by
President Salva Kiir has the potential to facilitate that
objective, and we in the IGAD region have reiterated
our unanimous support for that initiative while calling
on the Government to ensure that it is conducted in
an all-inclusive manner. Of course, for that to happen
the necessary conditions have to be established,
which is why the parties to the conflict should cease
all hostilities.
The continued and collective commitment of IGAD,
the African Union and the United Nations to the search
for lasting peace, security and stability in South Sudan,
as encapsulated in the joint press statement of January
29, is imperative. In line with the understanding reached
between the three organizations, former President
Alpha Oumar Konaré has already started his shuttle
diplomacy with a visit to South Sudan. He has also met
for consultations with my Prime Minister in his capacity
as Chair of IGAD. Although we will not be able to hear
from him today about the outcome of the consultations
and progress made thus far, we remain hopeful that
his efforts, in close consultations with IGAD and the
United Nations, will help to ensure the inclusivity of
the national dialogue and the implementation of the
peace agreement. We believe that it is important that
the Security Council support those efforts and send a
strong and unified message to all the parties in South
Sudan to engage seriously and constructively. I would
again like to reiterate our firm conviction that if there
is unity in the Council, it will not be overly difficult
or impossible to make headway in achieving peace in
South Sudan — peace that is rooted in ownership for the
country and that ensures the safety, security and dignity
of the people of South Sudan in all their diversity.
The deployment of a regional protection force
(RPF) continues to be very important, and we note that
progress, even if slow, has been made in that regard.
As the Secretary-General rightly stated in his report
(S/2017/224), the cooperation of the South Sudanese
Government, as well as the support of regional and
international partners, continues to be extremely
critical to facilitating deployment of the force. Now
more than ever, perhaps, it is self-evident that a regional
protection force is needed, as is the full cooperation of
the Government in facilitating its deployment. IGAD’s
Council of Ministers reaffirmed their support for this at
their meeting last week and called for the RPF’s speedy
deployment. As a troop-contributing country, Ethiopia
would like to take this opportunity to once again
12/24

23/03/2017

reiterate our firm commitment to deploying our forces
as part of the RPF, and preparations are well under way
to deploy an advance company in the near future.
Finally, regardless of what we in the region and the
rest of the international community can do to help, it is
ultimately up to the South Sudanese people themselves
to address the enormous difficulties that they are facing
today, including the interconnected challenges of
peace, relief and inclusivity to which President Mogae
so eloquently referred, which have serious implications
for the lasting survival of their new nation. We therefore
hope that all South Sudanese parties will rise to the
challenge and work to restore peace through genuine
dialogue and reconciliation.
Mr. Amendola (Italy): I thank you, Sir, especially
for convening this meeting and focusing on the need
for action. I thank the Secretary-General for his update
on the situation in South Sudan and reiterate Italy’s
appreciation of and support for his plan of action, as
it marks a first step towards the way out of the current
crisis. I also thank President Mogae and Ms. Sunday for
their insightful remarks.
With regard to the need for action, as we have heard
today, the security situation in South Sudan continues
to deteriorate. The political landscape is increasingly
fragmented along ethnic lines. The nation is being
undone by widespread violations of human rights,
impunity, gender-based violence and the recruitment
of child soldiers, and the humanitarian crisis is
reaching a tipping point. Famine has already been
declared in some parts of the country. The staff of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, humanitarian
personnel — including religious volunteers — and
their facilities have been attacked, looted and impeded
in their efforts to provide relief to the population. As
you have said, Mr. President, time is running out.
Clearly, the Security Council needs to pursue a strategy
following up on what we agreed on today in presidential
statement S/PRST/2017/4.
We are friends of South Sudan. In 2011, we all
supported South Sudan’s independence. We welcomed
President Kiir’s announcement of the national dialogue,
but for a dialogue to be credible and effective, it requires
two preconditions and a clear and common objective.
First, there is the matter of the ceasefire. Along with
the Secretary-General and other Council members, we
believe that the only possible solution to the conflict
is a political one. To achieve that, the parties have to
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

stop fighting. For that, South Sudan’s regional partners
are the actors with the greatest potential influence.
The African Union Special Representative’s shuttle
diplomacy, the United Nations engagement in the
country and the Security Council itself can also make a
significant contribution. In the Council, we are working
to maintain our focus on a first concrete step, which is
key to moving the process forward. We therefore support
President Konaré’s request to the South Sudanese
Government to announce a unilateral ceasefire.
Secondly, there is the issue of inclusivity. Our
engagement is aimed at promoting a truly inclusive
national dialogue, open to all national political
stakeholders, as well as to representatives of civil
society and religious leaders. A dialogue could be
the tool needed to end the conflict and help respond
to the profound impact of the current humanitarian
crisis. We can step up our political engagement with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development in order to lay the foundation for
achieving that goal. But we must first establish security
guarantees. The current progress on deploying a
regional protection force is still limited. We call on
the South Sudanese parties to cooperate constructively
with the United Nations so as to improve security
standards in Juba, and to refrain from obstructing
humanitarian access.
Thirdly, there is the issue of the implementation
of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, which the parties
to the conflict signed in 2015. Few of its elements
have been implemented — the proposed hybrid
court and the reconciliation process come to
mind — and implementation of some of the others
should be relaunched. The success of a national dialogue
will depend on achieving those goals.

S/PV.7906

and Evaluation Commission, and civil-society
representative Ms. Sunday for their briefings.
Kazakhstan fully commends and supports the
Secretary-General’s commitment to finding a peaceful
solution to the conflict in South Sudan, for which
there is no military option. We should strengthen
the capacities of the Transitional Government of
National Unity to address the political, economic, and
humanitarian challenges that it is facing, including
the full implementation of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We stress the importance of the work of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC)
in monitoring and overseeing the implementation of the
Agreement, as well as the tasks of the Government. In
order to make JMEC’s work more effective, all South
Sudanese parties should implement their commitments
in full and cooperate fully with the Chair of JMEC.
Kazakhstan supports an inclusive national
dialogue aimed at tangible results, in which all leaders
in the conflict can participate. We concur with the
African Union (AU) High Representative to South
Sudan, Mr. Konaré, that that dialogue must be led
by independent personalities who enjoy wide public
support. In that regard, we welcome President Salva
Kiir’s promise to ensure the safety and freedom of all
of the participants. We must seek all possible ways to
support the AU High Representative’s shuttle diplomacy
in promoting dialogue and ensuring the implementation
of the Agreement.

Italy continues to provide humanitarian support
to the people affected by the famine and the tragic
situation in South Sudan. We have just announced a
new contribution in response to the Secretary-General’s
appeal, but the humanitarian crisis in the country is
mostly man-made. It is time for action. Let us work
seriously, cooperatively and jointly in the Council, as
well as at the regional and international levels, to return
peace to South Sudan.

The chances of achieving the goal of ending the
conflict by political means and mediation will be
further enhanced by closer collaboration between the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the United Nations and other
stakeholders. We therefore encourage the international
community to support the Transitional Government in
furthering that important political process. We agree
that IGAD should play a leading role in resolving the
conflict in South Sudan, because it has always been
at the forefront in addressing problems in the region.
We look forward to the forthcoming joint consultative
meeting between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council at which issues
relating to South Sudan will be considered.

Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Secretary-General Guterres,
President Mogae, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring

The human suffering caused by the serious
famine in some regions of South Sudan demands the
international community’s urgent attention. The effects

17-0763513/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the famine can be significantly alleviated if the South
Sudanese Government cooperates positively with the
United Nations and humanitarian actors by facilitating
access to conflict-affected areas and by providing free
movement to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).
We are also concerned about the recruitment and
use of children, in violation of international law, and
about sexual and gender-based violence, both of which
have reached alarming proportions. Closer coordination
between UNMISS and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Sexual Violence in Conflict is essential if we are to
address those issues and end impunity.
The recommendations of the AU Commission
of Inquiry to put transitional justice mechanisms in
place, including a hybrid court, should be speedily
implemented with the technical assistance of the United
Nations Secretariat.
The mandate of UNMISS has been impeded for
several months now, owing to the imposition of new
immigration conditions affecting UNMISS personnel,
and that procedure must be addressed. Likewise, the
speedy deployment of a regional protection force is
essential to reinforcing the overall security in the
country. A full operational UNMISS and regional
protection force would contribute significantly to
improving the security situation. Kazakhstan is ready
to join the multilateral action to propel South Sudan
on its path towards peace and security, which are the
prerequisites for regional stability.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
President Mogae and Ms. Sunday for their briefings.
We are outraged by the events unfolding in South
Sudan, especially the widespread violence, ongoing
atrocities and obstruction of humanitarian access.
Rather than committing to the ceasefire called for in
the 2015 peace agreement endorsed by the Security
Council, South Sudan’s leaders, both in Government
and in opposition movements, have chosen to undertake
new military offensives and orchestrate militia attacks,
placing their own interests above those of their people.
Last December, some colleagues in the Security
Council argued that pressure would be counterproductive
because it would block a renewed political process, but
there has been no progress since December. Instead,
14/24

23/03/2017

the situation has deteriorated and is even more grave
now. There is ongoing and active fighting. In the past
three weeks alone, 40,000 South Sudanese have been
displaced to Uganda, with almost 500,000 displaced
since last July. There are almost 5 million people facing
severe hunger, and famine has been declared in two
counties, with the very real prospect that it will spread.
The famine is not a result of drought; it is the result of
leaders who are more interested in political power and
personal gain than in stopping violence and allowing
humanitarian access.
The Government’s continued unconscionable
impediments to humanitarians seeking access to assist
famine-stricken populations may amount to deliberate
starvation tactics. There are reports of civilians being
deliberately targeted on an ethnic basis, rampant sexual
violence, widespread unlawful recruitment of child
soldiers, the destruction of homes and the looting of
property. It is not the first time in this now three-yearold conflict that Government forces have employed a
scorched-earth campaign. Since September 2016 alone,
almost 17,000 structures have been destroyed in just
part of the former state of Central Equatoria.
Our goals are clear. The parties must cease
hostilities, engage in meaningful and inclusive
dialogue and deliver on their repeated promises to allow
unfettered access for humanitarian organizations. Any
political process must be truly inclusive of all South
Sudanese voices in order to be sustainable and credible.
Dialogue must complement the peace agreement, the
core elements of which include a permanent ceasefire,
power-sharing and critical reforms — a road map to
lasting peace. We welcome the continued commitment of
the United Nations and regional organizations to peace
and stability in South Sudan, and we look to the shuttle
diplomacy of the African Union High Representative to
South Sudan, President Konaré, and to full engagement
on the part of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to yield results in the next month. It is
against that backdrop that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), the peacekeeping mission
authorized by the Council, is being prevented by both
Government and opposition forces from fully carrying
out its mandate. Moreover, the Council-authorized
regional protection force has encountered unacceptable
delays in deploying. The Council should take seriously
this deliberate repudiation of its Chapter VII mandate.
The international community must make use of
all of the tools at its disposal to address the crisis in
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

South Sudan and the many obstructions to the work
of UNMISS. We have received warning after warning
about the prospect for further mass atrocities, but we
do not need such warnings to know that the sustained
level of violence and ongoing atrocities in South Sudan
are beyond unacceptable. As has been noted, an arms
embargo is one tool that the Council could use to
address the ongoing violence in South Sudan. Similarly,
our unanimously adopted sanctions resolution 2206
(2015) gives us the ability to designate individuals
whose actions or policies threaten peace in South
Sudan, including those who obstruct the activities of
international peacekeeping or humanitarian missions,
those whose actions or policies expand the conflict and
those who engage in the targeting of civilians, including
women and girls.
Finally, I would like to say a word about
accountability. Progress in establishinga hybrid court
for South Sudan is desperately needed, and we urge the
African Union and South Sudan to expedite progress on
that important mechanism in the coming months. Peace
and justice can and should be pursued simultaneously.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming the presence of the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom at today’s meeting, as
well as the initiative taken by the British presidency to
organize this meeting on South Sudan. I would also like
to thank the speakers for their briefings. In particular,
I commend the Secretary-General for the strength of
his personal commitment to South Sudan. France fully
subscribes to the priorities he has just outlined and
fully supports him in his efforts to promote a return to
peace and stability in that deeply scarred country.
After three years of conflict, the situation in South
Sudan remains a serious source of concern. Famine is
now added to the violence, atrocities and human rights
violations that have been endured by the people of
South Sudan for far too long, and to a large extent it is
a result of those other problems. We cannot and should
not remain inactive in the face of this situation. We
should pursue three objectives.
First, priority should be given to a cessation of
hostilities and access to vulnerable populations. The
responsibility rests with all of the parties to the conflict
and, first and foremost, with the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition. They must finally respect the

S/PV.7906

multiple ceasefire agreements that they have reached
and that they violate constantly. The emergence of
militias and the expansion of the combat zones make
that first step all the more essential.
The cessation of hostilities must be accompanied
by an immediate end to the obstructions that have been
inflicted on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and humanitarian actors. The attacks,
violence, harassment and looting to which the Blue
Helmets and humanitarian actors fall victim are contrary
to international humanitarian law. We salute the courage
and dedication of those men and women in their tireless
efforts to help the most vulnerable. The Council must
be ready to impose sanctions on all who engage in such
attacks against them. We also strongly regret that the
protection and assistance efforts of both UNMISS and
humanitarian personnel have been subject to access
restrictions and bureaucratic barriers. The Government
of South Sudan must make every effort to put an end to
such obstructions and to facilitate these people’s work.
Only progress on those two fronts — an end to violence
and the facilitation of humanitarian access — will
make it possible to establish an environment conducive
to peaceful political dialogue.
My second point is about the implementation of a
political settlement, which is the only possible long-term
solution to the country’s challenges. In that respect, we
know the terms of the political solution, for they are
contained in the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan of August 2015.
That document provides a comprehensive and detailed
road map that must be implemented in order to restore
security and stability in the country. In that regard,
we welcome the work of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) under the leadership
of President Mogae. It is essential to continue to
monitor the peace agreement and to firmly remind the
Transitional Government of National Unity — itself
the result of the Agreement — and all other South
Sudanese stakeholders of their responsibilities. Again,
it is unacceptable that those who have committed to
implementing those measures do not respect their word.
In that context, following the example of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union, the Council must recall
its expectations regarding the implementation of
the measures provided for in the peace agreement,
including and perhaps primarily in the field of security.
We therefore welcome the continued engagement of

17-0763515/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

IGAD and the African Union, in full coordination with
the United Nations. The mission entrusted to President
Alpha Konaré to advance the implementation of the
peace agreement and to promote the inclusiveness of
the national dialogue is essential in that regard. We call
on all parties to work with him to that end. Any national
dialogue would be in vain, even counterproductive,
if it detracted from the implementation of the peace
agreement and was not fully inclusive and conducted so
as to assure its autonomy, its impartiality and the trust of
all participants. In that regard, I would like to recall that
France is of the view that instituting an arms embargo
would improve the prospects for a political solution. By
restricting access to weapons used to commit abuses
against civilians, an embargo would help to lower the
level of violence and foster an environment conducive
to peaceful political dialogue.
Thirdly and lastly, we must remember that the
cycle of violence and suffering can be broken only
if real progress is made in the areas of justice and
accountability. As Ms. Sunday said, women have
suffered disproportionately in this conflict. The use of
rape as a weapon of war, which has been abundantly
documented by the United Nations, the African Union
and civil-society organizations, may constitute a war
crime or even a crime against humanity. Violence
against children and the recruitment of child soldiers
are equally revolting violations.
Faced with the current inadequacies in the efforts
to combat impunity in South Sudan, we must remind
the perpetrators of those crimes that they will be
held to account. We can help to prevent such crimes
by considering the punishment of those who commit
or order them. We should also support judicial
accountability efforts. Again, the peace agreement
provides for mechanisms to that end, including the
establishment of a hybrid court. We call for progress in
that direction and reiterate our encouragement for the
work of the African Union along those lines. If there is
no improvement in this area, violence and human rights
violations will only be repeated in South Sudan again
and again.
Let us be realistic. The tragedy in South Sudan may
yet worsen. But if the parties assume their responsibilities
and the Council remains fully mobilized, that does not
have to be a foregone conclusion.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would once again
16/24

23/03/2017

like to thank the British presidency for convening this
important meeting. And, of course, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2017/224). We are encouraged by
his approach and his leadership. I would also like to
thank President Mogae for being here and for his work
on this difficult problem. And I thank Ms. Sunday for
her presence.
Bolivia is of the view that, in line with the efforts of
the Secretary-General, it is essential that the Council be
united in supporting the political process, which is the
only possible solution to the situation in South Sudan.
We support the point made today by the SecretaryGeneral on the three elements that are essential to
making progress in resolving this tragic conflict: first,
a cessation of hostilities; secondly, a resumption of the
peace process; and thirdly, unrestricted humanitarian
access. Similarly, the combined support and continuing
follow-up that regional organizations, the United
Nations and the international community can provide
will be key to ensuring that the dialogue process is
genuinely inclusive and enjoys legitimacy.
In addition, I would like to express the support of
my delegation for the joint press statement of 29 January
2017 by the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and the United Nations
in support of a national dialogue. In that regard, I
would also like to stress our recognition of the work
and good offices of the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, Mr. Mogae, and the
African Union High Representative for South Sudan,
Mr. Alpha Konaré.
With regard to the security situation, we call for
compliance with the peace agreement on the cessation
of hostilities between the parties and the end of the
clashes in the regions of Equatoria, the Upper Nile,
Bahr el-Ghazal, Malakal and Wau Shilluk, which have
led to a general situation of insecurity and the ongoing
displacement of civilians, of whom women and children
are the most vulnerable. We believe that it is important
to ensure that the Government, together with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), works
to guarantee unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance and the protection of civilians in the areas
that need them the most.
We are concerned about the reports of human
rights violations, sexual violence and the recruitment
and use of children. We call for chapter V of the peace
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

agreement to be upheld, and we hope that the African
Union will take all necessary measures to establish
a just, impartial and credible hybrid court for South
Sudan. It is also important to welcome the progress
made in the practical measures being taken to deploy
a regional protection force, which could contribute
significantly to mitigating the worsening security
situation as long as we are clear about what its functions
will be. The regime’s cooperation is also very important
in that regard.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, the
announcement by the Food and Agriculture Organization
of localized famine in Leer and Mayendit counties
represents an urgent call to the Government and the
international community to take immediate measures
to mitigate it and ensure that the situation does not
deteriorate further. According to figures issued by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
100,000 South Sudanese are in a state of famine and
5.5 million are experiencing food insecurity and
in need of concerted action. According to UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien and his appeal to
the international community and financial donors, it is
essential that we raise $1.25 billion to deal with this
difficult problem.
The famine is clearly caused by a number of
factors, including the armed conflict between the
various parties, the difficulties of humanitarian access
and the severe drought in the region, which also shows
that the effects of climate change increase the potential
for conflict. That is why we call on the Government to
work together with humanitarian workers and UNMISS
staff to bring the necessary assistance to the people in
those regions as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the joint
work of regional organizations is fundamental to
efforts to develop action plans aimed at strengthening
the institutions of South Sudan. Those plans must
address the institutions’ structural problems and should
respect the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness whereby all development cooperation
should be adapted to the country receiving it, aligned
with the country’s plans, coordinated among the parties
and, lastly, based on the mutual responsibility of all
stakeholders. Similarly, we believe that the conflict in
South Sudan should be resolved by the people of South
Sudan themselves, with the help of the international
community, while respecting the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV.7906

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mogae and Ms. Sunday
for their assessments of the situation in South Sudan.
We also welcome the personal efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to reach a settlement on South Sudan.
We agree on the importance of coordinating actions
by the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations aimed
at ensuring peace, stability and security in South
Sudan. We support the Secretary-General’s approach in
seeking African solutions to African problems with the
appropriate support of the United Nations, including
where the problem of South Sudan is concerned. We
believe that it is appropriate that IGAD should play a
central role in that process. We credit the Secretariat
for its recent provision of more balanced assessments
in its monthly reports, among which we would like
to emphasize the progress that has been made in
preparing for the deployment of a regional protection
force. As the information makes clear, the time frame
for the deployment of front-line units was postponed
somewhat through no fault of the South Sudanese.
Juba’s constructive position on the issue of the regional
protection force is evidenced by the fact that the
Government has allocated the first plot of land for their
barracks, while as far as we know, the delays on the
second plot are due to some unavoidable formalities.
We urge the Secretariat to continue to cooperate
with Juba in order to resolve all the current problems
involving the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), including the need to create a mechanism
for the prompt resolution of visa problems and for
determining the modalities for deploying the regional
protection force while complying with the basic norms
of peacekeeping.
We share the concerns about the country’s disastrous
humanitarian situation, and we note the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
improve things. We welcome President Kiir’s statement
on granting humanitarian access to the regions where
there is a food crisis. We should not omit to note the
assistance that has been given to the people of South
Sudan by Khartoum. At the same time, considering
the situation in neighbouring Somalia and Kenya, we
should also point out that the famine in various parts of
South Sudan is the result not only of security problems
but also of bad weather.

17-0763517/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

23/03/2017

We are also alarmed by the news of armed clashes
in various parts of the country. We continue to hold
the view that to a large degree those incidents are the
result of command-and-control problems, as well as a
certain lack of discipline among Government troops
and those of the opposition. Another factor is the rift in
anti-Government forces between supporters of Taban
Deng Gai and Machar, with clashes that occur for
inter-ethnic or simply criminal reasons.

Nations experts that the same countries that appear to
advocate introducing an arms embargo in the Security
Council may be supplying South Sudan with weapons.

We welcome President Kiir’s announcement of
the forthcoming holding of a national dialogue in the
framework of the peace agreement and call for active
support to it. We trust that the proposed amnesty will
enable progress to be made in the political process
and also help to resolve the problem of the presence
of supporters of the former First Vice-President Riek
Machar on the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In general, we believe that the parameters of
a national dialogue and the location of the consultations
should be determined by the South Sudanese themselves.
We agree that it will be impossible to promote national
dialogue or implement the peace agreement if the
ceasefire is not maintained. But it would be unfair
to blame the continuing violence exclusively on the
Transitional Government of National Unity.

Basically, and tragically, almost all the worst fears
about the fate of the country have become a reality.
South Sudan is on the verge of chaos. Millions have
been displaced from their homes. The economy is in
ruins. Hunger and poverty are rampant. As the South
Sudanese people suffer, the warring parties continue
to pursue their goals by military means. Killings,
abductions, rape, looting and the burning of homes
now constitute a horrifying daily routine in South
Sudan. Yet in recent months the situation has sunk
to unprecedented new lows, with reports of growing
ethnic violence and declarations of famine in some
parts of the country. Leer county in Unity state is just
one example. It is one of the epicentres of the famine,
where more than 100,000 people face imminent
starvation. Villages are deserted. Gunmen from both
sides have torched crops and chased farmers from their
fields. People are hiding in swamps. They eat water-lily
roots and the occasional fish that they manage to catch.
There are no schools and no health services. There is
nothing but the fear of losing the only thing that still
belongs to them — their lives. It is shameful that all
of this is happening in the twenty-first century. It is a
disgrace that we, the international community, have not
managed to prevent it from happening. It is an outrage
that the South Sudanese political leaders have failed
to shoulder their responsibilities for their own people.
Time is not on our side. But as long as we do not stand
by idly, that human tragedy can still be averted.

We consider it absolutely inappropriate to bring up
threats of genocide. The rise in inter-ethnic tensions is
largely the result of provocative statements and actions by
armed and criminal groups and undisciplined elements
of the security forces. That hardly corresponds to the
suggestions of some kind of purposeful, systematic
policy on the part of the authorities.
We welcome the establishment within UNMISS of a
working group on hate speech and incitement. We would
like to emphasize the importance of preventing similar
activities emanating from any country through Internet
social networks, since otherwise the entire content of
resolution 2327 (2016) would simply be ineffective.
Our position on the new Security Council sanctions
against South Sudan is well known. If we are to establish
lasting peace in South Sudan, what we need is not a
Security Council arms embargo, but rather targeted
measures to disarm the population and to demobilize
and reintegrate combatants. We also believe that it
is essential to heed the views of the regional Powers
on the fact that this is not the time for proposals for
introducing additional restrictions on Juba. Against that
backdrop, we would point to information from United
18/24

Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and the other briefers for their comprehensive
presentations. I also commend the United Kingdom for
providing a timely opportunity to discuss the further
international efforts required to resolve the conflict in
the world’s youngest nation.

How can we do that? We must shake up the deadly
status quo and divert the energies currently squandered
on war towards advancing peace. Public statements
of condemnation and threats of consequences without
action will not help. Both sides largely discount them
as barking with no bite. Biting requires a get-tough
approach that might truly be able alter the calculations
and influence behaviour. If we are to stop the fighting,
the flow of arms must be stopped. If we are to prevent
public funds from being used for personal purposes,
they must be made inaccessible to certain individuals.
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

If we are to stop attacks on civilians, the perpetrators
must be held accountable.
That is why Ukraine believes that an arms embargo
and additional targeted sanctions are still relevant if we
are to prevent South Sudan from sliding into war and
chaos. We do not believe that such measures will be a
panacea. However, we do believe that they will reduce
the parties’ ability to continue fuelling the conflict.
That will help to silence the military equipment they
already have and stop desperately needed financial
resources being spent on new weaponry.
Ukraine firmly believes that the conflict in South
Sudan has no military solution. An inclusive political
dialogue within the framework of the 2015 peace
agreement is the only way to restore peace and stability
in the country. In that regard, we welcome the initiative
of the Government of South Sudan to launch a national
dialogue aimed at promoting national reconciliation and
inter-communal harmony among all groups in South
Sudan. However, for it to be credible and effective, the
hostilities must cease immediately, the rule of law must
be restored and humanitarian aid must be allowed to
reach those in need.
Finally, I would like to express Ukraine’s full support
to the Secretary-General’s commitment to working
closely with the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development member States and other
partners to ensure inclusivity in the implementation of
the peace agreement and the national dialogue process.
As one of the troop and police contributors to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, Ukraine will
continue to actively back United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts in that fragile country.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, the Senegalese delegation would like to thank
the United Kingdom presidency for its initiative in
convening this important briefing on South Sudan,
over which Mr. Boris Johnson, the Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, was kind
enough to preside. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Chairman of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for
their important briefings, and we appreciate Ms. Betty
Sunday’s important presentation on the situation. Their
statements have further highlighted the acuteness of
the issue before the Council.
The crisis that has torn South Sudan apart for more
than three years has led to an increase in violence and

S/PV.7906

violations of human rights. My delegation would like
not only to reiterate its profound concern about the
worsening security situation in the country and its
impact on the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, but also to condemn the armed incursions
and threats against humanitarian workers and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), as
well as the violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
international humanitarian law and the security of the
United Nations staff.
The repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement
and the increasing hostilities in many parts of the
country have, as we are all aware, led to a wave of
refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries and an
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
within the country, further worsening an already
disastrous humanitarian situation. If we add to that
the famine that is now present in various regions, it
becomes a matter of urgency for us to act if we are to
prevent the population from succumbing to disease and
hunger. The fact is that the ongoing fighting and the
economic collapse have left more than 100,000 people
facing a situation of famine. According to various
United Nations agencies, 1 million more are considered
to be on the borderline of famine. It is the worst famine
the country has seen since the conflict began.
My delegation therefore believes, and I think
we can all agree, that only a political solution to the
conflict in South Sudan will make it possible to resolve
the disastrous humanitarian situation once and for all.
We therefore call on the various parties to the conflict
to resume dialogue and implement the peace agreement
in the Republic of South Sudan. In that regard, we
believe that the national dialogue process announced in
December by President Salva Kiir could, if it proves to
be truly inclusive, free and transparent, help to create
conditions conductive to the restoration of peace in
the country. That would endow the process with the
necessary legitimacy and ensure ownership on the part of
the South Sudanese population, without discrimination,
with the support of the region and the international
community. The national dialogue should also make it
possible for those involved to discuss general issues,
including issues crucial to governance, security-sector
reform and national reconciliation, among others. It is
in that spirit that we warmly encourage cooperation
among the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the United Nations

17-0763519/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

aimed at ensuring coordinated measures to support the
peace process, including the national dialogue process,
and at ensuring the broadest possible inclusivity in the
national dialogue through the involvement of all the
parties to the conflict in South Sudan.
Going back to the famine, President Alpha Konaré,
the High Representative of the African Union for
South Sudan, has made specific proposals aimed at
mitigating the disastrous effects of the famine so as to
ensure overall food security in the rest of South Sudan.
That will require a cessation of hostilities, particularly
in order to enable farming activity to resume. We
therefore call on all of the armed groups to immediately
cease hostilities and allow UNMISS — and we pay
tribute here to the staff’s untiring efforts in a hostile
environment — to give humanitarian personnel access
to the civilians who need their help. Unless unhindered
access is provided immediately, the humanitarian
situation can only get worse, and it will be the local
population that will suffer most.
My country also supports the creation in South
Sudan of a hybrid independent court for prosecuting
the perpetrators of crimes and other atrocities against
the civilian population, and we call on the Government
of South Sudan to support the African Union in
that endeavour.
Finally, with regard to the regional protection
force — and we welcome the recent developments
noted concerning its deployment — we urge the South
Sudanese authorities to take all necessary measures to
ensure its immediate deployment. Here I would like to
pay tribute to the troop-contributing countries for their
dedication to the cause of peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely briefing. I would also like
to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General,
to Mr. Mogae, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission for South Sudan, and to
Ms. Sunday for their very informative briefings.
Japan remains deeply concerned about the ongoing
hostilities and the dire humanitarian situation in South
Sudan, which has been exacerbated by famine. Many
lives are at stake. The members of the Security Council
and international partners must continue to extend
lifesaving support to the innocent people of South
Sudan. In addition to the $22.4 million in humanitarian
and reconstruction assistance announced in January,
Japan decided last week to contribute an additional
20/24

23/03/2017

$6 million in response to the Secretary-General’s call
for international support to address the famine.
For international assistance to be effective it must
reach those in need. To that end, safe and unhindered
access is essential. We are troubled by the many reports
of restrictions on humanitarian access, including
on work permits, that only increase the suffering of
innocent people. Worse still, aid providers continue to
be targeted in such incidents as the tragic killing by
unknown gunmen on 14 March of personnel from the
International Organization for Migration. Japan calls on
President Kiir to honour his previous commitments and
take immediate action on the ground, including through
improved humanitarian access at the local level and by
working to bring about a cessation of hostilities. The
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with
the Government of South Sudan. We urge that concrete
progress on that front be made.
There is no alternative to a political process
aimed at achieving genuine peace. Japan reiterates
its full support for the collective commitment and
close coordination on South Sudan demonstrated by
the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations in their joint
statement in January. Japan welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s ongoing engagement at this critical time.
We also appreciate the strong involvement of both
President Konaré and President Mogae, and we support
their call for South Sudan to make the national dialogue
as inclusive, free and transparent as possible. The
Council should continue to be united in supporting
those engagements and efforts. As part of the efforts
to promote inclusivity and reconciliation, Japan is
considering providing support to grass-roots peace
initiatives through the United Nations Development
Programme. The successful holding of a national day
of prayer on 10 March with broad participation was a
step in the right direction. The onus is now on President
Kiir and the Government. We strongly urge President
Kiir to build on that spirit in pursuit of a genuine and
inclusive national dialogue process. Other parties
should also renounce violence and cooperate in that
national endeavour.
Japan takes note of some signs of progress on the
deployment of a regional protection force, including
regional countries’ reaffirmation of their commitment
to participating in the force, and by the visits by troopcontributing countries’ reconnaissance teams and
enablers to South Sudan. But there are still challenges
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to be resolved regarding the force’s full deployment.
We need further progress on land provision and airport
coordination in order to ensure that it can function
effectively. We again call on the Government to
fully cooperate with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, including with regard to the regional
protection force.
Notwithstanding our recent decision to end the
activities of the Self-Defence Force engineering unit,
Japan remains unwavering in its commitment to peace
and stability in South Sudan. Japan will support efforts
towards an inclusive national dialogue and work with
the parties concerned for the smooth and effective
operation of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, including the early deployment of a regional
protection force. Japan will also continue to provide
development cooperation and humanitarian assistance
to those in need, thereby contributing to nation-building
in South Sudan.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to join other speakers in thanking the
presidency of the United Kingdom for this initiative.
We were also grateful for the presence among us of the
British Foreign Secretary, Boris Johnson. We thank
the Secretary-General, Ms. Sunday and Mr. Mogae for
their statements.
Today’s presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/4) and
the Secretary-General’s statement have covered all of
the points in the text that we prepared for my statement
this afternoon, so I will be very brief.
I will just say that the presidential statement
establishes and clearly outlines five measures that
are needed if progress is to be made on the situation
in South Sudan. We believe, therefore, that we should
urge the Council to remain vigilant in seeing those
steps implemented in close cooperation with all of the
regional organizations involved in issues related to
South Sudan.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the United Kingdom for convening today’s
meeting and Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing. We listened attentively to the statements made
by Chairman Mogae and Ms. Sunday.
Recent events show that the situation in South
Sudan continues to be complicated. President Kiir has
put forward an initiative on holding a national dialogue
and promoting economic development. Meanwhile,

S/PV.7906

the Government of South Sudan is facing numerous
difficulties in implementing the peace agreement,
maintaining national stability and addressing the
humanitarian crisis and the famine.
China hopes that the international community will
provide assistance in the following four areas: first,
it should forcefully push for a political settlement of
the question of South Sudan, since that is the only
possible solution. The international community should
continue to put pressure on all the parties in South
Sudan to cease hostilities, return to the political
settlement track and effectively implement the peace
agreement. China welcomes President Kiir’s initiative
on holding a national dialogue and hopes that all of the
parties in South Sudan will actively participate in that
process, settle their differences through dialogue and
consultations and promote reconciliation in a joint effort
to achieve national peace, stability and development.
Secondly, the role of regional and subregional
organizations should be brought into full play. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU) have done extensive
mediation work on that issue. The United Nations
should give full play to the comparative advantages and
respective roles of IGAD and the AU, step up efforts to
implement the joint statement signed by the three parties
IN January during the AU Summit and lend greater
support to mediation efforts led by Chairman Mogae
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
and AU High Representative President Konaré, so as to
create synergy in seeking a resolution to the situation
in South Sudan.
Thirdly, we must enhance the capacity of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to fulfil its mandate. China is in favour of UNMISS
playing a constructive role in assisting all of the parties
in South Sudan to implement the peace agreement,
protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian access.
We hope that the Government of South Sudan will
actively implement the joint communiqué issued with
the Security Council, as well as the relevant Council
resolutions; and we support UNMISS in fulfilling its
mandate by cooperating with the deployment of the
regional protection force and increasing consultations
with the United Nations and IGAD, thereby properly
addressing any issues that might arise in the
cooperation process.

17-0763521/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Fourthly, South Sudan must be actively helped
to combat the famine. We hope that the international
community will provide active support to the disaster
relief efforts of the South Sudanese Government,
encourage all of the parties in South Sudan to act in
the overall interest of the people and create favourable
conditions for the speedy delivery of disaster relief to
affected areas. The international community should
help the Government increase investment in agriculture
and infrastructure and enhance the Government’s
capacity for self-reliance and disaster resilience so as to
promote sustainable economic and social development.
The Chinese Government has actively participated
in and promoted the peace process in South Sudan by
pushing for peace talks and dispatching peacekeepers.
China has made its contribution to the peace process
in South Sudan. Recently, the Special Representative
of the Chinese Government on African Affairs visited
Uganda, Kenya and South Africa, and exchanged views
with the countries in the region on the situation in
South Sudan. China will continue to play a constructive
role in restoring peace, stability and development in
South Sudan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): At the outset, permit
me to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, and
your delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. My
delegation pledges its full support. I would like to
assure the Council of my cooperation and support in
tackling issues of concern to my country.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and former President Mogae, Chairman of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC), and
Ms. Sunday for their briefings. The Chairman is aware
that the Transitional Government of National Unity
submitted its October 2016 report. The previous report
was in March. So far, JMEC has not raised any concerns
to the Transitional Government of National Unity over
the implementation of the chapters of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. Aside
from the lack of the resources needed to implement
chapter II, relating to security arrangements, the delay
in the implementation of article 14 of chapter I is largely
attributable to the Chair of the National Constitutional
Amendment Committee.
22/24

23/03/2017

We are delighted to report that the Chair of the
Committee reported to Juba two weeks ago, and
all efforts are being made to review the legislation
necessary for the reform, consistent with chapter IV of
the peace agreement. We wish to advise that it includes
the incorporation of the agreement into the constitution
of the Republic of South Sudan.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
has repeatedly declared its firm commitment to
implementing the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. In fact, it has already taken
practical steps to that end in order to achieve lasting
peace. It has established the Transitional Government
of National Unity of the Republic of South Sudan,
the Transitional National Legislative Assembly, the
National Constitutional Amendment Committee and
the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, among other
things. It has also implemented political inclusivity
at the national level, as stipulated in the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. In
other words, various political forces are represented
in the Government’s composition, in line with the
peace agreement.
In an effort to revitalize peacebuilding, the
Transitional Government of National Unity came up
with a plan for reconciliation and national dialogue
using a bottom-up approach — starting within the
communities and all the way up to the national level.
The Government has also welcomed the Action Plan
for Peace and Reconciliation, launched by the South
Sudan Council of Churches, as a means of reinforcing
Government peacebuilding efforts. The Transitional
Government of National Unity welcomes all
stakeholders to join that effort. However, it is important
to note that the peace agreement in South Sudan was
not based on individuals, but rather on various parties.
Therefore, it should not be held hostage by individuals
who have chosen to self-exile for reasons best known
to themselves.
The implementation of the peace agreement can, and
will, go on without those individuals. National dialogue
is a process, and those who are not ready to join now
may join whenever they feel ready to do so. National
dialogue is not an alternative to the peace agreement in
South Sudan. The Transitional Government of National
Unity has actively engaged with the United Nations
through its interactions with various delegations that
have visited the country. That includes the delegation
of the Security Council in early September 2016, with
17-07635

23/03/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

which it signed a joint communiqué; the delegation of
the United Nations strategic assessment team in early
October 2016; the Head of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance to
Afghanistan in early November 2016; the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Mr. Dieng; the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and his assessment team; and the Panel
of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2206 (2015).
The Transitional Government of National Unity
has also cooperated closely with UNMISS through
its technical team. The two parties have reached a
common understanding on various issues of concern,
in particular with regard to the deployment of a
regional protection force, which the Government has
accepted without preconditions. They agreed on other
issues of concern as well, including, but not limited
to, freedom of movement for the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), unhindered
access for relief personnel to deliver humanitarian
assistance to all populations in need in South Sudan
and the establishment of a one-stop-one-shop system
to facilitate and expedite the issuance of visas, timely
customs clearance, flight clearance and the elimination
of bureaucratic obstacles, among other things.
As was indicated earlier, the Transitional
Government of National Unity has accepted the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force without
any strings attached. It took further steps by allocating
a plot of land to host the proposed force that covers
an area of 2.514 square kilometres. Furthermore, it
has approved requests for a second plot of land for
the Regional Protection Force. UNMISS has already
submitted the names of those who are to join officials
in Jubek, along with state authorities, to inspect and
survey that land.
During a visit to the country’s capital on Tuesday,
21 March, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, said that the
first units of the regional protection force for South
Sudan would be deployed within a few weeks. Having
cooperated with the United Nations, the region and
the entire international community, the Transnational
Government of National Unity had expected that its
efforts would be positively acknowledged, rather than
negatively reported.

S/PV.7906

The Transnational Government of National Unity
strongly rejects as baseless any accusation of looming
genocide or ethnic cleansing in South Sudan. South
Sudan is a diverse country composed of approximately
60 tribes and ethnicities that have been living in
peace and harmony since ancient times. The conflict
in South Sudan is political, and characterized by a
power struggle on the part of those who seek to take
power by force: it has no ethnic dimension, despite
what has been alleged by certain circles. Using the
ethnic divide serves to muddy the waters and, perhaps,
warrants the application of punitive measures against
the Government.
We commend the Secretary-General for the recent
statement he made at his press conference at the United
Nations Gigiri complex, in which he said that the risk of
genocide in South Sudan had significantly diminished.
Although, in our view, the statement did not go far
enough to debunk the allegation of looming genocide,
it is nevertheless a welcome development and a step in
the right direction.
Furthermore, the Transnational Government of
National Unity categorically rejects any accusation
that its forces target civilians, or use sexual violence
as a tactic of war. The Government has only carried
out its constitutional mandate to protect civilians from
attacks by rebels and maintain law and order, which
are among the primary constitutional functions of
any Government in the world. It has also exercised
its right to self-defence when attacked by negative
forces and criminal elements, which is in line with
international law, including Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The Transnational Government of National Unity
therefore appeals to the United Nations, the region
and the entire international community to encourage
and support the genuine efforts of the Government
to implement the peace agreement, specifically the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, including the transitional
security arrangements, so as to enable the achievement
of lasting peace and stability in the country and end the
immense suffering of the people. The Government is
ready to do its part. The challenge is how to deal with the
spoilers of peace and the political opportunists. We have
recently witnessed the formation of new rebel groups
that are bent on dislodging the Government by military
means. Even the Chairman of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission recently remarked that those

17-0763523/24

S/PV.7906

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

23/03/2017

new groups are composed of opportunists and criminals
who have no coherent political agenda. Unless a clear
message is sent to all rebel groups, they will continue
to derail peace efforts.

The call for imposing targeted sanctions and an
arms embargo would further aggravate the situation
and hit vulnerable groups the hardest, as previous
experience has shown.

The Transnational Government of National Unity
thanks the United Nations and the donor community
for their interventions in, and response to, the famine
in the two counties of the former Unity state. The
Government, however, takes issue with the accusation
that it is responsible for the famine. It is also important
to note that other parts of the country are affected by
drought as a result of climate change. The Transnational
Government of National Unity therefore takes this
opportunity to state that it will spare no effort to address
the situation and to call on the international community
to assist in addressing that urgent matter.

I should like to conclude by reiterating my
Government’s stand on the implementation of the
peace agreement in letter and spirit. The Transnational
Government of National Unity accordingly appeals
today to the United Nations, the region and the entire
international community to encourage and support the
genuine efforts of the Government in implementing
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, including the transitional
security arrangements, so as to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the country and eliminate the immense
suffering of the people.

24/24

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

17-07635
