S/PV.7134

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7134th meeting

Thursday, 13 March 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Asselborn . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Mrs. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-26370 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426370*

Ukraine

S/PV.7134

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Prime Minister of Ukraine,
and request the Protocol Officer to escort him to his
seat at the Council table.
Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Prime Minister of Ukraine,
was escorted to a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: I will focus my briefing on two
aspects: recent developments in Ukraine and the work
of the United Nations.
It is a reflection of the severity of this crisis and its
possible wider ramifications that the Council is meeting
to discuss Ukraine today for the second time this week
and for the sixth time since 1 March. Serious attention
has been accorded to this issue by the Council, in
addition to multiple multilateral and bilateral diplomatic
efforts, all aimed at seeking a peaceful resolution of the
crisis.
The frequency of the deliberations, however, is
also a reflection of the fact that, as the international
community, we have not yet been able to deliver on
our obligation — of which the Secretary-General has
reminded us so often — to contribute to the de-escalation
of tensions in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. Although it has so far
proved elusive, the path towards a peaceful resolution
of the crisis is still open. Let us seize it.
2/19

13/03/2014

I will first speak about the developments in
Ukraine. Since my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7131), the Secretary-General’s concern about the
deteriorating situation in Crimea and rising tensions
in eastern Ukraine has further deepened. In Crimea,
the seizure and blockade of Ukrainian military bases,
as well as the majority of the State border service
facilities, continue. There have been reports that a
military hospital has been taken over by unidentified
military personnel. On 11 March, it was reported that
the Crimean authorities had closed down the airspace
of the peninsula to all commercial flights except those
to and from Moscow, citing the need to keep so-called
provocateurs away from the peninsula.
We understand that the referendum called by the
authorities in Crimea is expected to go ahead on Sunday,
16 March. There are no indications to the contrary.
On 11 March, Crimea’s Parliament adopted a
“declaration of independence of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea”. On the same day, the Parliament
of Ukraine, citing specific articles of the country’s
Constitution, adopted a resolution urging the Parliament
of Crimea to
“reconsider its decision of 6 March 2014 and
bring it in line with the Constitution of Ukraine
and the Constitution of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea, approved by the Law of Ukraine of
23 December 1998”.
The resolution further stated that if the parliament of
Crimea failed to do so by 12 March 2014, the Parliament
of Ukraine would “initiate the issue of early termination
of powers of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea”.
Turning to United Nations activities, the SecretaryGeneral continues his active efforts to speak with all
relevant parties with the aim of seeking a peaceful
resolution of the ongoing crisis. To that end, he will
receive Mr. Yatsenyuk later this afternoon.
As I stated on Monday, the scheduled referendum
has further complicated an already difficult and
volatile situation. In that context, I regret to report
to the Council that the local authorities have denied
the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights,
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, access to Crimea, citing their
lack of readiness to receive his visit and an inability to
provide security.
Upon his departure from Ukraine, Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović intends to report on
14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

the human rights situation throughout the country.
For Crimea, he will have to rely on, inter alia, reports
from the residents of Crimea, foreign diplomats
based in Crimea and international non-governmental
organizations, with whom he has been in contact.
Given the vast divergences in reports about what is
actually happening on the ground in Crimea, we would
have much preferred that Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović had been able to collect first-hand accounts
himself.
Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović has so far
held meetings in Kyiv, Kharkiv and Lviv, including with
representatives of local administrations, the Russian
minority, non-governmental organizations, including
a representative of the Crimean Tatars, and other civil
society representatives, as well as with ombudspersons.
During his mission, he has also continued to discuss
options with the authorities for practical human rights
measures that could be taken to strengthen human
rights protection and contribute to de-escalation.
The human rights monitoring mission of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights is set to become operational in Ukraine by
this coming Monday. In the light of the unpredictable
situation, which could affect human rights, the
Secretary-General is considering asking Assistant
Secretary-General Šimonović to extend his mission.
Since the beginning of the crisis, the SecretaryGeneral has called for a peaceful resolution that respects
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The Secretary-General continues to advocate for a
resolution of the crisis in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. He appeals to all parties to avoid
hasty actions or provocative rhetoric and to engage
in direct and constructive dialogue in order to forge
a peaceful way forward. He also continues to remind
all parties that democratic values and international
human rights norms must be upheld for all the people
of Ukraine, including minorities. As part of the United
Nations efforts, we also continue to closely coordinate
our activities with key players and relevant regional
organizations, including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.
In the highly charged atmosphere in Ukraine,
exacerbated by a lack of trust and fear, the potential
for intentional or unintentional escalation or
miscalculations is real. We underscore that all sides
must avoid unilateral actions that could further raise
tensions and make de-escalation more difficult. It is

S/PV.7134

high time for constructive engagement. Instability
in Ukraine is in no one’s interests and will have dire
consequences for the region and the world.
The Secretary-General, under the auspices of his
good offices, is the Council’s partner in supporting and
facilitating a peaceful resolution through dialogue. We
are convinced that with genuine and concerted efforts
by the international community, we can together pull
Ukraine back from the brink.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Feltman
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Prime Minister of
Ukraine.
Mr. Yatsenyuk (Ukraine): It is a great honour for
me to address the primary body that is responsible
for peace, stability and security in the world. As far
as I know, this is the sixth extraordinary meeting of
the Security Council. The Council is well aware of what is
happening on the ground but let me additionally report on
the most recent developments in Ukraine. My country has
faced military aggression by a neighbouring country that is a
permanent members of the Security Council. There is no
reason for that aggression; there are no grounds for it.
It is absolutely and entirely unacceptable in the twentyfirst century to resolve any kind of conflict with tanks,
artillery and boots on the ground.
The Russian Federation has violated a number
of bilateral and multilateral treaties that were signed
between Ukraine and Russia. We strongly believe that
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
states that
“all Members shall refrain in their international
relations from the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the Purposes of the United Nations”
is not questioned by anyone. We still believe that we
have a chance to resolve this conflict in a peaceful
manner, and we commend and praise the Ukrainian
military that have refrained from the use of any force.
We would like to be very clear and say that the
military presence has been clearly identified. This is a
Russian military presence, with Russian number plates
on its vehicles. We urge the Russian Federation to pull
back its military forces deployed in Crimea to their
barracks and to start real talks and negotiations in order
to tackle this conflict.

14-263703/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

This is not an internal conflict. This conflict goes
beyond the borders of Ukraine. Let me recall that in
1994, Ukraine abandoned its nuclear weapons. We gave
up one of the largest arsenals of nuclear weapons — the
third largest in the world — and, under the Budapest
Memorandum, the signatories guaranteed the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and independence of the Ukrainian
State. The way our Russian neighbours — and I believe
that if we talk real talks with Russia, they could be real
partners — acted undermines the entire global security
and nuclear non-proliferation programme, as after these
actions it would be very difficult to convince anyone in
the world not to have nuclear weapons.
I would like to reiterate again that the Ukrainian
Government is absolutely open. We want to have talks,
we do not want to have any kind of military aggression.
I shall now address the Russian Federation.
(spoke in Russian)
We are looking for an answer to the question of
whether Russians want war. As the Prime Minister
of Ukraine, which for decades had warm and friendly
relations with Russia, I am convinced that Russians do
not want war, and I hope that the Russian Government
and the Russian President will heed the wishes of their
people and return to the negotiating table to engage in
dialogue and solve this conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs and European Affairs of Luxembourg.
I thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing. I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Prime Minister
of Ukraine, to the Council and thank him for his
statement. His speech was very moving.
The situation in Ukraine is serious, in particular
in Crimea. We cannot remain indifferent given the
crisis the country is undergoing. Despite increasing
tensions, we would like to believe that there is still
time to avoid the worst — the annexation of Crimea
by force. We hope that this public meeting of the
Security Council — the body that, under the Charter
of the United Nations, has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and international
security — will help to strengthen the efforts of the
entire international community in favour of a peaceful
settlement of the crisis in your country.

4/19

13/03/2014

Luxembourg is deeply concerned by the crisis.
During my trip to Kyiv on Monday as part of a working
visit with my colleagues, the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium and the Netherlands, I came to a
personal realization of the courage and resilience the
Ukrainian people have shown over recent weeks. I
also had the opportunity to observe the restraint and
composure of Ukraine at a time when it is being faced
with the violation of its sovereignty and territorial
integrity in Crimea.
The decision taken on 1 March by the Council of the
Russian Federation to authorize the use of the Russian
armed forces on the territory of Ukraine and the actions
taken on the ground over the past two weeks constitute
flagrant violations of international law, especially the
Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act. They go against the commitments to Ukraine
undertaken by Russia under the Budapest Memorandum
of 1994 and under the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership between Russia and Ukraine, signed in
1997.
The main reason given by Russia for to justify
its actions, that is to say threats against the rights of
Russian speakers and Russian communities in Crimea,
has been proved to be baseless, as noted recently the
High Commissioner on National Minorities of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE). We regret that it was not possible for the
Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations for
Human Rights to visit Crimea to corroborate that claim
of the OSCE.
The holding on 16 March of a referendum on the
status of Crimea is in both form and substance in
violation of the Constitution of Ukraine. We call on
Russia to cease all actions of support to that referendum.
The great and powerful Russian Federation has no need
to either encourage or to take advantage of this charade
of a referendum, whose ballot papers do not even offer
the option of voting against. If the referendum is held
anyway, the international community will in no way
recognize its outcome.
We are no longer in the era of Yalta or the time
of divvying up the European continent. It must be
possible to find a peaceful way out of this crisis that
takes the interests of all parties concerned — including,
of course, those of Russia — into account. The
destabilization of Ukraine serves the interests of no one
in the long term. We recognize Russia’s historical ties

14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

with Ukraine, including in the economic and cultural
areas. We welcome the spirit of openness of the Prime
Minister of Ukraine and his readiness to engage in
negotiations — yet further reason for Russia to take
the outstretched hand of Ukraine to establish a direct
dialogue to defuse the crisis.
A lasting political solution to the Ukrainian
crisis will also require inclusive political dialogue
within Ukraine itself. Such dialogue must include
all democratic political forces and all regions. It
must reflect the diversity of Ukrainian society, the
aspirations of all Ukrainians and the need to respect
the rights of all Ukrainians. We support the efforts
of the Government and the Parliament of Ukraine to
promote such dialogue, which could, in our view, lead
inter alia to a strengthening of the federal character
of the Ukrainian State. But it is up to the Ukrainians
alone to decide their destiny. Ukraine belongs only to
Ukrainians.
As I said at the outset, I want to believe that
it is still possible to avoid the worst and that there
is still time to find a peaceful solution in keeping
with the principles of our Organization and with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. Luxembourg encourages the continuation of
intensive diplomatic efforts to establish a multilateral
mechanism — a contact group bringing together key
stakeholders, including Russia. The mechanism should
allow us to initiate a military de-escalation, starting
with a withdrawal of Russian forces to their places
of permanent deployment. It should also permit the
launching of direct dialogue between the Russian and
Ukrainian authorities.
I welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Secretary-General, and encourage them
to pursue their mission of good offices. Luxembourg
supports the efforts of the OSCE, in close cooperation
with the United Nations and other international actors,
to deploy a special observer mission, above all in
Crimea and other regions of Ukraine, in agreement with
the host country. Such a mission would assess the facts
and respect for human rights, and promote dialogue on
the ground in order to ease tensions and normalize the
situation.
In conclusion, let me reiterate once again our call
on all parties concerned, in particular Russia, to give
priority to dialogue over violence and international
law over the law of the strongest. The time has come

S/PV.7134

to step up up diplomatic efforts to reach a solution to
the Ukrainian crisis that respects Ukraine’s political
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity in the interests of peace, stability and
prosperity in Europe.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): This
meeting comes at a time when every day we are seeing
an ever starker contrast between the conduct of the
authorities in Kyiv and the conduct of the authorities in
Moscow. Let me consider each in turn.
Ukraine’s Government is placing a priority on
internal reconciliation, plans for free and fair elections,
and political inclusivity. It has proposed the creation
of a task force to consider the possibility of enhanced
autonomy for Crimea within Ukraine. Ukrainian
leaders have made clear the future they wish for their
people — a future of pluralism, prosperity and dignity;
a future free of corruption and cronyism; a future in
which the Ukrainian people do not have to choose
between East and West.
The Government of Ukraine has been unwavering
in its pledge to honour all of its international
agreements, including those covering Russian military
bases. Ukraine has also shown remarkable restraint
over the past few weeks with respect to the use of its
armed forces. As evidenced today by the statement of
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, Ukraine’s voice throughout
this crisis has been one of reason, support for the rule
of law and restraint in the face of provocation. Its
Government was voted in nearly unanimously by the
Rada and has since enjoyed broad support across the
political spectrum, including from former President
Yanukovich’s former party. The Government also
includes representatives from across the country, east
and west, north and south.
Ukraine’s leadership is properly focused on the
needs of its people. Yesterday in Washington, D.C., the
Prime Minister met with President Obama and other
leaders of my Government, and also with top officials
of the International Monetary Fund. The Prime
Minister’s goal is to stabilize his country’s finances,
curb corruption, and lay the groundwork for progress
under a new Government to be elected peacefully,

14-263705/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

freely and fairly by all the people of Ukraine on 25 May.
These elections, which are just over two months away,
will give any citizen who has a different vision for
Ukraine the chance to be heard. It will give those
who wish to shape Ukraine’s future the chance to be
elected. Ukraine’s efforts to stabilize its economy and
the coming elections merit the wholehearted support
of every member of the Council and of the broader
international community.
In Moscow, we see a different kind of leadership.
Russia has pursued a course of military action from the
outset. At the very start of the crisis, Russia massed
its forces along Ukraine’s border for military exercises,
while supporting efforts inside Crimea to take control
of Ukrainian border posts, surround Ukrainian military
facilities, seize control of public facilities, and replace
Ukrainian media with Russian stations. President Putin
asked for and received authorization from the Federation
Council to use military force in Crimea, and today
there are reportedly more than 20,000 Russian troops
in the region. Although Moscow justified its actions in
the name of protecting ethnic Russians, Russian troops
have repeatedly obstructed international monitors
and mediators and denied them access, even though
their task is to ensure that the rights of minorities are
not violated. This is not the behaviour of people who
believe that they have truth and law on their side.
The self-anointed Crimean leaders set a referendum
with full backing from Russia. That date was to
be 25 May. They then reset the date for 16 March,
allowing less than two weeks to prepare for and carry
out a vote — two weeks on an issue of monumental
importance, risking grave destabilizing consequences,
in defiance of the Ukrainian Constitution and in
defiance of international law. The referendum ballot
that will be put to voters contains no option to vote
for the status quo. Ballots with nothing checked will
reportedly be ruled invalid. As the vote approaches this
weekend, the Russian military intervention continues,
and we learned this morning of new military operations
by Russian troops involving artillery batteries, assault
helicopters and at least 10,000 additional soldiers near
the Ukrainian border.
The proposed 16 March referendum on the status of
Crimea is everything that the scheduled 25 May election
is not. If the 25 May election offers an opportunity under
the law for all Ukrainians to participate in charting
their shared future, Sunday’s referendum in Crimea
is hastily planned, unjustified and divisive. Ukraine’s

6/19

13/03/2014

Constitution requires that any change to its territory be
achieved only through a national referendum. Because
the Government has not authorized such a measure,
the proposed balloting on 16 March would violate
Ukraine’s sovereignty. Any referendum on Crimea
must be conducted within the bounds of Ukrainian
law. Accordingly, the United States joins with others
in calling for the suspension of that ill-conceived
initiative, which cannot be recognized as legitimate,
especially when carried out against the backdrop of a
foreign military incursion. We also call on the Russian
Federation to refrain from further actions in support of
this dangerous undertaking.
The only true solution to the current crisis is
through diplomacy. My Government strongly supports
direct talks between the Russian Federation and the
Government of Ukraine, to be conducted, if necessary,
with appropriate help from the international community.
Secretary Kerry will meet with Foreign Minister
Lavrov tomorrow in the hope of finding a way off this
path of confrontation. Given the risk of conflict, none
of us can afford to leave any stone unturned.
But Russia has to want a diplomatic solution. The
diplomatic path remains both viable and desirable,
because the way forward is clear. Russian forces
must return to their bases and Russia must honour its
agreements with Ukraine. All countries must respect
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and seek
to resolve disputes through peaceful means. Every
country must fulfil its obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations and its commitments under the 1994
Budapest Memorandum and the Helsinki Final Act.
Ukraine and the Russian Federation must abide fully by
their bilateral agreements, including the 1997 Treaty of
Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership and the 1997
basing agreement.
These steps, each in accordance with prior
agreements, each consistent with international law,
each in keeping with the best interests of the people
of Ukraine, are all that is needed to end this crisis in a
way that respects the rights and interests of everyone
involved. In accordance with these principles, the
United States is proposing a draft resolution for the
Council’s consideration that would endorse a peaceful
solution to the Ukraine crisis based on international
law and the Council’s mandate to act, when necessary,
to ensure global security and peace.
In closing, I would like to reiterate my Government’s
belief that, to resolve this crisis, what is needed now
14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

is for a climate of restraint to replace confrontation,
openness to replace obstructionism, and peaceful
dialogue to replace coercion. This is the moment to
show that laws matter, rules matter, and territorial
integrity matters. If we do not come together, if we do
not send a clear a signal of our shared commitments,
we will live with the consequences in Crimea and well
beyond. We will look back on this moment and wish
we had come together with a unified voice before the
consequences became dire and innocent lives were lost.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
welcome Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk to the
Security Council today. The United Kingdom stands
side by side with the Ukrainian people in this time of
crisis.
We commend Mr. Yatsenyuk, his Government
and the people and armed forces of Ukraine for the
remarkable restraint they have shown in the face of
repeated provocation. Because of their strength of will,
there is still a chance for a peaceful diplomatic solution.
Over the past week, we have heard in this Chamber
and elsewhere an attempt to cast doubt on the legitimacy
of the transitional Government in Ukraine. That is
entirely unwarranted. Mr. Yanukovych deserted his
office and his people in the midst of a crisis. Rather
than work to implement the 21 February agreement, he
abandoned his post. He was disowned by his own party
and his removal was approved by an overwhelming
majority of Members of Parliament.
The transitional Government that replaced him has
already taken important steps — steps which uphold
the spirit of the 21 February agreement and which
lay the foundations for the future of Ukraine. They
have restored the 2004 Constitution, they have begun
the process of constitutional reform, and they have
scheduled elections for 25 May. Those forthcoming
elections will enable all Ukrainians to choose their own
leaders. Internationals monitors stand ready to ensure
that those elections are free and fair. We urge all parties
to support that effort.
We all agree that Ukraine needs our support in this
time of transition. We all acknowledge that Ukraine
has a pressing need for reform, for improvements to its
political culture, for political stability and inclusiveness,
and for an end to corruption. We all support the call
for investigations into the violence of the past three
months, we all back fresh elections under international
observation, and we all agree on the importance of

S/PV.7134

protecting minority rights. Those points of agreement
could form a basis around which we can coalesce to
find a way forward.
But in order to move away from confrontation,
the Russian Federation needs to accept that the cause
of current instability in Ukraine lies not in Kyiv or
in Donetsk. It comes from the actions of the Russian
Federation in the Crimean peninsula where, against the
express wishes of the Ukrainian Government, Russian
military forces have taken control of a large part of the
sovereign territory of Ukraine. We utterly condemn that
blatant violation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine and the flagrant breach
of international law.
Russia claims that it is acting to protect its citizens.
We have heard claims of Russian speakers and nationals
under threat, the Russian language outlawed, rampant
anti-Semitism, and hundreds of thousands of refugees
fleeing Ukraine. All those claims have been shown
to be unfounded. The only part of Ukraine where
minorities are under threat is in Russian-occupied
Crimea, where Ukrainian forces are besieged in their
bases and hundreds of members of the Tatar community
are fleeing Crimea in fear, and where, as we heard just
now from Mr. Feltman, Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights Šimonović has been denied access and the
opportunity to investigate the disturbing developments
taking place in Crimea. But those international
observers who have visited Crimea, including Astrid
Thors, the High Commissioner on National Minorities
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, have found no evidence of any violations or
threats to the rights of Russian speakers. They have,
however, reported that, as a consequence of Russian
actions, tensions between ethnic communities have
increased.
We are deeply concerned by the decision of the
so-called Crimean Government, installed by an armed
putsch accompanied by Russian military intervention,
to hold a referendum on 16 March to ascertain whether
Crimea should become part of the Russian Federation.
We are equally concerned by the legislative steps Russia
is taking to facilitate that referendum.
It is absolutely clear that the proposed referendum
would violate the Ukrainian Constitution. Article 73
sets out that any alteration to the territory of Ukraine
must be resolved by an all-Ukrainian referendum.
This is manifestly not an all-Ukrainian referendum.

14-263707/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

Moreover, a free and fair referendum cannot possibly
be held while Russian troops and Russian-backed
militias dominate Crimea, where there is no electoral
register, where there are restrictions on press freedom,
and where voters will be casting their ballots under the
barrel of a gun. Under such conditions, it is clear that
any referendum vote in Crimea this weekend would be
farcical. Worse, it would reopen ethnic divisions and
risk a serious escalation in tension. Such a referendum
will not be recognized by the international community.
A window of opportunity remains to find a
peaceful resolution to the crisis. The window is narrow,
but it exists. But finding that solution requires Russia to
take a number of important steps. It must de-escalate.
Its forces must return to their bases in Crimea and to
the force level stipulated in the Black Sea Fleet basing
arrangements. International monitors must be allowed
into Crimea. Their presence will ensure that the rights
of people belonging to minorities are fully respected
by all parties. Russia should distance itself from the
proposed referendum, clearly indicate that it will
not seek to use the result as a pretext for annexation,
and publicly reaffirm its commitment to the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. And
Russia must agree to proposals for a dialogue with the
Ukrainian Government, either directly or through a
meaningful international diplomatic process.
The Council is meeting today in the gravest possible
circumstances. A referendum is set to take place on
Sunday that is illegal under Ukrainian law and the
consequences of which will clearly be inflammatory — a
destabilization with serious implications for the United
Nations Charter and international norms.
There is no need for this. What we have just
heard from Prime Minister Yatsenyuk confirms what
many of us have been repeatedly emphasizing in the
Council — that there is a clear willingness on the part
of the Ukrainian Government to address Russia’s stated
concerns through peaceful dialogue, discussion and
negotiation. When there is a readiness for dialogue, it
makes no sense — indeed, it would be dangerous and
irresponsible — for Russia to take unilateral actions
or collude with unilateral actions of the Crimean
authorities. The United Kingdom urges Russia to
refrain from such unilateral actions and to distance
itself from the referendum set to take place on Sunday.
And the United Kingdom urges the Security
Council to make clear that Ukraine’s sovereignty, unity

8/19

13/03/2014

and territorial integrity must be respected and that any
attempt to modify Ukraine’s borders through unlawful
means will not be tolerated.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I welcome
the dignified statement we just heard from the Prime
Minister of Ukraine.
If the current crisis were not so serious, we could
wax ironic about the recent statements made by Russian
diplomats to explain the apparent movement towards
the annexation of Crimea. That irony is based on two
facts. First, Russia constantly refers to the agreement
of 21 February, negotiated by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Germany, Poland and France, which it refused
to endorse when it was signed. It has become a very
belated supporter of that agreement after Yanukovych’s
shameful flight.
Secondly — and here the irony borders on
the surreal — Russia refers to the opinion of the
International Court of Justice, which ruled that the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
was not illegal. Russia never recognized that opinion
and always disputed Kosovo’s independence. We
therefore await with interest the logical conclusion of
that unexpected conversion — Russia’s recognition of
Kosovo.
It is interesting to note that, in its opinion,
the International Court of Justice established two
conditions. One was the contested character of the
territory, which led to the existence of a unique legal
order, resolution 1244 (1999), and the second was the
non-use of force. Obviously, those conditions have not
been met in Crimea, the status of which was in no way
contested either by Moscow or the local assembly, and
where the Russian occupation allows one faction, which
received 4 per cent of the votes in the local elections, to
organize a mock referendum in the shadow of Russian
bayonets. As French Minister for Foreign Affairs Fabius
said this morning, “in Crimea Sunday the choice will
be between ‘yes’ and ‘yes’”.
But for Russia it is not a question of law, coherence
or logic; it is a question of using anything and everything
to justify the unjustifiable — the blatant and cynical
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, whose
foundation is respect for the territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of its Members.
Everything is therefore in place for the annexation
of Crimea by Russia regardless of legal wrangling that

14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

will fool no one. The Western media sees in this matter
the triumph of the Russian chess player who will have
checkmated the international community. I play chess
pretty badly, but I see here above all the immaturity of
a player who cannot help but try to take the rook and
ends up losing the game. Russia will gain Crimea and
lose its credibility. What will happen to the credibility
of Russian diplomacy when it tries to returns to its
foundations — respect for the territorial integrity of
States and non-interference in the internal affairs of
States — a diplomacy that encouraged and recognized
the secession in Georgia and annexed a region of
Ukraine? It will be met with nothing but sarcasm and
a shrug.
What will happen to the credibility of Russian
diplomacy in the former Soviet space? Are we not aware
that certain independent States had been conquered by
the Russian Empire before Crimea? Are we not aware
that there are Russian and Russian-speaking minorities
everywhere across that space? All that Russia will
find there is distrust and anxiety. What will happen
to the credibility of Russia in Ukraine? How can we
imagine a reconciliation between the spoiler and the
dispossessed? How can we understand the creation of
a new Alsace-Lorraine a century after 1914? No one
is asking Ukraine to choose between East and West.
Russia has succeeded in doing so by leaving Ukraine
no choice in the matter.
Finally, what will become of the rapprochement
between the European Union and Russia when Russia
tramples upon the values that led to the creation of the
European Union and the resolve to break the cycle of
invasions, occupations and demands? The European
Union can only see its error in believing that its
interlocutor shared the same objective. Russia will lose
the game, but no one will emerge unscathed, because
naked force will have imposed its logic. The fragile
fabric of international law — the only guarantee and
only barrier that small States have against the return of
war — will have been torn.
In this moment of confusion, it is right for the
Security Council to reaffirm the principles upon
which the United Nations is founded. France therefore
supports the draft resolution presented by the United
States of America and calls for its being put to a vote
before the holding of the referendum.
It is not too late. Let all of us, members and
non-members of the Security Council alike, launch a

S/PV.7134

final appeal to Russia. We understand the passions and
concerns. We want to respond to them, but through
respect for law and the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
That is the message that for a week now all our Heads of
State and Government have been sending to the highest
levels in Moscow.
Simple solutions are available; the principles
are well known. I even cited them here a week ago:
the return of the Russian forces to their barracks,
the deployment of international observers from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to ensure the safety of the civilian population, the
establishment of a Government of national unity in
Kyiv, the swift holding of elections under international
monitoring (see S/PV.7125). Let us negotiate the terms.
Time is running out. If the illegal referendum is
held on Sunday, if Russia responds unfavourably, as it
has announced it would, we will be forced to let Russia
suffer all the political and economic consequences. I
say “forced” because we do not want to follow a path
leading backwards. I say “forced” because we will not
have a choice in the face of such a major violation of
international law on our continent.
Russia should resist the nationalist giddiness that
has engulfed it and which is always ill advised. Russia
should forget 1914 and understand that we are in 2014.
It should return to the principles that it heralded for so
long and that it tramples today. It should listen to what
the entire international community is telling it. If it
does, a solution is possible — a solution that respects
the territorial integrity of Ukraine and its independence
and ensures the rights of all communities of Ukraine.
It should not lose the chess game for the sake of the
limited and fleeting pleasure of taking a rook. That
would not be a worthy display of the talent of Russian
chess players, who are among the best in the world.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): It is increasingly alarming
that the crisis and the turn of events in Ukraine poses a
threat to the security of the entire region and continues
to affect the daily lives of innocent people. While there
are a number of diplomatic engagements under way
in approaching the crisis, we believe it is important
to take into account substantive issues that gave rise
to the conflict in the first place thus addressing the
grievances of all concerned parties.
We reiterate our support for the solidarity of all
Ukrainian communities and maintain our call for
an inclusive political Ukrainian-led dialogue that

14-263709/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

recognizes the diversity of the Ukrainian people
and emphasizes the protection of minorities and the
Russian community. As the Security Council and
the international community, we have a duty to find
an end to the confrontation and allow the Ukrainian
people to determine their own destiny and their own
future in a genuine and impartial manner. We thank the
United Nations leadership for its active role and steps
taken thus far in an effort to de-escalate the situation
as described to us by the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, whom I wish to thank personally.
We remain concerned that intensified rhetoric
on all fronts is undermining efforts to find common
ground. We reiterate our call on all parties to exercise
extreme restraint during this volatile time and to resolve
the issue through existing bilateral and multilateral
arguments. We the international community must
uphold our commitment to the principles of peace
and security and do our part to ensure that there is no
further deterioration of the crisis, which includes a call
for all parties involved to commit to finding a peaceful
solution.
Rwanda stands for respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States as
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations. In
our view, it is time to focus our priority on achieving
sustainable peace through genuine talks geared towards
de-escalation of the situation and to encourage all
concerned parties to deploy sustained efforts to defuse
fear, hatred and other negative emotions that will
worsen the situation.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): I would like to welcome the Prime
Minister of Ukraine, Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, and thank
him for his clear briefing to the Security Council. The
implications of the events in Ukraine, particularly in the
region of Crimea, have reached a critical turning point,
which requires concerted efforts to defuse the crisis,
give precedence to the language of reason, and begin a
direct dialogue between the parties concerned in order
to end the crisis and prevent any further escalation.
That will require urgent action on the part of the
international community through the United Nations
and other international organizations, and bilateral
contacts aimed at creating an atmosphere conducive to
enabling the parties to overcome the causes of the crisis
and find a mechanism for the dialogue and negotiation
necessary to achieve solutions that will preserve the
interests of all parties concerned.

10/19

13/03/2014

In this regard, Jordan welcomes the efforts of the
Secretary General of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the proposals
of its presidency, including on the establishment of an
international contact mechanism to facilitate dialogue
among the parties and the despach of a fact-finding
mission to Ukraine to gather information and evaluate
the security situation. We also support efforts to
implement these proposals as soon as possible, given
the current situation.
Jordan stresses the need to respect Ukraine’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political, and
not to interference in its internal affairs. We also call
for compliance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the settlement
of disputes by peaceful means. Jordan stresses the
territorial integrity of Ukraine, all regions of which,
including Crimea, are subject to Ukrainian sovereignty,
in accordance with the provisions of international law
and the relevant international conventions, including
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum and the 1997 Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
We also affirm that the international community
should help launch a political process in Ukraine that
will include all parties and communities, including
minorities, with a view to restoring peace, security and
the rule of law in Ukraine. Such a political process must
ensure the rights of all citizens of Ukraine and pave the
way for presidential elections in May.
Diffusing the crisis in Ukraine — particularly
the region of Crimea — and ensuring respect for its
Constitution and territorial integrity will prevent
a further escalation of the crisis and avert threats to
international peace and security. Jordan calls on all the
parties concerned to create an environment conducive
to resolving the crisis, refrain from escalation, and
keep all options open for solutions aimed at preserving
the rights and interests of all and restoring peace and
security in the region.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): We thank the
Luxembourg presidency for holding today’s public
meeting on the crisis in Ukraine and appreciate your
presence here, Mr. Minister. We are grateful for the
participation of and statement by Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk of Ukraine, and for the briefing by UnderSecretary-General Feltman. We express our firm
support for the political process towards elections on
25 May, under the Government of Ukraine.
14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

The Republic of Korea remains deeply concerned
over the continuing escalation of tensions in Ukraine. We
are particularly troubled by the decision of the Crimean
Parliament to hold a referendum and its unilateral
declaration of independence. Those actions will only
further exacerbate the already tense situation. Without
a doubt, it is vital that the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine be fully respected. Ukrainians
should retain full power over their country’s affairs,
without intervention or influence by outside forces. In
that vein, we urge the full observance of all relevant
international and bilateral agreements, particularly the
Charter of the United Nations and the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum.
The unabated military activities in Crimea, which
are violating the sovereignty of Ukraine, are also
a source of grave concern. Any military presence or
activity not authorized by the Ukrainian Government
and in breach of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine must immediately cease. We welcome
the ongoing diplomatic efforts of the international
community to de-escalate the situation, in particular
those of the Secretary-General and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
also underscore the importance of bilateral dialogue
between Ukraine and Russia.
The Republic of Korea believes that credible
international monitoring mechanisms will have a notable
calming effect on the ground. In that connection, it is
worrying that the United Nations Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights and OSCE personnel have
been denied access to the Crimean region. Unhindered
access must be ensured for such missions. Any action
threatening the safety and security of international
personnel must be stopped.
The stability and prosperity of Ukraine are critical
not only to peace in Europe, but also far beyond. We
truly hope that Ukraine will emerge from the crisis as
a strong, inclusive and prosperous democracy, led only
by the will and aspirations of the Ukrainian people. It
is the responsibility of the international community to
assist the people of Ukraine in fulfilling that goal.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing. China has been closely following developments
in the situation on the ground in Ukraine, which
remains highly complex and sensitive as we speak. The
situation in Ukraine today is the result of a complex

S/PV.7134

interlinkage among historic factors and circumstances
on the ground.
China regrets the recent clashes that took place
in the streets of Kyiv. China also condemns acts of
extremism and violence. Efforts to address Ukrainian
affairs should take the lawful rights and interests of
all ethnic communities in Ukraine into consideration
with a view to restoring the normal social order as soon
as possible. On several public occasions, China has
clearly stated its principled position on the question of
Ukraine. It continues to address the issue objectively
and impartially. It is China’s long-standing position not
to interfere in the internal affairs of other States and to
respect their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
My country is of the view that all parties must
now remain calm, exercise restraint, prevent a further
escalation of the situation, and adhere to the approach
of resolving the crisis through political and diplomatic
channels. It is our hope that all parties concerned will
promote communication and coordination, put the
interests of all ethnic communities in Ukraine above
everything else, keep their eyes on the big picture of
maintaining regional peace and stability, and settling
their differences by appropriate means.
China supports the constructive efforts and good
offices of the international community in de-escalating
the situation in Ukraine. We are open to all proposals
and plans that would help to ease tensions in the country.
We remain committed to playing a constructive role
in achieving a political settlement of the question of
Ukraine.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to welcome Prime
Minister Yatsenyuk and to thank him for his briefing.
I also want to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for providing an
update on the situation in Ukraine.
In a world that is already deeply embroiled in
turmoil in most regions, the current crisis in Ukraine is
one crisis too many. The world can ill afford it. Nigeria
remains unequivocal in highlighting the precarious
and delicate nature of the situation in Ukraine. The
imperative for a cautious approach by all parties to
avoid exacerbation of the crisis could not be more
urgent. That consideration is even more pertinent today
as developments on the ground indicate that so little has
changed since our last meeting in the Council on this
issue (see S/PV.7131).

14-2637011/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

The fundamental principle at stake in the crisis is
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
State Member of the United Nations. We want to remind
all concerned to uphold the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, particularly as concerns the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. In order to engender a
peaceful settlement of the current impasse, there must
be understanding. There must be mutual trust. There
must be flexibility and a willingness between the
parties to engage in constructive and peaceful dialogue.
We want to urge the parties not to slam the door on
dialogue, which represents a priceless opportunity
for all issues to be discussed towards a peaceful and
mutually acceptable resolution of the crisis.
The foundations for reconciliation are not farfetched. We can find them in previous agreements.
The Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership, adopted
in 1990 and renewed in 1997, are valued and credible
instruments that provide a ready framework for
resolving the crisis in Ukraine, and we call on all parties
to abide by their commitments and obligations under
those instruments. We also note that interlocutors have
a vital role to play in ameliorating the situation.
While the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, is making progress
in discussing human rights-related issues with
stakeholders across Ukraine, we regret that he has had
to cancel his visit to Crimea, which is at the core of the
current crisis. We hope that he will be able to undertake
that visit in the near future, because it is critical.
We would also like to see access granted to observers
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in order to allow them to undertake an objective
assessment of the situation on the ground. That, we
believe, would foster a deeper understanding of the crisis.
We want to reiterate our position that the referendum
planned for Crimea contravenes the Constitution of
Ukraine and is therefore illegitimate. For that reason,
we call on the authorities of Crimea to postpone, and
indeed cancel, the impending referendum. To go ahead
with it would add insult to injury. Our ardent desire is
to see a united, peaceful and democratic Ukraine where
all citizens and communities can live side by side in
peace, security and harmony.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
expresses its profound concern about the very serious
consequences of the announced referendum in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the holding of which
12/19

13/03/2014

could lead to an escalation of the crisis in Ukraine. It
is critical for the Council to contribute to ensuring the
maximum stability and the moderation of the parties,
and to use all appropriate means to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis.
We thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely
meeting, and the Prime Minister of Ukraine,
Mr. Arseniy Yatsenyuk, for his participation in this
meeting. We also thank Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing,
and welcome the work of the Secretary-General and the
mission of good offices in Ukraine of Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Robert Serry, and Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović.
Chile reiterates the necessity to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. It is essential that all parties involved in
the situation refrain from actions that are in breach
of the Charter of the United Nations or international
treaties and pacts to which Ukraine is a party. In that
context, it is essential to respect the rule of law at both
the international and national levels. At the national
level, that must be reflected in full respect for the
Ukrainian Constitution, which is particularly relevant
and important today on the eve of the referendum to be
convened by the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Chile appeals to the authorities of Ukraine to pursue
their efforts to establish an inclusive national political
process. At the international level, the parties must
respect and adhere not only to the Charter of the United
Nations, but also to the 1997 Treaty on Friendship,
Cooperation and Partnership and the Budapest
Memorandum. All the mechanisms provided for in
those instruments should be used to find a peaceful
solution to the dispute. We call for compliance with
the Budapest Memorandum, which obliges the parties
to respect the independence, sovereignty and current
borders of Ukraine and to refrain from the threat or use
of force to undermine the territorial integrity or political
independence of the country. By the same token, we
recall paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), which states:
“Any attempt aimed at the partial or total
disruption of the national unity and the territorial
integrity of a country is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.”

14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

We regret that Mr. Šimonović was not allowed to
enter Crimea and that the observers of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) are
still being prevented from doing so. It is essential for
Mr. Šimonović and the observers to have secure access
to Crimea. We urge that the efrforts of the United
Nations and the OSCE to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis not be hindered. Chile also reiterates its call
on the Russian Federation and Ukraine to make use of
existing mechanisms of dialogue to find that solution.
We need to give time to diplomacy.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that it is for the people of
Ukraine, in all its diversity and unity, to decide its own
destiny in the framework of an inclusive process that
guarantees the rule of law, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and respect for the rights of minorities.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your presence in presiding over this open debate at
such a critical time. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his briefing and welcome Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk of Ukraine at this very difficult and decisive
time for him and his country. It is important that
the Council has heard directly from him today. We
should commend him and the Ukrainian authorities
for their restraint and courage in the face of continued
provocation and for their efforts to design a new and
inclusive future for Ukraine.
We welcome all international efforts to find
solutions to the crisis. We commend the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) for their efforts. We support yesterday’s
statement by the Group of Seven, which spoke with one
voice in urging Russia to join them and work together
through diplomatic processes to resolve the crisis. We
also commend the efforts of the United States to find
a solution through engagement with both Russia and
Ukraine. Russia must similarly show itself ready to
engage seriously and constructively with the Ukrainian
leaders to resolve the crisis.
In our numerous meetings over the past two weeks,
the messages from Council members have been stark.
Ukraine’s territorial integrity must be respected.
Russia must take immediate, deliberate and definitive
steps to de-escalate the situation, including, critically,
ordering Russian troops to return to their bases, and
must allow independent monitors access to Crimea to
verify the situation on the ground. Russia and Ukraine
must engage with each other in direct dialogue at senior
levels.

S/PV.7134

However, we have seen no sign of change in
Russian actions. Instead, we have seen further Russian
efforts to consolidate its control of Ukrainian territory
in Crimea. It has extended its control of air, sea and
land access to the peninsula. The closure of Crimea’s
airspace to non-Russian commercial air traffic has now
further severed connections between Crimea and the
rest of Ukraine. Russian forces have seized Ukrainian
military and Government facilities and laid seige to
others, including the naval headquarters. They have
reportedly laid mines in a number of locations. Such
actions cannot be justified by a perceived threat to
Russian assets or nationals. OSCE High Commissioner
on National Minorities Ms. Thors found no evidence of
violations or threats to the rights of Russian speakers in
Crimea during her visit.
Media freedom has also been severely suppressed
in a clear attempt to prevent coverage of what is
occurring. Attacks on journalists have intensified.
Despite the repeated calls for independent verification
of the situation on the ground, unarmed OSCE
monitors have also been denied access to Crimea three
times now. United Nations representatives have been
similarly unable to conduct visits. The SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Ukraine, Robert Serry,
was threatened by armed men and Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights Šimonović has been denied
entry to Crimea. Reports of intimidation of Crimean
Tatars make it all the more crucial that human rights
assessment missions proceed as planned.
The Crimean Parliament’s announcement of a
referendum, to be held on Sunday to decide whether
Crimea should secede from Ukraine, was a dangerous
further escalation of tensions and deeply destabilizing;
so, too, were statements by Russian parliamentarians
that Russia would formally accept the results of that
referendum. Any such referendum would contravene
article 73 of the Ukrainian Constitution, which provides
that any alteration of the sovereign territorial boundaries
of Ukraine can be decided only through an all-Ukraine
national referendum. It would be inconsistent with
chapter X of the Constitution, which sets out the
constitutional role of Crimea within Ukraine. That has
been underlined by both Ukraine’s Acting President
Turchynov and Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.
The Ukrainian Parliament also demanded on
11 March that the referendum be cancelled. The
Crimean Parliament itself has no standing on that issue.

14-2637013/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

We also note that the referendum will be conducted at
a time when Russian forces are in control of Crimea.
For all those reasons, the results of the proposed
referendum will be inherently illegitimate and will
not be accepted by the international community. We
welcome the United States proposal that the Council
adopt a draft resolution that would make this clear. We
would support adopting such a draft resolution before
the Sunday referendum.
However, it is not too late to resolve the crisis
peacefully, but the window for that is rapidly closing.
The international community has shown its willingness
to support efforts to resolve the crisis, the continuation
of which will not only have terrible consequences for
the people of Ukraine but will also reverberate far
beyond that. The Ukrainian Parliament has asked the
United Nations for its support and we should remain
ready to assist. International principles that are at the
core of international relations not only in Europe but
globally, and that matter fundamentally to each and
every sovereign State, are at stake.
For diplomacy to have a chance, Russia needs to
actively de-escalate the situation. It must pull back
its forces to their bases and decrease their numbers to
agreed levels. It must also allow international observers
access to Crimea to verify the situation on the ground
and accept the proposed OSCE monitoring mission. It
must also demonstrate its respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including by
desisting from any support for the referendum proposed
this Sunday. And it must engage in direct dialogue
with Ukraine, as Ukraine has repeatedly requested,
either bilaterally or through diplomatic mechanisms,
such as the contact group that has been proposed. The
international community has offered its assistance
and dialogue. It is now imperative that Russia work
with international partners to ensure that the crisis is
resolved peacefully.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall respond directly to the direct question
put to me by Mr. Yatsenyuk. The Russians do not want
war, and I am sure that the Ukrainians do not want it
either. Furthermore — and this is something that I want
to underscore in particular — we see no grounds for
viewing the situation in such terms. We do not want any
further exacerbation of the situation.
Russia did not provoke the spiral of destabilizing
violence that has determined developments in Ukraine

14/19

13/03/2014

in recebt months. Some colleagues who spoke here
before me today painted an almost idyllic picture of the
situation in Ukraine. They claimed that if it had not
been for Russia, everyone in Ukraine would live long
and happy lives. Some others simply tried to claim a
role in the crisis. For them, it seems to be a game; for
us, it is an issue of lives and the fundamental norms
of international law. If we are to understand how to
normalize the situation, we need to objectively analyse
the root causes of the current crisis.
We have already said in this Chamber that there
were no objective grounds for Ukraine’s deteriorating
situation over the past few months. All that was at
stake was the need for President Yanukovych and
his Government to adopt a decision on whether it
was beneficial to Ukraine to sign the association
agreement with the European Union that was proposed
by Brussels. The reaction to Kyiv’s decision to refrain
from that for now while still maintaining a so-called
European future outlook was totally unfounded. The
escalation was provoked both by forces in Ukraine and
by Western sympathizers with that country.
Having refused to engage in trilateral negotiations
on the economic problems of Ukraine, under the
European Union-Ukraine-Russia format, Brussels and,
for some reason, Washington, D.C., started to demand,
almost in the form of an ultimatum, that Kyiv sign the
association agreement, which had significant economic
consequences for Ukraine. They appealed not only to
the Government but also to the street.
Of course, the people of Ukraine have the right
to peaceful political protests, but why turn the
Maidan into a militarized camp? Why send columns
of militants, well-trained and well-equipped by
someone, into the centre of Kyiv? Why provoke the
representatives of law-enforcement agencies by pelting
them with paving stones and Molotov cocktails,
using bulldozers as weapons of street terror? Are the
seizure of administrative buildings and political party
headquarters, and the killing and torturing of those
arrested there — for example, in the torture chambers
set up in the trade unions building — consistent with
democracy? The acts of violence that took place in Kyiv
clearly require careful international investigation.
The picture painted by Kyiv and Western
propaganda completely contradicts those reports, which
show that the same people fired on positions held by the
law-enforcement agencies and by the demonstrators.
There were also recent reports that they also fired on
14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

the headquarters of the so-called Commandant of the
Maidan who now leads Ukraine’s National Security
Council.
Why have the representatives of Western countries
fuelled the enmity and unrest? Why did the Speaker of
the Parliament of Lithuania, in a speech to the Maidan,
call for continued anti-governmental actions? Why
were there Ministers for Foreign Affairs and other
high-level civil servants and representatives of some
Western States among the demonstrators? Why was
there such blatant interference in the domestic affairs
of a State, in blatant disregard for its sovereignty?
However the activities of Victor Yanukovych
during that period may be judged, no one in this
Chamber can claim that he did not seek a possible
compromise with the opposition. The post of Prime
Minister was offered to Mr. Yatsenyuk. Why did he
not seize that opportunity to prevent the country from
falling into economic disaster? Why not seize not only
the opportunity provided by offers from the European
Union and the United States, but also by readiness of
the Russian Federation to help with credits and lower
fuel prices to begin to stabilize the economic situation?
Finally, why not seize the opportunity of the
agreement of 21 February to end the stand-off,
re-establish the normal political process, and cement
the economic and political integrity of the country?
Could it be that the forces seeking power and authority
were not interested in democracy, but in a dictatorship,
when they threatened all those who differed with
them, including members of the Rada? As a result, the
legitimate legal President was overthrown and forced to
leave Kyiv under the threat of physical violence.
Those present in this Chamber know full well that
the violent overthrow of an authority is illegal. Such
actions have been repeatedly condemned, including in
documents adopted by the Security Council. Instead of
the Government of national unity provided for pursuant
to the agreement of 21 February, a Government of the
victors was established in Kyiv, as acknowledged by
Mr. Yatsenyuk. A number of key positions, including
that of Minister of Defence, went to representatives
of the radical nationalist Freedom Party. In the
resolution adopted in December 2012, the European
Parliament characterized the views of that party as
anti-Russian, anti-Semitic, xenophobic, and counter to
the fundamental values of the European Union. It called
on all pro-democracy parties in the Rada not to form
coalitions with that party. Where are those European

S/PV.7134

values now? Are the new authorities in Ukraine sticking
to them?
The real bulwark of those new forces is an even
more radical organization, the so-called Right Sector,
whose leader has made his presidential ambitions clear.
The radicals have not laid down their weapons, as
required by the agreement of 21 February. Moreover,
they are restocking their arsenals with weapons seized
from military depots. The new authorities have done
nothing to organize a national dialogue to promote
genuine constitutional reform, as stipulated in the
agreement of 21 February.
They have done their best, however, to antagonize
the eastern and south-eastern regions of Ukraine.
First of all, they got rid of a law on languages that
afforded official status to the Russian language, and
then they eliminated the Russian-language versions of
Government websites. Instead of engaging in dialogue,
Kyiv sends its political commissars to the eastern
region. Those who dissent are arrested, as happened
with a popular governor of the Donetsk region who
stated that he intended to participate in the presidential
elections, and with former Governor Dobkin of the
Kharkiv oblast. The fract is, the Kyiv authorities
themselves are splitting their country in two.
A great deal has been said in the Council today,
often with considerable passion, with regard to the
situation in Crimea and the decision of the Supreme
Council of the Autonomous Republic to hold a
referendum on to decide on annexation by Russia or
on broader autonomous status within Ukraine. Some
dispute the legitimacy of such a referendum. However,
what is unacceptable is the manipulation of individual
principles and norms of international law, arbitrarily
wresting them from the general context not only of
international law itself, but in particular of concrete
political situations and historical specificities.
In each particular case, one must seek the right
balance between the principles of territorial integrity
and the right to self-determination. It is clear that
the achievement of the right to self-determination in
the form of separation from an existing State is an
extraordinary measure. However, in the case of Crimea,
it obviously arose as a result of the legal vacuum created
by the violent coup against the legitimate Government
carried out by nationalist radicals in Kyiv, as well as by
their direct threats to impose their order throughout the
territory of Ukraine.

14-2637015/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

A number of countries that have spoken out against
the expression of the popular will of the Crimean people
rushed to recognize the independence of Kosovo,
which was declared without a referendum by a simple
decision of Parliament, despite the protests of Belgrade
and the fact that the declaration of independence
took place against the backdrop of an illegal military
operation by NATO countries in a situation in which
the majority of the Serbian population was forced to
leave the province. I shall not even speaking about
resolution 1244 (1999), which retains all its validity in
establishing an international protectorate over Kosovo.
It is well known that the concept of a referendum
is not new. Referendums have been or will be held in
Puerto Rico, Gibraltar, the Falkland Islands, Catalonia
and Scotland. The legal and historical contexts,
as well as the results of all those votes, are all quite
different, but the fact remains that the inhabitants of
those territories were or will be given the opportunity
to express their free will. Why should the people of
Crimea be an exception?
There are other interesting precedents. The
Comoros declared their independence from France
in 1975 and were accepted as a State Member of the
United Nations consisting of four islands. However, in
February 1976 France organized for the residents of one
of those islands — Mayotte island — a referendum to
determine whether they wanted to remain part of France
or to be part of the new State of the Comoros. By a small
majority, they voted against independence from France.
The Head of State of the Comoros tried to keep that
from happening. In February 1976, he requested that an
emergency meeting of the Security Council be convened
(see S/PV.1888). France’s actions were characterized as
naked aggression and an encroachment on the national
unity of the Comorian State. He noted that under French
law in force before the independence of the Comoros
islands, the island of Mayotte was an inalienable part
of Comorian territory. He also underscored the fact that
the Comoros was accepted as a State Member at the
United Nations as a State composed of four islands. It
was all to no avail. Draft resolution S/11967 in support
of the Comorian position was vetoed by France.
The Declaration of Independence of the United
States refers to a situation in which it had become
necessary for a people to dissolve the political ties
connecting it to another people. Let us see how
the people of Crimea view that position during the
upcoming referendum.

16/19

13/03/2014

Finally, some who have spoken in the Council
referred to the actions of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in
Crimea. We consider those references to be incorrect.
The Russian Black Sea Fleet is in no way interfering
in the situation leading up to the referendum, which
has been proclaimed and organized by the Crimeans
themselves.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): As Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Feltman noted in his
statement, this is the sixth time since 1 March that
we have met to address the crisis caused by Russian
aggression against Ukraine. In the meantime, the
Heads of State of the European Union have condemned
the unprovoked violation of Ukrainian sovereignty
and territorial integrity by the Russian Federation, and
called on the later to immediately withdraw its armed
forces to their areas of permanent stationing. That call
was reinforced by a similar statement issued by the
leaders of the Group of Seven and the Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe) to stress the illegality of the referendum in
Crimea and call on all actors to refrain from supporting
unconstitutional activities.
As a leader and a patriot, ex-President Yanukovych
should have put Ukraine first and done everything
within his power to normalize the situation. He should
have led the implementation of the oft-cited 21 February
agreement, which he signed very unwillingly and
which Russia refused to co-sign, as eloquently pointed
out by the French Ambassador. Instead, Yanukovych
abandoned his country and fled, exposing it to
partition and annexation. Under those circumstances,
the Ukrainian Rada, whose legitimacy have never and
cannot be challenged, appointed a new Prime Minister
in accordance with the Ukrainian Constitution and
by the overwhelming majority of votes, enabling
the formation of a unity Government that is fully
representative of the ethnic and geographical diversity
of the Ukrainian population, as was also pointed out by
our colleague from the United States.
We commend the incredible restraint and moral
fortitude of the Ukrainian Government, its people and
its military in the face of the continuous escalation of
provocations and a massive propaganda onslaught. It
speaks volumes on the Prime Minister’s readiness and
commitment to pursuing the peaceful resolution of the
current crisis.

14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

Never has a referendum been set up so hurriedly,
and even that very short time frame was cut still shorter
in a clear violation of Ukraine’s Constitution and also
the constitution of Crimea, which unambiguously states
that Crimea shall be an integral part of Ukraine. The
original inhabitants of Ukraine, Crimean Tatars, have
spoken loudly against the referendum and Crimea’s
secession and have reaffirmed their desire to see their
homeland as part of Ukraine. But their voices will not
count, nor will the voices of many other ethnic groups
inhabiting Crimea, including Ukrainians themselves,
because the referendum is specifically designed to
endorse secession. There is simply no other option but
to say yes to partition.
Notably, in the meantime, Russia is fast-tracking
legislation that will facilitate the annexation of
Crimea — or any piece of any other country, for that
matter. One can only imagine the shudders that is
sending across the entire region, whose memories of
the recent Soviet occupation and invasions are still very
much alive.
As a signatory of the 1991 Almaty Declaration,
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, the 1997 Agreement
between Russia and Ukraine on the Status of Conditions
of the Presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet on the
Territory of Ukraine and the 1997 Treaty on Friendship,
Cooperation and Partnership between Ukraine and
the Russian Federation, the Russian Federation has
repeatedly recognized Ukraine’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Furthermore, as a signatory of the
Budapest Memorandum, it has undertaken the obligation
to protect and guarantee Ukraine’s sovereignty,
inviolability and territorial integrity, in exchange — as
has been pointed out — for Ukraine’s relinquishing its
nuclear-weapons arsenal.
The blatant breach of bilateral obligations and
international law by Russia is undermining the very
foundation of international law as well as regional and
international peace and security. We strongly call on all
States to make it clear that they will not recognize the
referendum and its outcome.
Nothing that has been said, including by the
Russian Ambassador — nothing on Earth — warrants
or justifies Russia’s actions and those of the pro-Russian
forces in Crimea. Whatever concerns — legitimate
concerns — may be raised about the conditions of
ethno-linguistic minorities, they could have and still
can be readily addressed through existing regional

S/PV.7134

and international instruments. The Council of Europe
has plenty of mechanisms to that effect and is ready to
engage; so do the OSCE and the United Nations. Let
those organizations do their job, just as they have done
with success on multiple other occasions, especially
since Ukraine has repeatedly invited monitors and
representatives of those organizations and declared
its openness to be visited, assessed, inspected and
monitored. Ukraine has nothing to hide.
But its opponents do. Why else would certain
forces try to do everything in their power to isolate
Crimea before the illegal referendum? The pro-Russian
forces propped up by the ever-growing Russian military
presence on the peninsula have repeatedly denied
access to OSCE teams, to Assistant Secretary-General
Šimonović and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Robert Serry, who was harassed and denied
entry twice. Crimean Ukrainians are attacked and
accused of being occupiers in their own country,
taunted en masse as fascists and Nazis, simply for no
other reason but being Ukrainian.
Crimean airspace is closed to flights, except
those from and to Moscow. Waterways are blocked,
electricity and supplies to Ukrainian forces cut. Ships
are sunk at water entries to the peninsula, trenches dug
and, as reported by the International Campaign to Ban
Landmines, landmines are being laid. Land access is
monitored by so-called unidentified Russian-speaking
men who are armed to the teeth. Crimea’s information
space has also been blocked. All Ukrainian information
channels and the local Tatar network have been clamped
down and replaced by Russian channels transmitting
continuous anti-Ukrainian propaganda. Journalists
have been threatened, assaulted and kidnapped.
It is in that context of Crimea’s isolation, gunpoint
tactics by pro-Russian forces and extreme levels of
anti-Ukrainian hysteria that the illegal referendum is
to take place this coming weekend, paving the way to
Crimea’s annexation by Russia. The crisis is deeply
troubling. Besides violating the underlying principles
of international law and of a country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, it also has a highly explosive
human dimension. The anti-Ukrainian propaganda and
a barrage of lies risk unleashing the most dangerous
demons of hatred, with potentially devastating
consequences for the region and international security
as a whole.
We call on the Russian Federation to stop the
warmongering and its dangerous propaganda campaign

14-2637017/19

S/PV.7134

Ukraine

aimed at its neighbours, and to use whatever little
time remains for open dialogue and the participation
of international mediation. While it is still possible,
we appeal to the Russian Federation to withdraw its
troops to their regular locations, accept the primacy
of international law and reaffirm its respect for
the Charter of the United Nations, engage in direct
dialogue with Kyiv without any further delay, revert
to existing mechanisms of crisis resolution, and accept
the initiatives of the United Nations, the OSCE, the
Council of Europe and whatever other initiatives there
are that are aimed at preventing further escalation and
launching international monitoring mechanisms.
The solution to the crisis in Ukraine can be
based only on the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and independence of the country, as well as on strict
adherence to international law and international
standards of behaviour. If this chance is missed, the
consequences for the international order are difficult
to assess, and the full responsibility for them will be
Russia’s to bear. The window of opportunity, as our
British colleague has referred to it, is still open. It is up
to Russia to keep it open, or to shut it in the face of the
international community.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing. I welcome the transition
Prime Minister of Ukraine, Mr. Yatsenyuk, and thank
him for the information he has provided.
Chad notes with great concern the continuing
escalation of the crisis in Ukraine, despite the repeated
calls of the international community, in particular the
Security Council, for calm and restraint. We think
that it is still possible to take the path of national
reconciliation and preservation of the unity of Ukraine
through an inclusive process of dialogue between the
different components and respecting diversity.
Chad also calls for the respect for territorial
integrity, the non-use of force and the peaceful
settlement of disputes in conformity with the Charter
of the United Nations. The parties must take the
necessary steps to create a climate of dialogue with a
view to achieving genuine national reconciliation and
respecting human rights, more specifically, the rights
of minorities. Chad supports international mediation
for a peaceful outcome of the crisis and welcomes the
efforts deployed by the Secretary-General towards that
end.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express the appreciation of my delegation
18/19

13/03/2014

for the commitment with which Luxembourg has
served in its presidency of the Security Council, as can
be seen in the fact that you, Mr. President, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs, are presiding over today’s meeting.
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his briefing and for his call. We value the good
offices that the Secretary-General is employing. We
acknowledge the various actors that are collaborating to
reach a diplomatic solution of this crisis. We welcome
the Prime Minister of Ukraine for his participation in
today’s meeting.
Argentina has been following with concern the
situation in Ukraine, particularly since we received the
note from the Permanent Representative of that country
on 28 February (S/2014/136). The Council and the
international community have given the issue intense
attention as the situation has become increasingly
complex.
The delegation of Argentina reiterates once again
that it is essential that we stick to the principles that
we undertook to uphold when we became Members of
the United Nations. In particular, we must recall our
commitment not to intervene in matters within the
domestic jurisdiction of States. In light of that, we
understand that the action of any State or international
organization must preserve due respect for Ukraine’s
conduct of its internal affairs.
As a Member of the Organization, Argentina
considers it essential to highlight the primary duty
to respect the territorial integrity and political
independence of all States. My country has sustained
that principle throughout its history, even prior to the
very existence of the United Nations, and will continue
to do so unwaveringly.
We have followed with concern the evolution of
Ukraine’s domestic situation and listened attentively
to the statements by the various authorities of that
country before this Council. We are concerned about
past and present violence and the possibility that it
may worsen. We regret that, despite repeated appeals
to all parties and key stakeholders to refrain from any
action that could contribute to inflammatory rhetoric
and to aggravating the situation, particularly unilateral
acts on the ground, it has still not been possible to take
substantive steps to establish constructive dialogue and
good faith with the aim of resolving the current crisis.
It is essential that the international community and
the actors in Ukraine themselves facilitate democratic

14-26370

13/03/2014

Ukraine

dialogue and contribute to finding peaceful solutions
to the current situation. In that regard, the Argentine
delegation wishes to emphatically appeal to all
Ukrainian parties to refrain from taking positions
and decisions that could make the situation worse or
establish faits accomplis that hinder dialogue and the
search for the necessary compromises that will make a
comprehensive solution possible.
We hope that the internal evolution in Ukraine
can take democratic paths, as that is the only way
to be inclusive. At the same time, we consider it
essential to observe strict respect for human rights
and humanitarian law. Our own national experience
in that regard teaches us that for any community,
such commitment is essential to ensuring a future of
peace and development with social inclusion and the
full operation of democratic institutions. We hope that
throughout the process due respect will be maintained
for all minorities, whether ethnic, linguistic, cultural
or religious.
International efforts have been directed towards
finding solutions through diplomatic channels. They
have crystalized in high-level meetings in Paris
and Rome, as well as in various proposals to deploy
mediation or observation missions. While those
initiatives have not been fruitful, diplomatic efforts
for a rapprochement must be redoubled to alleviate
tensions on the ground and, at the same time, open
space for dialogue to resolve the crisis. The way out of
the current crisis is political and must be peaceful and
concerted.
The international community must actively
contribute through mechanisms that the Ukrainians
consider necessary or appropriate to achieve internal
peace in the country. It is our hope that the competent
regional organizations can constructively contribute in
that regard. It is incumbent on all of us to refrain from
exacerbating internal dissent and to strictly adhere to
the principle of non-interference by military, economic
or political means in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.
As for the Security Council, we understand that our
primary responsibility is to continue making concrete
proposals that will contribute to a resolution of the
crisis and to appropriate follow-up of the situation with
a view to preserving international peace and security,

S/PV.7134

and, where appropriate, to adopt the appropriate
measures. Argentina’s commitment to those goals can
be depended on.
The President (spoke in French): Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk has requested the floor to make a further
statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Yatsenyuk (Ukraine): Mr. President, let
me thank you and the Council members for your
unconditional support of the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and independence of my country. This
is really great, and I will deliver the message to the
people of Ukraine that all, except one, supported the
independence and territorial integrity of my country.
We still believe that we can find a peaceful solution. My
Government is committed to executing all international
obligations. We adhere to all bilateral and multilateral
treaties that Ukraine has signed and ratified.
Crimea was, is and will be an integral part of
Ukraine. We will never recognize any kind of makeshift,
artificial and falsified so-called referendum. We are
ready to hold a nationwide dialogue in order to increase
the powers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in
the Ukrainian Parliament through constitutional means
and tools. We will protect and defend every minority in
my country. We stick to the principle of the Ukrainian
Constitution that says that, except for the Ukrainian
language, the only other language indicated in article
10 of the Ukrainian Constitution is the Russian one.
We will protect every religion of every one who is
a Ukrainian citizen. And we want to be very clear
in stating that this Government is ready for an open
dialogue.
We extended our hand to Russia, but in return
we got the barrel of a gun. But we still believe that
Russia is ready to negotiate and to tackle this dramatic
conflict — not only in our bilateral relations, but in the
whole of Europe — by peaceful means. What we are
asking for is the truth. History will judge us. We have
a chance to make history. We will do whatever we can
in order to preserve peace and stability and in order to
save my country.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

14-2637019/19
