S/2014/698

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 September 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 39 of Security Council
resolution 2147 (2014). It covers major developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo since my report of 30 June 2014 (S/2014/450), including with regard to
the implementation of national commitments under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
and progress made by the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in implementing its mandate. It
also provides an update on the reconfiguration of MONUSCO and the transfer of
tasks to the United Nations country team.

II. Major developments
Political developments
2.
The formation of a new Government of “national cohesion” announced by
President Joseph Kabila in October 2013 did not take place during the reporting
period. The extraordinary session of Parliament, which was expected to focus on the
adoption of three laws on the organization of local, provincial and general elections
and one law modifying article 70 of the Constitution in order to change the voting
system for provincial elections, also was not held. This fuelled speculation about
further revisions of the Constitution in the future, aimed at circum venting
presidential term limits.
3.
The Independence Day (30 June) commemorations were dominated by
President Kabila’s speech, in which he paid tribute to the patriotism and valour of
the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces armée s de la
République démocratique du Congo — FARDC) in their victory over the rebels of
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M23). Independence Day was preceded by statements
from several opposition parties and coalitions, in which they rejected the electoral
calendar published in May and opposed any constitutional amendments or changes
to presidential term limits. Several opposition parties called for the restructuring of
the Commission électorale nationale indépendante and the prosecution of its

14-61405 (E)

011014

*1461405*

S/2014/698

President. They also threatened to withdraw their representatives from the
Commission.
4.
The debate over constitutional changes continued to widen. Three weeks after
the Conference of Catholic Bishops issued a statement reiterating its opposition to
any revision of the Constitution, the Archdiocese of Kinshasa organized a
conference in mid-July on the theme “Is now the appropriate time to amend the
Constitution?”. Among the featured speakers was one of President Kabila ’s advisers,
who argued that the 2005 Constitution was not adapted to the post-transitional
context and that a new Constitution was needed as the country transformed into an
emerging regional power.
5.
In July and August, the Secretary-General of the presidential majority, Aubin
Minaku, and the President of the Parti du peuple pour la reconstruction et la
démocratie, Evariste Boshab, among other influential political leaders, echoed views
about the need to extensively revise the Constitution in order to adapt it to evolving
realities. Some called for such amendments to be adopted by referendum and began
campaigning for public support.
6.
However, disagreements appeared to surface within the presidential majority,
with the Mouvement social pour le renouveau publicly expressing concern about
any modification of article 220 of the Constitution, which prohibits the revision of
provisions relating to presidential term limits and other fundamental principles.
7.
On 4 August, some of the main parliamentary opposition parties, including the
Union pour la nation congolaise and the Union pour la démocratie et le progrès
social, organized a rally in Kinshasa in opposition to any constitutional change that
would end presidential term limits. National deputy and Union pour la nation
congolaise General Secretary Jean-Bertrand Ewanga was arrested on 5 August on
charges of slandering the Head of State and inciting ethnic hatred in relation to his
statements at the rally, raising concern about respect for fundamental freedoms and
political space for the opposition. On 11 September, the Supreme Court sentenced
Mr. Ewanga to one year in prison for contempt of the President, the Parliament and
members of the Government.
8.
On 3 September, approximately 30 civil society organizations issued a
statement for consideration by the Parliament, in which they opposed any
amendment to the Constitution that would compromise progress in consolidating
democracy and the rule of law.
9.
On 15 September, in Kinshasa, the Parliament reconvened in an ordinary
session, which was boycotted by members of Parliament from the Union pour la
démocratie et le progrès social and the Union pour la nation congolaise in protest
against the imprisonment of Mr. Ewanga. At the opening ceremony, National
Assembly Speaker Aubin Minaku stated that the Assembly would have to take a
decision on changing the voting system from direct to indirect suffrage for
provincial elections, which implies a constitutional modification. He indicated that
the modification of other articles, including article 220, should be decided by
referendum. Senate President Kengo Wa Dondo declared his opposition to any
attempt to change article 220, which limits presidential terms, and called upon
national stakeholders not to support any such amendment, since it could jeopardize
national cohesion and peace.

2/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

Progress on the implementation of national commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region: National Oversight Mechanism and benchmarking process
10. On 12 July, a matrix of 56 benchmarks and 347 indicators for the six national
commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework was endorsed
at a high-level validation seminar organized by the National Oversight Mechanism
and the Ministry of Planning, with the support of MONUSCO, the United Nations
country team and other international partners. Emphasizing national ownership of
the benchmarking process, the seminar paved the way for the inclusion of the
national commitments in the budget planning for 2015. On 17 Septe mber, the
Steering Committee of the National Oversight Mechanism, chaired by President
Kabila, adopted the matrix.
Security sector reform
11. There was no progress on the adoption by the Government of a national
security sector reform strategy. Only very limited progress was achieved on the
establishment of a rapid reaction force within FARDC. A dedicated FARDC reform
focal point was designated to act as the Mission’s army and defence reform
interlocutor. The need to establish a rapid reaction force by the end of March 2015
was also included in the national benchmarks for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, but priority actions for implementing this benchmark were
still under discussion. The use of the tactical training centre (Centre d ’entrainement
tactique des bataillons) for training the rapid reaction force in Kisangani was called
into question following the Government’s decision that the facility be used in the
short-to-medium term for the Forces démocratiques pour la libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) disarmament process.
12. Police reform continued to be hampered by a $173 million shortfall in the
2014 national budget. Advocacy efforts focused on ensuring that a sufficient
allocation be included in the 2015 budget. Budget constraints have had a negative
impact on plans to remove officers that are unfit for service from the Congolese
National Police ranks, conduct capacity-building activities and build a police
academy and police stations.
Consolidation of State authority
13. Through quick-impact projects, the road linking Walikale, Itebero and Otobora
is being rehabilitated. Under the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy, other road rehabilitation projects are ongoing, including on the following
axes: Sake-Walikale-Hombo, Bunyakiri-Hombo-Musenge, Baraka-Fizi-Minembwe
and Burhale-Shabunda. These projects enable the State to establish its presence in
remote rural areas through the redeployment of local administrative authorities and
increased mobility of national security forces and MONUSCO, for a quicker
response to community protection alerts.
14. Restoration of State authority was supported through islands of stability in the
territories of Masisi, Rutshuru and Walikale in North Kivu and Shabunda territory in
South Kivu. This encompassed capacity-building for over 700 local authorities and
civil society members. Activities focused on national guidelines for territorial
administration, conflict management and democratic governance, resulting in an
improved understanding of the decentralization process and the establishment of
local conciliation committees to increase dialogue among communities.

14-61405

3/19

S/2014/698

Decentralization
15. Only modest progress was achieved in implementing the reforms defined
under the Constitution, especially in respect of fiscal decentralization and the
adoption of legal frameworks to subdivide provinces and establish decentralized
governing structures. A number of important implementing laws and measures, such
as those regarding the definition of boundaries for future provinces, the
establishment of a mechanism to redistribute revenues among provinces and the
reorganization of public administration, remained pending.
Structural reforms of government institutions, including financial reforms
16. Progress in structural reforms was mixed. On 2 July, the International Board of
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative designated the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as “Board-compliant”. The country’s status had been
temporarily suspended in April 2013.
17. In July, the Central Bank of the Congo began a consultative process on the
possible creation of a stock exchange. The Bank also implemented reforms aimed at
ending the use of the United States dollar as legal tender in the Congolese economy.
In contrast, structural reforms to further the independence of the Central Bank of the
Congo, including through its recapitalization, and to improve the transparency and
governance of State-owned enterprises in the mining sector remained stalled.
Reconciliation, tolerance and democratization
18. On 7 July, the nine members of the new Constitutional Court were appointed
by presidential decree. The Court has, inter alia, jurisdiction over the interpretation
of the Constitution and replaces the Supreme Court as the fin al jurisdiction for
adjudicating electoral disputes in respect of legislative and presidential elections.
19. On 9 July, the Government announced an additional 246 beneficiaries of the
Amnesty Law of 11 February. While 153 were from the Mayi -Mayi Kata-Katanga,
no former M23 elements were listed. The six-month period to request amnesty
expired on 15 August. Nonetheless, the Government undertook to grant amnesty to
eligible applicants, including former M23 elements, regardless of the expiration of
the grace period. Thus, on 3 September, the Government announced an additional
272 beneficiaries of the Amnesty Law, including 191 former M23 combatants, 162
of whom are in Uganda awaiting repatriation.
Electoral developments
20. Preparations for local elections proceeded, albeit at a slow pace. Following a
pilot exercise in Bandundu, the process of updating the voters ’ register and mapping
polling stations was launched in the remaining 10 provinces and is expected to
conclude at the end of November.
21. At the 18 July and 27 August meetings of the Partnership Committee and the
Elections Technical Committee respectively, the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante, MONUSCO, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and donors continued to discuss the UNDP electoral support project. Partners clearly
linked their financial commitment to the publication of the 2014 -2016 global
electoral calendar. Delays in finalizing a multi-year electoral budget and the lack of
a clear disbursement plan for funds already allocated delayed the procurement

4/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

process, resulting in a projected two-month slippage in the partial operational
calendar, which currently envisages local elections taking place between June and
October 2015. The first set of local elections is now foreseen for mid-August 2015.
22. On 24 July, the Commission électorale nationale indépendante successfully
organized legislative by-elections in Befale, Equateur Province, a seat unoccupied
since the Supreme Court’s cancellation of by-elections in 2011. Provisional results
were published on 25 July, with definitive results expected in October.
23. On 21 August, the Commission fired 96 staff members who were reportedly
involved in acts of theft and illegal sale of Commission material, embezzlement of
funds, falsifying voter registration cards and abandoning their posts.
Situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
24. The security situation in North Kivu continued to be dominated by the FDLR
voluntary disarmament process and the pursuit of military operations against the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), Nduma Defence of Congo/Cheka (NDC/Cheka)
and other armed groups.
25. Although ongoing military operations significantly weakened ADF, the rebel
group retained the capacity to launch sporadic ambushes against FARDC. The main
thrust of the military operations against ADF in Beni territory, which resumed on
15 July, were aimed at disrupting the group’s supply routes. As a result of the
pressure from FARDC, ADF split into small groups, with some report edly moving
towards Virunga National Park, regarded as an ADF sanctuary. According to the
Administrator of Beni territory, by early August, approximately 280 out of the 600
hostages believed to be held by ADF had been released and returned to their
villages.
26. In Walikale territory, FARDC-led operations to neutralize NDC/Cheka —
launched on 2 July with the support of MONUSCO — resulted in the recapture of
the main Kashebere-Mpofi-Walikale Centre axis, including the group’s former
strongholds in Buniyampuli and on the Kibua-Pinga axis. The operations continued
on the northern side of the Osso River. As a result of the operations, 23 NDC/Cheka
elements surrendered to MONUSCO in August.
27. In southern Walikale territory, at least 13 schools were forced to close in July,
owing to clashes between rival factions of Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki. In
mid-August, FARDC launched operations against Mayi-Mayi Raia Mutomboki and
Mayi-Mayi Kifuafua elements on the Itibero-Hombo axis, regaining control of the
axis by 22 August. In late August, in Rutshuru territory, FARDC commenced joint
operations with rangers of the Institut congolais pour la conservation de la nature to
dislodge FDLR-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi, FDLR-Rally for Unity and
Democracy and Mayi-Mayi Shetani from the area west and north-west of Nyalima.
28. On 13 August, in Remeka, South Masisi, 17 alleged former M23 elements led
by former Rwanda Defence Force Captain Gapasi were arrested by a Mayi -Mayi
Raia Mutomboki faction led by “Colonel” Maachano and a Mayi-Mayi Kifuafua
splinter group. FARDC presented this arrest as a step towards dismantling M27, a
group that would have been reconstituted on the remnants of M23, with a similar
seditious agenda. Some elements belonging to this group seemingly came from
Ngoma camp in Rwanda. They were part of the M23 faction led by Bosco Ntaganda
and could have returned clandestinely to Masisi in order to secure economic
interests.

14-61405

5/19

S/2014/698

29. The security situation in the Ruzizi Plains of South Kivu remained volatile.
Following the killing on 6 June of at least 34 civilians in the village of Mutarule, a
significant rise in inter-ethnic incidents was reported, including cattle rustling,
abductions and killings. In addition to launching an internal investigation into the
6 June killings, MONUSCO increased patrols and supported the deployment of joint
investigation teams with Congolese military justice officials. Two persons were
arrested in relation to the killings, including the Commander of the FARDC 1052nd
battalion. Following the killing of another six civilians on 13 August in Mutarule,
MONUSCO launched internal investigations and supported the deployment of two
joint investigation teams with the FARDC Military Prosecutor. Another three
individuals were killed on 23 August in what appeared to be ethnically targeted
killings in Itombwe, Mwenga territory. In a bid to stem rising tensions, MONUSCO
identified the locality of Sange as a location for establishing an island of stability.
30. The security situation in southern Uvira and Fizi territories continued to be
marked by renewed military activities by Mayi-Mayi Yakutumba, with clashes with
FARDC reported in the Ubwari Peninsula, Baraka, Misisi, Mizimu, Yungu and
Talama villages and a significant increase in piracy on Lake Tanganyik a.
31. The security situation in Katanga province remained fragile. Attacks and
exactions by Mayi-Mayi Kata-Katanga in Mitwaba territory resulted in the
displacement of an estimated 50,978 persons. From 15 to 18 July, MONUSCO
fielded a mission to Mitwaba to ascertain the veracity of the reported intention of
the group’s leader, Gédéon Kyunguto, to surrender. MONUSCO started deploying a
temporary operating base in Mitwaba to facilitate his surrender as well as the
creation of an island of stability in the locality. Contrary to his intention to
surrender, Gédéon Kyunguto set up headquarters in the caves of Kibawa in western
Moba territory, from which he started recruiting and training local youth. On
17 August, the headquarters was overrun by FARDC.
32. In other developments in Katanga Province, intercommunity conflict between
the Balubakat and the Pygmies in Manono territory spilled over into Kalemie,
Kabalo and Nyunzu territories, resulting in the displacement of some 80,000 persons
fleeing atrocities reportedly committed by both sides. MONUSCO responded by
deploying a number of fact-finding missions in Kabalo territory, which gathered
information on allegations of gross human rights violations, mainly perpetrated by
the Balubakat militia against the Pygmy. M ONUSCO subsequently deployed a
special investigation team to ascertain these reports and launched an island of
stability project in Manono territory to deal with the situation.
33. In Orientale Province, in Mambasa territory, Mayi-Mayi Simba carried out
several attacks on gold mining sites and civilians, reportedly to avenge the death of
their leader, Morgan, who was killed during his surrender to FARDC on 14 April, as
well as for financial gain. These included an attack on 5 July in Bakaiko, during
which 17 women were raped and 16 civilians were killed. Similarly, in the night of
6 to 7 July, another faction of this group attacked Alota village, killing four civilians
and abducting an indeterminate number of people. Mambasa was identified as a
location for the establishment in September of an island of stability.
34. The security situation in Ituri district, especially in South Irumu, remained
volatile and unpredictable despite ongoing FARDC operations against the Forces de
résistance patriotiques en Ituri (FRPI). Between 20 and 26 July, FRPI perpetrated
attacks and exactions against Sorodo, Kagoro, Songozo, Kamatsi, Mukubwa and

6/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

Bunga villages. In Sorodo, FRPI militia allegedly assaulted and wounded eight
civilians, including a pregnant woman, and looted household items. Negotiations
between FARDC and the FRPI leader, Cobra Matata, for the group ’s surrender
continued but failed to produce the desired outcome.
35. The security situation in Bas- and Haut-Uélé remained relatively calm, with
reported breaches of public order and criminal activity by small groups of bandits or
suspected Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) elements. Most incidents were
concentrated in the Duru-Doruma-Dungu Triangle in Niangara territory and along
the borders with the Central African Republic and South Sudan. During the
reporting period, 81 LRA dependants were released in Bas- and Haut-Uélé between
26 August and 4 September. To counter the LRA and other activities carried out by
unidentified armed elements, MONUSCO established a mobile operational base in
Kiliwa from 8 to 10 September and conducted night and day patrols as well as aerial
reconnaissance.
Humanitarian situation
36. The estimated number of internally displaced persons remained at 2.6 million.
However, significant new displacements occurred in Southern Irumu owing to
attacks by FRPI and in Katanga’s Tanganyika District owing to fighting between
Pygmy and Balubakat groups.
37. On 19 August, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees restarted voluntary return operations for former Angolan refugees by train
from Kinshasa and Bas-Congo. Out of 47,851 refugees, 29,659 have expressed the
wish to return to Angola, with the other 18,192 opting for reintegration into the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
38. On 24 August, the Ministry of Health confirmed the outbreak of Ebola in
Boende District, Equateur Province. By 9 September, 64 cases had been reported,
including 35 deaths owing to a strain homologous to the Zaire Kikwit strain. This
outbreak is unrelated to the West African Ebola outbreak. A quarantine affecting
40,000 people has been established in the 100-km area surrounding Djera, the Ebola
epicentre. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations humanitarian country team are cooperating on an $8.6 million emergency
response.
39. Meanwhile, the humanitarian appeal for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, set at $832 million, remains only 36 per cent funded.
Economic developments
40. The International Monetary Fund projected a growth of 8.5 per cent in the
gross domestic product of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2015; this is
down slightly from 2014, mainly owing to fluctuations in the international prices of
the country’s main mineral exports. Notwithstanding recent strong economic
growth, poverty remained widespread and posed a risk to the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals. Reviewing economic and social indicators, the
UNDP Human Development Report 2014: Sustaining Human Progress: Reducing
Vulnerabilities and Building Resistance, published on 24 July, ranked the
Democratic Republic of the Congo 186th out of the 187 countries assessed.

14-61405

7/19

S/2014/698

Regional developments
41. On 2 July, in Luanda, at a joint ministerial meeting of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), participants agreed to extend the 22 -day FDLR disarmament
plan of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo by an ad ditional
six months, with a midterm review on 2 October. Under the leadership of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, on 16 July, the Government established a two -tiered
coordination mechanism with the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, SADC and MONUSCO to agree on political and strategic decisions for the
technical process. At the monthly ambassadorial plenary meetings on 2 August and
2 September and at ad hoc working-level meetings, the discussion focused on
developing criteria to evaluate progress and defining steps for moving the proce ss
forward.
42. On 6 August, a joint delegation of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, MONUSCO
and SADC travelled to Lusumambo to deliver a strong message to the FDLR
leadership, including that all FDLR elements should leave the Democratic Republic
of the Congo within the six-month time frame via voluntary repatriation to Rwanda
or relocation to third countries; that 70 per cent of the estimated 1,400 combatants
should disarm by 2 October; that units should disarm, with their leadership; and that
all human rights violations and illicit economic activities should cease immediately.
The delegation also asked the FDLR leadership to order the immediate transfer of
disarmed elements and dependants from temporary camps in the Kivus to
Kisangani, in Orientale Province. On 7 August, as part of his statement to the
Security Council, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond Tshibanda, warned
FDLR that it should surrender in greater numbers and either disarm voluntarily or
face FARDC and the Force Intervention Brigade. In open letters signed by the
armed group’s interim president, Victor Byiringiro, to the Security Council on
4 August, to the United States Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Regi on of Africa
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 8 August and to the incoming SADC
Chair, President Mugabe of Zimbabwe, on 27 August, FDLR made clear its position
that it would not, under any circumstances, move from the Kivus to a transit camp
in Kisangani or engage in a disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration process, unless as an outcome of dialogue with the Government of
Rwanda.
43. On 14 August, the President of Angola, José Eduardo Dos Santos, hosted a
mini-summit of regional Heads of State to discuss common security issues,
including the FDLR disarmament process and the repatriation of former M23
combatants. The Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Africa
and Uganda were present, with ministerial participation from the Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and the United Republic of Tanzania. The communiqué of the
mini-summit reinforced the ultimatum to disarm within six months of 2 July and
stated that military action would be planned if there was no progress on clear
benchmarks at the 2 October midterm evaluation.
44. An SADC summit held in Zimbabwe on 17 and 18 August endorsed the 2 July
decision of the Joint Ministerial Meeting of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and SADC, according to which voluntary disarmament by
FDLR should be completed within six months. The summit also called upon the

8/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

United Nations, in cooperation with the African Union, to play its role in
repatriating FDLR elements who have voluntarily surrendered and disarmed or
provide them with temporary resettlement in third countries outside the Great Lakes
Region.
45. At the 2 September plenary of the FDLR coordination mechanism, Minister
Tshibanda underlined his Government’s determination that all FDLR leave the
country within the six-month time frame. He noted an emerging consensus among
stakeholders that FDLR had not sincerely engaged in an unconditional disarmament
process and that that process had stalled.
46. Other initiatives to strengthen regional cooperation and build confidence were
also undertaken. For the first time in seven years, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo-Uganda Joint Cooperation Commission held bilateral exchanges, from 24 to
27 August in Kinshasa, aimed at reviewing progress on confidence-building
measures and cooperation in the areas of defence, security, the judiciary, education
and culture. A number of issues of common interest, including the repatriation of
former M23 combatants and the situation of refugees, were also discussed.
47. In line with the recommendation of the Expanded Joint Verification
Mechanism following its investigation into border skirmishes between security
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda near Kibumba, North
Kivu in June, the Democratic Republic of the Congo Joint Border Commission
reconvened in Goma from 4 to 7 August. Meeting after a long hiatus owing to the
M23 conflict, participants agreed to undertake a mission to clarify contentious land
border areas, which took place from 25 to 30 August and identified the location of
22 border markers.

III. Implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo
Good offices of my Special Representative
48. Following the objections voiced by President Kabila in May regarding third party-led round tables on electoral matters, my Special Representative and
MONUSCO consulted all stakeholders, including the Commission électorale
nationale indépendante and the main majority and opposition parties, to devise a
new formula to fulfil the Special Representative’s mandated role of good offices. All
parties expressed support for continuing a dialogue on electoral issues, with the
support of the good offices of MONUSCO.
49. The senior leadership of MONUSCO, including the two Deputy Special
Representatives, also met extensively with relevant Government Ministers and
senior officials and facilitated meetings with the international community on key
issues, including disarmament, demobilization and reintegration planning, security
sector reform, the repatriation of former M23 elements and the voluntary
disarmament of FDLR. My Deputy Special Representative for Rule of Law and
Operations East supported the Minister of Defence in finalizing th e third national
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan, which was launched on 11 July,
and worked closely with Government counterparts on advancing the repatriation
process for former M23 elements, namely preparing the joint technical mission of

14-61405

9/19

S/2014/698

the Government, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
MONUSCO and the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region to
Rwanda from 17 to 21 July. The mission identified 453 of the 767 former M23
elements cantoned at the Ngoma and Gisovu regrouping sites as potential
beneficiaries of the Amnesty Law of 11 February. The remaining 314 former M23
elements could not be accounted for since they were not present at the sites during
the mission.
Protection of civilians
50. In July, MONUSCO improved its early warning and response mechanisms at
all Mission levels. The effectiveness of these mechanisms was demonstrated on
9 July in Mambasa territory, Orientale Province. Alerts triggered an immediate
military response from the Mission, which deployed 70 troops to the area to protect
civilians against increasingly threatening activities by FRPI.
51. Within the framework of its strategy to fight insecurity and protect the civilian
population in Beni, the United Nations police opened two free hotlines through
which the population could contact the Congolese National Police. As at
2 September, 240 calls had been received, prompting 125 follow-up actions by the
Congolese National Police and leading to 93 arrests.
52. Over 90 community protection committees in five provinces continued to
manage local protection plans aimed at improving preventive responses by
MONUSCO and Congolese authorities. In July, the Mission initiated support to the
establishment of community protection plans in 36 exist ing company operating
bases/temporary operating bases.
53. Completed in July 2014, a best practices review of community alert networks
assessed that such networks were effective protection tools. The review
recommended their use in other peacekeeping operations.
54. As part of the implementation of local protection plans, over 469 early
warning alerts were transmitted between 1 July and 1 September. The MONUSCO
Force responded directly in 13 per cent of cases; 43 per cent of the alerts were
conveyed to Congolese security forces and 36 per cent to local civilian authorities.
In approximately 46 per cent of all alerts received, violations against civilians were
either halted or the perpetrators arrested, or the potential threats were deterred.
Mission deployment and neutralizing armed groups
55. The MONUSCO Force continued to support the FDLR voluntary disarmament
process by securing former combatants who had surrendered and their dependants.
Meanwhile, the monitoring of FDLR activities continues and join t plans with
FARDC for military action are being prepared, should the process fail.
56. MONUSCO supported FARDC operations against ADF, NDC/Cheka and the
Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS) in North Kivu,
through joint planning, situational awareness, logistics and fire support.
57. At the request of the Congolese authorities, MONUSCO facilitated the safe
evacuation from several locations within the area of operations, to Beni and then
Goma, of an estimated 50 ADF dependants. MONUSCO also provided logistical
support to encourage ADF and NDC/Cheka elements to surrender through leaflet
drops and radio broadcasts.

10/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

Support to defence sector reform and police reform
58. On 27 June, the plenary of the National Committee for Police Re form adopted
a policy document on human resources management and, on 15 August, a draft
decree regulating the conditions and modalities of engagement of the mobile
intervention units of the Congolese National Police. MONUSCO contributed to the
development of both documents.
59. MONUSCO and the European Union Mission of Assistance for Security Sector
Reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo also continued to chair regular
meetings of key FARDC reform partners, with a view to harmonizing the
contributions of international partners to army and defence reform and to help to
advance the rapid reaction force concept.
60. MONUSCO trained a total of 915 officers of the Congolese National Police,
including 64 women, on such topics as crowd control, traffic poli ce and coaching. A
total of 187 officers were trained in community policing in Bukavu, South Kivu,
with the support of the Department for International Development of the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, while
245 officers were trained on the same issue in Kisangani and Bunia, with support
from UNDP. A total of 302 officers completed their training in policing of mining
sites, community policing and addressing sexual and gender-based violence at a
facility in Mugunga built under the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy in support of the Government’s stabilization and reconstruction plan for
areas emerging from armed conflict.
Justice and corrections institutions
61. Through its prosecution support cells, MONUSCO continued to provide
technical and logistical support to military justice authorities to investigate and
prosecute war crimes, crimes against humanity and other serious crimes.
62. In July and August, MONUSCO supported the military court s of Katanga
Province and Orientale Province in conducting mobile court proceedings in Pweto,
Komanda and Dungu relating to the prosecution of members of FARDC and armed
groups charged with rape and other serious crimes. MONUSCO also supported the
organization of mobile court proceedings in South Kivu for the trial of Lieutenant
Colonel Engagela, alias “Colonel 106”, charged with crimes against humanity,
including rape and murder, allegedly committed between 2000 and 2006.
63. During the reporting period, within the framework of the joint justice support
programme, MONUSCO and UNDP finalized the programme component for
support to the Constitutional Court and other higher jurisdictions and began
developing a resource mobilization strategy. The Mission also s upported the
Ministry of Justice in assessing the 2007-2012 national justice reform strategy and
continued to engage with the Government on the preparation of a new strategy.
64. During the reporting period, two corrections staff members were seconded to
UNDP to support prison reform projects under the joint justice support programme.
In July, MONUSCO organized five workshops on security and prison management
in Bukavu, Butembo and Goma. In August, it started implementing a quick -impact
project to construct separate facilities for women prisoners in the prison in Uvira,
South Kivu. Four prison rehabilitation programmes were also handed over to local
authorities in Goma. In the absence of major stakeholders that provide corrections -

14-61405

11/19

S/2014/698

related support in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO continued to
provide critical advisory and technical support, including capacity-building through
co-location with the Government, on prison management, health care and security.
However, there continued to be a lack of national ownership and accountability on
prison matters, leading to deplorable prison conditions and insecurity.
Stabilization and peace consolidation
65. From 15 to 17 July, in cooperation with the stabilization and reconstruction
plan for areas emerging from armed conflict, MONUSCO organized a workshop to
identify priority zones for programming within the framework of the International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy. Work under the plan is carried out, in
collaboration with partners, to conduct assessments that inform the development of
provincial stabilization plans and provincial action plans.
66. On 1 September, two initial pilot projects for stabilization in Kalehe, South
Kivu, and in Mambasa, Orientale Province, were submitted for approval to the
Peacebuilding Fund. These projects are aligned with the islands of stability and
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy priority zones.
Extraction and trade of natural resources
67. By 1 July 2014, all MONUSCO activities related to the implementation of the
project on mineral trading centres were transferred to the International Organization
for Migration (IOM). However, MONUSCO continued to monitor the security
situation in the mining sites and to share expertise with IOM for the establishment
of a conflict-free minerals supply chain.
Support to disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and to disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
68. During the reporting period, 121 Congolese armed group members
(48 combatants and 73 children associated with armed groups) and 61 foreign armed
group elements participated in the MONUSCO disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. Thirty-six of those 61 were combatants, including 35 from
FDLR, while 7 were children associated with armed groups and 18 were
dependants. Furthermore, 65 FDLR elements, including 4 children associated with
armed groups and 24 dependants, were repatriated.
69. On 11 July, the Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Defence officially shared
the finalized National Programme for Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration III document, including an operational plan, with donors for resource
mobilization and announced the Government’s contribution of $10 million to the
$85 million four-year plan. MONUSCO will contribute $8 million.
70. Providing logistical and political support to the FDLR disarmament process
continued to be the Mission’s top priority. As at 25 August, MONUSCO had
provided 53 special flights for regional and international partners, including the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, SADC and States Members of
the United Nations, 16.2 tons of food, 213,000 litres of water, 130 tents and
1,300 mattresses, as well as additional goods and services to 621 persons
(186 combatants and 435 dependants) housed in Kanyabayonga and Walungu
regrouping sites in North and South Kivu, respectively. The refusal by the FDLR

12/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

leadership to order the move from these temporary regrouping sites, which have
reached their full capacity, to Kisangani contributed to, among other things,
preventing further surrenders.
Electoral support
71. At the request of the Commission électorale nationale indépendante,
MONUSCO provided logistical support to transport personnel and over 70 tons of
electoral equipment during the ongoing update of the voters ’ register and the
mapping of polling stations. This effort was extended to assist with the organization
of the legislative by-elections in Befale territory, in Equateur Province.
Human rights
72. Serious human rights violations continued to be committed by armed groups
and State agents. Investigations carried out by the United Nations Joint Human
Rights Office in June and July indicated that at least 34 Bafuliiru had been killed,
including 16 women and 8 children, and at least 24 people had been wounded. In
addition, 10 houses and 1 church were burned down in an attack on 6 June by
Banyamulenge and Barundi militias on Mutarule village, Uvira territory, in South
Kivu. Some of the victims were allegedly burned alive and others were shot or
hacked with machetes.
73. In the pre-electoral context, MONUSCO continued to document human rights
violations against members of the political opposition or others critical of the
policies and actions of the Congolese authorities, journalists, human rights
defenders and, in some cases, their family members.
74. In Kasai Orientale, the conviction of a member of the opposition party Union
pour la démocratie et le progrès social for libel was upheld on appeal on 21 July
during a mobile court hearing of the Tribunal de Grande Instance of Mbuji -Mayi. He
was sentenced to 12 months in prison and fined 5 million Congolese francs. On the
night of 2 to 3 August, 11 civilians, including 1 activist from the human rights
non-governmental organization La Voix des Sans Voix pour les droits de l ’homme,
were reportedly detained in Kinshasa by a group of FARDC and Congolese National
Police elements during search operations for an alleged suspect in the 22 July
shootings at the Tshatshi military camp. The activist was reportedly released on
12 August. On 15 August, the General Secretary of the Parti de la révolution du
peuple was reported to have been beaten up and abducted by a group of unidentified
armed men presumed to be agents of the Agence nationale de renseignements.
MONUSCO confirmed that she received medical treatment at the hospital operated
by the intelligence services. Mike Mukebayi, the editor of the paper CongoNews,
has been detained since 21 August, reportedly for libelling Cardinal Monsengwo,
the Archbishop of Kinshasa, in an article published in the paper.
Sexual violence
75. Armed groups and national security forces continued to commit crimes of
sexual violence. Of the 37 cases recorded throughout the country, 15 were
committed by FARDC and 10 by Mayi-Mayi combatants from different groups,
18 of which occurred in North Kivu, South Kivu and Orientale Provinces.
76. On 9 July, in line with his commitments following the national consultatio ns in
October 2013 and the April 2014 Parliamentary Forum of the International

14-61405

13/19

S/2014/698

Conference on the Great Lakes Region, President Kabila appointed Jeannine
Mabunda Lioko Mudiayi as his Special Adviser on Sexual Violence and Child
Recruitment.
77. MONUSCO, with United Nations and other development partners, continued
to support national stakeholders, including the Ministry of Gender and civil society,
on issues relating to sexual violence. This included a review of the national
Comprehensive Strategy for Combating Gender Violence adopted by the
Government in 2009.
78. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Hawa
Bangura, completed a five-day visit to Kinshasa on 1 September. With the support
of her office and the United Nations, a draft FARDC action plan on sexual violence
was presented to the press by the Minister of Defence on 30 August after a two -day
workshop organized by the Government.
Child protection and armed conflict
79. As at 12 September, MONUSCO had documented 128 cases of children
(4 girls and 124 boys) who had escaped or were separated from armed groups. Of
these, five were Ugandan and one was Rwandan. MONUSCO is in the process of
documenting the cases of 25 Congolese girls who were reported to have escaped
from LRA. In addition, the Mission continues to receive information from reliable
sources indicating the recruitment and use of children by armed groups, including
Mayi-Mayi Nyatura and FDLR-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi in Rutshuru
territory, ADF in Beni territory, NDC/Cheka in Walikale territory, Mayi-Mayi
Mulumba in Fizi territory, Mayi-Mayi Nakishale in Uvira territory and Raia
Mutomboki in Masisi territory.
80. Furthermore, 30 children formerly associated with armed groups, who had
been detained by FARDC and the Agence nationale de renseignements, were
released. On 15 August, FARDC and MONUSCO jointly launched Opération
Sauvetage in Beni territory to rescue children formerly associated with ADF as
dependants, hostages or combatants hiding in Virunga National Park. As at
12 September, 41 children had been rescued and are receiving appropriate care and
assistance.
81. Pursuant to the action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children and sexual violence by Government armed forces signed in October 201 2, a
United Nations-Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo provincial
joint technical working group was established in Goma on 29 August. The working
group will facilitate the implementation of the action plan in North Kivu.
Monitoring the implementation of the arms embargo
82. There were no major events related to the arms embargo during the reporting
period. However, relevant information continued to be systematically shared with
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and exploited
internally by MONUSCO.
Support for the disposal of explosive ordnance
83. During the reporting period, the United Nations Mine Action Service trained
90 personnel from MONUSCO, United Nations agencies and national security

14/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

forces on awareness on improvised explosive devices. Despite a significant
reduction in resources, the Service destroyed 24 tons of expired ordnance stocks and
6,948 items of unexploded ordnance. This work significantly improved the safety of
military contingents and increased the freedom of movement of the local population
and humanitarian agencies in the Kivus and Katanga. The Service continued to carry
out humanitarian clearance and advocacy activities to support national mine action
authorities.

IV. Safety and security of United Nations personnel within the
context of the operations of the Force Intervention Brigade
84. To date, the support by MONUSCO to FARDC-led operations against armed
groups has not resulted in any discernible increase in threats to the Unite d Nations
personnel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless, security risk
management measures remain in place.

V. Road map for the transfer of tasks and
mission reconfiguration
85. The handover of substantive responsibilities to the United Nations country
team was completed on 1 July. Consequently, MONUSCO no longer performs the
following responsibilities in the non-conflict-affected areas, as described in my
report of December 2013 (S/2013/757): human rights training, children affected by
armed conflict, sexual violence, mine action, justice and corrections, extraction and
trade of natural resources (including in conflict-affected areas) and consolidation of
peace and democracy. For the majority of these responsibilities, the full continuation
of activities depends on generating additional resources and on the reversal of the
declining field presence of the United Nations country team. Electoral assistance,
however, continued to pose a significant challenge, since donors put the funding of
the proposed UNDP electoral assistance project on hold.
86. In August, MONUSCO finalized the implementation of its reconfiguration
with the redeployment from the west to the east of civilian, police and mi litary
personnel in support of more robust and effective operations in areas affected by
armed conflict. Existing field offices in North and South Kivu, Katanga and
Orientale Provinces were reinforced through the redeployment of 71 staff members
and were empowered to assume new responsibilities through the pursuit of an
area-based approach to the Mission’s operations. Heads of office now have greater
autonomy to advocate for early stabilization activities specific to their area of
operations, coordinate, and realign resources, including increased funding for quick impact projects within the Mission, which enables them to better resource such
activities, focused mainly on island of stability locations.
87. The streamlined Mission headquarters in Kinshasa continued to support
progress against national commitments outlined in the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and mandated tasks, including the good offices role of my
Special Representative and the wide-ranging partnership mobilized around his
coordination initiative in respect of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
elections, security sector reform and stabilization. Antenna offices were fully

14-61405

15/19

S/2014/698

operational in the western locations of Bandundu, Kananga, Kindu, Matadi,
Mbandaka and Mbuji-Mayi and carried out monitoring and reporting functions
jointly with the United Nations country team. MONUSCO co -located with the
country team in two locations, notably with the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) in Mbandaka, Equateur Province, and in Kananga, Kasai Occidental.
88. From 21 to 28 July, a joint MONUSCO-United Nations Headquarters civilian
staffing review was undertaken to assess the existing civilian staffing structure and
put forward recommendations on how to rationalize and right -size it for effective
mandate implementation. Its main findings will inform the preparation of the
2015/16 budget for MONUSCO.

VI. Observations
89. I have been encouraged by the successful military operations conducted by
FARDC with the support of MONUSCO. These have resulted in a considerable
weakening of ADF and, to a lesser extent, some other armed groups. However, I
remain concerned that, on the whole, the situation in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo since the defeat of M23 has evolved more slowly than expected. The
neutralization and disarmament of FDLR is stalled. The repatriation of former M23
combatants has seen too little progress and the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan has not yet been fully funded or implemented.
Political uncertainty surrounding elections has continued to fuel a number of local
conflicts.
90. Despite improvements in security in some areas, some returns of displaced
persons and the redeployment of the police, gains remain tenuous and progress in
preparing and mobilizing support for the safe and voluntary return of refugees has
been slow. Some disarmed combatants have returned to the bush. While previous
threats to the authority of the State in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
have been mitigated, residual armed groups continue to fight over territory and
mining sites and to attack and harass civilians. As a new and complex initiative
requiring mobilization of and coordination with the Government and the
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy, islands of stability have
been slow to emerge, but are gradually gaining traction.
91. If successfully completed, the voluntary disarmament of FDLR would be a
breakthrough in ending the cycle of violence that has characterized eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region for decades.
However, since the inception on 30 May of the current disarmament plan, the
process has dashed many hopes. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, echoed by regional Heads of State at the mini-summit of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region held in Luanda on 14 August, has made clear
that FDLR should either disarm peacefully before the end of 2014 or f ace military
action. At the midterm review of the FDLR disarmament process in early October,
States members of the International Conference and SADC, with United Nations
support, are expected to evaluate the process based on clear benchmarks and take
important decisions on how to move it forward. I call upo n FDLR to disarm
unconditionally and, for most of them, begin repatriation to Rwanda, which has
already seen some 11,000 former FDLR elements return home safely over the past
decade. A small number of FDLR elements may be temporarily relocated to third

16/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

countries. However, those suspected of grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law will have to be tried.
92. I also encourage the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda, in line with the communiqué of the mini-summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region of 14 August, to act swiftly to
implement the Nairobi Declarations of 12 December 2013 and set out a time -bound
road map for the repatriation of former M23 combatants from Rwanda and Uganda.
In particular, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to
accelerate the processing of amnesty requests signed by former M23 combatants,
whose individual repatriation depends on the completion of this process. I commend
the Congolese authorities for having ensured that all those who presented
themselves had the opportunity to sign commitment acts to receive amnesty. I also
commend the good cooperation of the Governments of Rwanda and Uganda in
facilitating the respective technical missions led by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to prepare for the repatriation of former M23
combatants. All such combatants should be demobilized and the members of the
group who are accused of serious crimes should face justic e.
93. The advancement of this repatriation process only adds to the urgency of
putting into effect the national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan.
The repatriation of former M23 elements could add over 2,000 former combatants to
the existing caseload of 4,000 from other armed groups. I urge partners to commit
the necessary additional funds for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
Continued delays will only increase the risks of failure, which could engender the
emergence of new armed groups.
94. The establishment of the Constitutional Court and the transmission to the
National Assembly by the Government of the three draft laws on the organization of
local, provincial and general elections represent positive steps towards the goal of
organizing the complete 2014-2016 electoral cycle. However, these are only partial
and belated steps, which have not yet succeeded in inspiring the full confidence of
all stakeholders in the electoral process. I remain concerned about the slow progress
in determining the full legal framework, timeline and budgetary allocations, which
are essential for completing the electoral cycle. I therefore encourage the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to act swiftly to put in place these building
blocks to ensure timely, peaceful and transparent elections, in accordance with the
Constitution.
95. Dialogue is key to guaranteeing inclusivity, participation and wide acceptance
of future results in the electoral process. For now, dialogue, especially among the
main protagonists, namely, the Commission électorale nationale indépendante, the
Government, political parties and civil society, remains limited, and deepening
divergences around the electoral process continue. I reiterate my full support for my
Special Representative in carrying out his critical, mandated good offices role to
help to forge a basic consensus around the modalities for organizing the elections.
96. MONUSCO will continue to support the judiciary in fighting impunity for
human rights violations, including by providing support for trials. I also urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure the timely adoption
of the draft laws on the implementation of its obligations as a State party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the creation of a specialized,
mixed chamber, both of which are important tools in the fight against impunity.

14-61405

17/19

S/2014/698

97. The improvement in the security situation is not yet irreversible. The Mission
and the Congolese authorities should remain vigilant so that they are able to deter
violence against civilians and intervene effectively when attacks are launched. There
is a need to ensure the protection of civilians through prevention, mobility and
active intervention rather than mere presence. In that connection, early warning
mechanisms have been reinforced and joint preventive actions have increased.
However, the Congolese authorities also need to do more to identify and prosecute
perpetrators in such complex conflicts, where cycles of reprisals can be perpetuated.
I call upon the Congolese authorities at the highest levels to denounce ethnically
targeted attacks and to work more effectively with civil society groups and local
community leaders to foster reconciliation and prevent conflict among communities.
The United Nations will fully support those efforts.
98. It is crucial that the root causes of instability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo be addressed in a determined manner and without delay. I urge the
Government to work with MONUSCO and the international community to
implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, advance security sector
reform, in particular defence sector reform, strengthen guarantees for the
independence of the judiciary and accelerate the installation o f the Constitutional
Court and the other superior jurisdictions foreseen by the Constitution. I also call
upon the Government to take action to ensure that the National Human Rights
Commission becomes fully operational. In addition to protection and early warning
mechanisms being established at the local level, much more needs to be done to
ensure that credible and functional structures are put in place at the local level to
support conflict prevention and reconciliation and facilitate the return and
reintegration of refugees and displaced persons.
99. I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative, Martin
Kobler, and my former Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region, Mary Robinson,
for their tireless efforts in mobilizing the necessary national, regional and
international attention to find lasting solutions to the situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I welcome my new Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Said Djinnit, who assumed his functions on 1 September, and call upon all
partners to lend him their unwavering support in carrying out his mandate. I also
pay tribute to the commendable contribution of the envoys of the African Union, the
European Union and the United States, as well as the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and SADC, in the pursuit of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I would like to express my
gratitude to all the personnel of MONUSCO and the United Nations country team
for their courage and determination in undertaking their duties in a challenging and
unpredictable environment. I also thank the countries contributing troops and police
to MONUSCO, donor countries, international and regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations for their invaluable support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

18/19

14-61405

S/2014/698

Map

14-61405

19/19
