A/63/PV.43

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

43

rd plenary meeting
Monday, 10 November 2008, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kpotsra
(Togo), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 4.50 p.m.
Agenda item 20
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
Letter dated 27 October 2008 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly (A/63/511)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.18)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to the representative of Guatemala to
introduce draft resolution A/63/L.18.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
It has been several years since the General Assembly
last addressed this agenda item, on the situation in
Central America. That is, in fact, a source of
satisfaction for us, since, in contrast to the situation of
15 or even 10 years ago, Central America is now a
region at peace where democratic institutions and
respect for basic human rights have been strengthened
and where progress has been achieved in the economic
and social spheres. Some of those advances may be
fragile or insufficient, but there is no doubt that the
current situation is incomparably better than the one
which prevailed during the mid-1990s. For that reason,
the most recent United Nations Human Rights
Verification Mission in the region — the mission to

Guatemala — left the country in 2002, after ten years
of fruitful work.
Having said this, some of the repercussions of
prolonged conflicts — the one in Guatemala's lasted
nearly 40 years — take a long time to resolve. In the
case of my own country, we inherited a culture of
impunity as a consequence of that conflict, which led
to a continuation over time of human rights violations
illustrated by threats, extortions, intimidations and
even the use of violence against judges, prosecutors,
teachers, journalists, human rights activists and other
innocent civilians.
Protected by the environment of impunity I just
described, some delinquent groups also emerged, at
times with high degrees of organization and with
transnational connections. Succeeding Governments
made important efforts to combat impunity through
specific projects and programmes aimed at
strengthening the civil police, the judicial system, the
system of penitentiaries, the Public Prosecutor's Office
and other entities of the State, including the legislative
branch.
It was in the context of those efforts that the idea
was developed to create a more robust criminal
prosecution mechanism with the assistance of the
United Nations. During the conceptual stage of the
initiative, various alternatives were explored, the most
ambitious of which being the creation of a new United
Nations mission that would undertake some of the
tasks of a public prosecutor, and the most modest
expression of which being a technical cooperation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-59523 (E)

*0859523*

A/63/PV.43

project to strengthen the Office of the Public
Prosecutor. Consultations and negotiations between the
Government and the United Nations were extended for
some time in order to search for a more appropriate
model that would be consistent with Guatemala's legal
and constitutional framework as well as with the norms
of the Organization.
A relatively ambitious first attempt was tried
during the last year of the administration that
relinquished power in January of 2004, but it did not
meet with the approval of the Guatemalan Congress
and was even challenged by the Constitutional Court,
the latter of which found that the Commission usurped
some functions that were the exclusive jurisdiction of
the Guatemalan State. A second attempt promoted by
the previous administration moved in the direction of
working through national institutions by strengthening
them, with the creation of an ad hoc commission
governed by national legislation. Such a commission
would be composed of personnel appointed by the
United Nations with a mandate that would not interfere
with the Office of the Public Prosecutor and would
work hand-in-hand with that body.
That revised version of the commission, adapted
to the norms of the United Nations, was also judged
compatible with the constitutional and juridical norms
of Guatemala by the Constitutional Court, and as a
result was approved by the Congress in August of
2007. The letter of 27 October sent by the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly, and
which has circulated under the symbol A/63/511, offers
more detailed information on the matter.
There are two specific observations to be made.
The first is that the Commission responds to an
initiative originating in Guatemala, rather than an
initiative of the United Nations. It reflects our
profound conviction that international cooperation is
needed in order to confront organized groups that
operate with impunity — not to replace national
authorities, but to support them and thus strengthen
them in the future.
We approached the United Nations because we
perceived an objective and independent Organization
without its own agenda. We sought creative means of
partnering with the Organization without renouncing
our obligations as a sovereign State under our own
Constitution. We persevered in that effort and, as
already stated, this is the third consecutive

2

administration to tackle that initiative and it has finally
managed to implement it.
The second observation is that in our view, the
lessons learned in Guatemala will also be beneficial to
the United Nations.
We are now entering relatively new and unknown
territory for multilateral cooperation, but we must
recall that the United Nations has accumulated
extremely valuable experience in defending and
protecting the rule of law and human rights throughout
its institutional life. More recently, it has accumulated
a wealth of experience thanks to the activities being
carried out by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime. We believe that the work of the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala will open
new areas of work for our Organization and provide
lessons that may in due time be useful to other Member
States.
The purpose of the draft resolution that we now
present to the plenary is two-fold. It is, first of all, to
ensure that the main intergovernmental body of the
United Nations will be involved and informed about
the steps taken by the Government of Guatemala and
the Secretary-General from the moment the General
Assembly urged the latter, in 2003, to support the
initiative of creating the Commission discussed in the
draft resolution. Secondly, its aim is to continue the
support of the General Assembly for our initiative,
without any additional financial or budgetary
implications.
Let me conclude by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for the welcome that has been extended to our
initiative. I would also like to pay tribute in public to
the many States that have supported the Commission
by means of voluntary financial contributions or
cooperation in the form of providing national experts,
as well as to the staff of the Commission, and most
particularly the Commissioner, Carlos Castresana, for
their dedicated work. Finally, I would like to thank the
countries that have supported us by sponsoring the
draft resolution that we are about to consider. I would
also like to thank those who, I hope, will support us in
adopting it by consensus.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
As we commence this debate, I think we should not
lose track of the historical background, as outlined by
the preceding speaker, the representative of Guatemala.
We should recall that this is an item that has been on

08-59523

A/63/PV.43

the agenda of the General Assembly since 1983 and its
earlier title showed that it dealt with procedures to
establish a sound and lasting peace. The title of the
item has changed, which is, I think, clear testimony to
the progress reached in Central America in the past
decade and the positive role that the United Nations
has played, and continues to play, in supporting the
dynamic of peace, democracy and development that the
subregion has experienced.
However, the strengthening of the peace process,
which the General Assembly and the Security Council
were examining in the 1980s and, even more, in the
1990s should not lead us to forget the needs of the
subregion. Overcoming post-conflict situations is an
arduous, long-term process, and in Central America
there are still considerable challenges, such as
combating impunity and transnational organized crime,
but also eradicating poverty, especially in rural areas
and among the indigenous population. Often, this is a
challenge that remains in spite of very promising and
positive macroeconomic indicators.
Spain supports the regional perspective in
looking at these challenges. Regional mechanisms of
dispute settlement, along with United Nations support,
have demonstrated their strong effectiveness in Central
America. We are convinced that further deepening of
Central American integration is essential to achieving
economic and social development, as well as
strengthening democratic institutions and the rule of
law in the countries that make up the subregion.
Spanish assistance efforts in Central America
have worked, and will continue to work, with this in
mind. We will continue giving priority to assistance to
democratic governance, citizen participation and
strengthening civil institutions. Examples of this policy
are the Cooperation Programme with Central America,
put into place in 2003 and strengthened in 2006 with
the Fund established by Spain and the Central
American Integration System (SICA), and cooperation
programmes based on commitments adopted at various
Ibero-America summits, such as the one that recently
took place in San Salvador. These were commitments
that have led us to work more in such areas as
combating gender violence, juvenile crime or impunity
for violent crimes.
For all these reasons, we welcome the efforts of
the Government of Guatemala in the past few years,
particularly in the areas of institutional development

08-59523

reform of the security forces, as has been emphasized
in the recent letter by the Secretary-General to the
President of the General Assembly (A/63/511).
Initiatives such as the establishment of the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG) and measures adopted in the area
of human rights have shown that the Government of
Guatemala has the determination and the necessary
vision to take its country down a path of lasting peace
and democratic consolidation.
As is reflected in the Secretary-General’s letter
that I just mentioned, the Commission, following the
first year of its mandate, is at a crucial juncture. Its
innovative character made it difficult to start work;
however, after the initial months of getting up to speed,
under the skilful, expert steering of its Commissioner,
Mr. Carlos Castresana, it has already taken on
significant cases. The support and commitment, both
on the part of the Government of Guatemala and the
United Nations Secretary-General, as well as of all the
friends of Latin America, has become more necessary
than ever for it to succeed.
Spain has supported the establishment and
operation of this Commission from its very beginning
through agreements with Guatemala and the United
Nations and is the main contributor to its funding. In
fact, we have already provided three million euros for
the period covering 2008 and 2009. We will continue to
support the work of the Commission, so that the
Commission can continue to carry out the
strengthening of rule of law in Guatemala.
In his letter to the President of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General identified some of the
challenges that the Commission will have to take up as
it advances with its work.
It is important for the United Nations system as a
whole to respond to the Secretary-General’s appeal for
full cooperation to ensure the success of the
International Commission and for it to fulfil its
mandate as an addition to the measures adopted by the
Government of Guatemala in order to meet the
concerns expressed by the citizens of Guatemala.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the information he has provided on this innovative
initiative and we emphasize our support for the
commitment and efforts made by the Government of
Guatemala. It is essential to keep working to ensure
that Central America remains on the agenda of the

3

A/63/PV.43

General Assembly as a key to progress and
development and as an example of democratic
consolidation.
Spain, which is part of the Group of Friends that
has supported the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala ever since it was initiated, is
one of the sponsors of the draft resolution that has been
submitted to the General Assembly for consideration.
We hope that this draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus and that it serves as support and
encouragement in the difficult and important task that
the International Commission and the Government of
Guatemala have before them.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/63/L.18. Before giving the floor to delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolution, may I remind
members that explanations of vote or position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Ms. House (United States of America): The
United States wishes to make a very brief statement
expressing its support for the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala, as that
Commission continues to implement its mandate to
assist the Government of Guatemala in promoting the
rule of law and ensuring justice and security for the
Guatemalan people.
Over the past year, the Commission and the
Government of Guatemala have directly confronted the
challenge of strengthening Guatemalan institutions
responsible for investigating and prosecuting crime,
and for ensuring transparent and impartial legal
processes. The strengthening of these institutions will
enable Guatemala to protect the fundamental human
rights of its citizens. Much work remains to be done
but notable progress has been made, and we hope that
it will continue.
The United States commends this effort and will
continue to offer its strongest support for all actors
committed to promoting peace and upholding the rule
of law in Guatemala.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/63/L.18. Before we do so, I should like to announce

4

that the following additional countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Antigua and Barbuda,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bolivia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland,
Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Iraq, Japan, Lithuania,
Madagascar, Mexico, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Sierra Leone, Slovakia, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia and the United States of America.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.18?
Draft resolution
(resolution 63/19).

A/63/L.18

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before calling on the
representative of the Russian Federation, who wishes
to explain his delegation’s position on the resolution
just adopted, I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have just adopted a very important
resolution on the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala. We would like to welcome
efforts by that country both to combat lawlessness and
to strengthen the rule of law. We hope that the
International Commission will fulfil the tasks set
before it and will assist the Government of Guatemala
to put an end to organized criminal groups that this
country has inherited as the legacy of a lengthy internal
conflict.
That being said, we would like to highlight the
unique legal nature of this Commission, which was
established as the result of an agreement between
Guatemala and the United Nations. In that agreement,
the Commission was described as a non-United
Nations body.
We understand that the modalities of cooperation
by the United Nations in the area of strengthening
national legal systems should be part and parcel of the
unique political and legal context of each specific
State. Sometimes non-traditional solutions are required
to achieve that. Nevertheless, the Russian Federation is
convinced that the establishment of such nontraditional arrangements should be undertaken in a
transparent manner, with the full involvement of bodies
representing the United Nations that are fully
authorized to make such important political decisions
on behalf of the Organization.

08-59523

A/63/PV.43

In the present case, we note that we have strayed
from that rule. The Russian Federation considers that
bringing the issue of the establishment of this
Commission up for consideration by the General
Assembly post factum, that is, after the fact, should not
become the rule in the work of the Secretariat. Of
course, we reserve the right to return to this issue, and
to any other issue, in the future, and we would like this
statement to be included in the official record of this
meeting.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We
have heard the only statement in explanation of
position.
May I thus take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
(A/63/81, A/63/277 and A/63/348)
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/295)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.21)
(c) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/75)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I give
the floor to the representative of Yemen to introduce
draft resolution A/63/L.21.
Mr. Mohamed (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): As
members know, certain provinces of the Republic of
Yemen were recently affected by unprecedented
torrential rains and floods. That led to a natural disaster
that caused considerable damage to property and loss
of life, as well as damage to infrastructure. This has
undermined the Government’s efforts to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015.
The scale of the damage caused by the disaster is
estimated to be about $1 billion, according to a

08-59523

preliminary international assessment by the World
Bank, as requested by Yemen’s Ministry of Planning
and International Assistance. Some 3,275 houses were
destroyed, over 10,000 people were left homeless and
about 4,000 hectares of land were swept away due to
the flooding and the torrential rains.
While we welcome the efforts, support and
assistance provided to Yemen by neighbouring
countries, other friendly countries and the donor
community, we urge the international community,
United Nations agencies and other international
financial institutions and development agencies, to
provide additional technical and material assistance to
enable the Government of Yemen to cope with the
consequences of the disaster and continue with its
tireless efforts to achieve the MDGs.
We wish to express our deep gratitude and
appreciation to all of those who have supported us and
have sponsored the draft resolution we have submitted
on special economic assistance for Yemen (A/63/L.21),
and hope it will be adopted by consensus.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
report entitled, “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations” (A/63/81), which we are examining today.
Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union:
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Albania and Montenegro, as well as
Ukraine and Armenia, align themselves with this
statement, which has been distributed in its complete
written form. I wish here only to highlight some of its
key points.
First of all I wish to communicate to the
representative of Yemen Europe’s expressions of
solidarity with regard to the disaster that his country is
facing at this time. I also wish to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs for the
reports submitted to this session and to reiterate the full
support of the European Union (EU) as well as for all
of the teams of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
Conflicts, natural disasters, climate change,
increasing shortages of scarce resources and increased
competition to obtain them, as well as humanitarian

5

A/63/PV.43

crises continue to affect civilian populations around the
globe.
In December 2007, the European Union agreed
on a framework, the European Consensus on
Humanitarian Aid. It is based on respect for and
compliance with the principles of international
humanitarian law and based upon a partnership
approach between different stakeholders at various
stages of assistance. The European Union recognizes
the coordinating role of the United Nations while
emphasizing the primary responsibility of States
themselves.
The European Union would like to express its
gratitude and solidarity towards humanitarian
personnel who often risk their lives in increasingly
difficult situations. The EU reiterates its commitment
to respect the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality, and independence. Compliance with those
principles is essential so that the efforts of
humanitarian actors are accepted.
The European Union condemns the attacks
committed against humanitarian personnel which
continue to occur in a number of crises, notably in
Darfur, Iraq, Somalia and Afghanistan. It is even more
worrying and unacceptable to find that humanitarian
workers — both those from the United Nations and
those from non-governmental organizations (NGOs) —
are being specifically targeted in greater numbers each
day.
The European Union underlines that the primary
responsibility for ensuring their safety falls on the
States hosting United Nations operations or
installations. The European Union further recalls its
firm condemnation of all acts of terrorism, in any form,
anywhere and whatever the excuse.
The European Union attaches great importance to
respect for the areas where humanitarian efforts are
being carried out. That is essential for ensuring access
to the populations in distress. Humanitarian action has
its own logic. However, in some circumstances, as a
last resort and in conformity with certain conditions,
security must be provided that conforms to the Oslo
Guidelines and the Guidelines on the Use of Military
and Civil Defence Assets to Support United Nations
Humanitarian Activities in Complex Emergencies —
the MCDA Guidelines. Such security that will ensure
that aid reaches populations in need, while at the same
time protecting humanitarian personnel. Furthermore,

6

the independence of humanitarian actors as regards
needs assessments of populations affected by crises
must be maintained.
Finally, as several recent crises linked to natural
disasters or conflicts have illustrated, there are
unfortunately still some States’ that, in an unacceptable
manner, deliberately restrict humanitarian access to
disaster-stricken populations. The European Union
calls for humanitarian assistance to be delivered
without any restrictions and for humanitarian personnel
to be guaranteed freedom of movement.
As agreed by the heads of State or Government at
the 2005 World Summit, the European Union is
convinced that each individual State has the
responsibility to protect its population from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. The international community, through the
United Nations, also has the responsibility to assist
with the protection of populations from those crimes.
But where national authorities are manifestly failing to
meet the responsibility to protect their population, the
international community has confirmed that it is
prepared to take collective action through the United
Nations
Security
Council.
The
effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect is of
utmost importance to the European Union.
Among the millions of civilians who are victims
of conflict, women and children are particularly
vulnerable and unfortunately often become the main
targets. The European Union underlines in that regard
the importance of fully and effectively implementing
Security Council resolutions 1674 (2006), 1325 (2000),
1820 (2008) and 1612 (2005). In the case of increasing
gender-based violence and sexual violence that has
nearly become an actual war tactic, the European
Union intends to soon adopt the Guidelines to Combat
Violence against Women, to show that action in this
domain is a priority and to make that action sustainable
over the long term.
Furthermore, the European Union welcomes the
action of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and reaffirms actions
made to reintegrate children who are victims of war, in
particular by UNICEF.
Now, I would also like to mention the three major
crises facing the international community: first, climate
change and natural disasters; secondly, spiralling food
prices and thirdly, the consequences of the financial

08-59523

A/63/PV.43

crisis. Cyclone Nargis in Burma and recent hurricanes
in the Caribbean battered already vulnerable
populations. The European Union reaffirms the need to
help OCHA, in liaison with relevant national
authorities, to play its role in coordinating responses to
international disasters and underscores the crucial role
that NGOs play in disaster response.

humanitarian funds to be very positive developments.
The European Union welcomes the improvement in
rapid response to crises thanks to CERF and the
emphasis on underfunded crises. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs must give
consideration to the outcome of the independent
evaluation of CERF.

The European Union is determined to promote
disaster risk reduction and to prepare populations in
developing countries in the best possible manner,
through coherent and coordinated action at local,
national and regional levels. Local capacity-building is
essential. The European Union encourages States to
implement the Hyogo Framework for Action, and it
supports the coordination role played by the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. It
supports integrating risk reduction and early planning
strategies in development cooperation.

The European Union supports the United Nations
humanitarian reform, especially the role of resident and
humanitarian coordinators and the sector-wide
approach, which helps achieve more coherent
international action, bringing together all relevant
actors,
including
international
and
local
non-governmental organizations, and allows a better
assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of
humanitarian assistance. A balance between coherent
action and flexible implementation must be found.

As regards the food crisis, the United Nations has
been in the front line with respect to mobilizing the
international community and helping to provide
immediate response in the hardest-hit countries. The
European Union would like to highlight the quality of
the work done by the United Nations Task Force
coordinated by Mr. John Holmes. The response to the
food crisis will have to take place over the long term so
as to address its structural causes. That is the aim of
the Global Partnership for Food, promoted by the
Group of Eight, with which the European Union fully
associates itself.
Although it is still difficult to assess, it is clear
that the current financial crisis will impact
humanitarian action. On the one hand, greater needs
linked to a deterioration of the situation of populations
already in distress can be predicted. On the other, the
countries of the South fear a potential reduction of
financial contributions.
The European Union, which has reaffirmed its
commitments to the Millennium Development Goals
and which is the largest donor to United Nations
humanitarian agencies, encourages the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator to broaden the donor
base and calls upon all States to mobilize.
The European Union thinks it crucial to increase
the predictability and flexibility of humanitarian
financing. We believe the establishment of the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) and common

08-59523

Moreover, the European Union supports the
partnership approach set up within the Global
Humanitarian Platform. To guarantee the effectiveness
of humanitarian aid, needs assessments must be
improved at the global and local levels. That requires
reliable information and clearly defined priorities. In
that regard, the European Union welcomes the vital
role of the United Nations Disaster Assessment and
Coordination System.
Lastly, it is not enough just to provide an
emergency response. Early recovery and reconstruction
must be the natural successors to humanitarian
assistance. In order to strengthen the connection among
those various aspects, the European Union encourages
humanitarian and development actors to coordinate
their action from the earliest stages of crisis response.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
European Union’s full support for the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and our resolve to
work closely with the United Nations and all
humanitarian actors, so as to provide the victims of
conflicts and disasters with the solidarity and
assistance they deserve.
Mr. Hunte (Antigua and Barbuda): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China on agenda item 65 (a), “Strengthening of the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations”.
All countries are vulnerable to disasters. States
can and indeed must cooperate to find collective and

7

A/63/PV.43

cooperative solutions to the challenges that disaster
presents. The relevance of that cooperation has
multiplied with the increase in the number and impact
of natural disasters in recent years. The collective
efforts of Member States to promote more responsive,
prompt, fair and needs-based humanitarian assistance
must be augmented and strengthened.
The Group of 77 and China believes that a system
such as the one just described calls for an increase in
resources available to the United Nations for
humanitarian assistance. We also believe that greater
attention needs to be paid to the ability of the United
Nations to coordinate responses to demands for
humanitarian assistance. That can be achieved by
strengthening the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and by making sure that the
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) is well
funded.
In that regard, we thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report on CERF (A/63/348). While we are
still analysing that report, our preliminary view is that,
after two years of operation, the CERF has been a step
forward in ensuring a more predictable and timely
response to humanitarian emergencies. We take note of
the findings in the summary of the Secretary-General’s
report that CERF has become "a valuable and impartial
tool for humanitarian action by helping to accelerate
response". We also note the call to Member States to
contribute to the Fund and we would, in particular, like
to be kept abreast of amounts being disbursed and the
policies governing the disbursal of such funds. We
certainly can support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to keep the Fund’s progress under
review.
The increase in the number and scale of natural
disasters and their impact in recent years has resulted
in massive loss of life and livelihood and threatened
agricultural production and food security. The global
food crisis has further exacerbated conditions for more
than 900 million people, mainly in developing
countries, who are undernourished. The crisis is
expected significantly to increase the demand for
humanitarian assistance. We believe that there is a need
to address those developments in a holistic manner and
significantly to scale up the response to the crisis.
We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
that international humanitarian law and the guidelines
contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution

8

46/182 remain the framework governing the provision
of humanitarian assistance. The General Assembly has
stated on numerous occasions, including in the guiding
principles of resolution 46/182, that humanitarian
assistance should be provided with the consent of the
affected country and on the basis of an appeal by it.
The resolution also emphasizes that humanitarian
assistance must be provided in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.
Moreover, coordination of all types of external
assistance must be done by the recipient Government.
That would ensure better coherence and coordination
of relief efforts.
The Group of 77 and China is concerned about
statements and efforts made this year that would imply
the need to modify the agreed basis for the provision of
humanitarian assistance. We should avoid attempts to
expand the scope of humanitarian assistance or to
introduce guidelines and principles on operational and
other matters into deliberations of this Assembly
without due regard to adequate and sufficient
intergovernmental consultations. We are engaged in the
strengthening of the humanitarian response capacity of
the United Nations and its role in coordinating
international assistance to national responses to
emergencies. We remain open to proposals and ideas
that will contribute to those objectives and that result
from an inclusive intergovernmental process that duly
takes into account the views and needs of recipient
countries of international humanitarian assistance.
Sound national disaster management policies
require strong capacity and coherent strategies that
address both disaster prevention and disaster
management. However, while there is no substitute for
effective national efforts, a national response alone can
sometimes be inadequate. In that regard, there is a need
for more bilateral, regional and international
cooperation in response to natural disasters.
The United Nations system and the international
community have a unique role to play in assisting
developing countries to enhance their existing
humanitarian capacities, knowledge and institutions,
including by promoting access to and transfer of new
technology, funding and expertise to developing
countries. Such assistance will help developing
countries to strengthen preparedness, including through
the development and maintenance of early warning
systems; to respond rapidly to natural disasters and
mitigate their impact; to address the long-term

08-59523

A/63/PV.43

challenges of the post-recovery period; to reduce the
risks associated with future natural disasters and to
accelerate relief and rehabilitation.
Building on this last point, an issue of great
interest and concern to our Group is the transition from
relief to development. We believe that it is possible to
make that transition and to transform disasters into
opportunities for sustainable development. That is the
case when efforts are made at an early stage to support
local and national recovery processes. We are
convinced of the need for continuing international
engagement in the post-disaster period to restore
livelihoods, build resilience and reduce vulnerability.
We hope that there will be a greater focus on meeting
those needs even as we work towards improving CERF.
In that context, as in previous sessions, the Group
of 77 and China will submit a draft resolution on
international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in
the field of natural disasters, from relief to
development. We believe that international cooperation
in response to natural disasters gives life to the
principle of international solidarity and hope to
multilateralism. We are pleased with the growing
consensus on this annual draft resolution and we look
forward to our partners’ continued support for that
important initiative.
Mr. Mitchell (Grenada): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) that are Members
of the United Nations on agenda item 65,
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance”, and its
sub-item (a) “Strengthening of the coordination of the
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations”.
The CARICOM member States wish to associate
themselves with the statement made by the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s reports on those agenda items and wish to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and his staff for their hard work and
dedication in facing the challenges of the past year.
We remain disconcerted by continuous reports
over the past five years of an upward trend in disasters
of vastly devastating effect and the probability that this
trend will continue as vulnerabilities increase. Even

08-59523

more worrisome to the CARICOM member States in
that context is the reported growth in the frequency and
severity of hydrometeorological hazards. Addressing
the complexity of disasters and ending the cycle of
vulnerabilities necessitates an integrated approach to
disaster management that would include, as indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report (A/61/84), disaster
planning and preparedness, sustained assistance for
post-disaster recovery and reconstruction, and the
prioritization of risk-reduction as a matter of urgency.
To that end, the World Summit Outcome set forth
three broad areas to improve the United Nations
humanitarian system. Without prejudice to the
importance of progress at an even pace in all three
areas, CARICOM has particular interest in the
improvement of facilities for rapid access to funds in
the initial phase of a humanitarian emergency and for
ensuring equitable response to neglected emergencies
or otherwise chronically underfunded emergencies.
The development of small island developing
States with particular vulnerabilities to hurricanes,
floods and earthquakes is itself dependent on the
frequency and magnitude of such weather events. Yet,
in the most recent past, there has been an inadequate
international response to the disasters that struck
Grenada, Guyana, Haiti and Jamaica, as well as other
islands whose infrastructure is weakened by persistent
and constant strong winds, rains and tidal swells. It
was in that context that we welcomed the launch of the
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) to ensure a
more predictable and timely response to humanitarian
emergencies, and recognized the innovative grant
element in the improved Fund.
Two years after the launch of the Fund,
CARICOM remains pleased with its overall
application. We note in particular the provision for the
immediate disbursement of funds based on appeals for
rapid response to situations in Africa, the ongoing
situation in Haiti and situations caused by the current
food crisis. Also to be noted is the allocation of funds
to underfunded crises. The two-year evaluation has
found that CERF has proven itself a valuable and
impartial tool. The Fund has helped to accelerate
response and increase coverage of needs, in addition to
having served as a catalyst for proven field-level
coordination and evidence-based prioritization.
Since its launch in 2006, the Fund has allocated
more than $1 billion for humanitarian aid around the

9

A/63/PV.43

world. In order to ensure that CERF remains an effective
funding tool, its funds must be replenished. In this regard,
CARICOM member States urge the transformation of
pledges into firm funding commitments and call on the
Secretary-General to continue to use his good offices in
that process.
Secondly, it is important to recall the purpose of
CERF as a mechanism of last resort and the
complementary role it plays in the humanitarian appeals,
mechanisms and emergency funds of individual agencies.
Thus, CARICOM notes that the Fund has been able to
complement other humanitarian funding arrangements
and has been a valuable and successful addition to the
humanitarian financing architecture. CERF is noted to
work best when used in combination with United Nations
agencies’ own emergency funds or with other
humanitarian pool funding mechanisms.
CARICOM member States would like to take this
opportunity to praise the invaluable role that the Advisory
Group continues to play in the management of the Fund
and to take note of the Secretary-General’s recent
appointment of 16 members of the Advisory Group,
including four past members, to assure continuity and
integrity. CARICOM continues to endorse the Advisory
Group’s recommendation that Member States make every
effort to achieve the $500 million target established by the
General Assembly. CARICOM joins the SecretaryGeneral in calling on Member States to contribute to the
Fund at the forthcoming high-level conference on the
central emergency response fund in December 2008.
In 1991, CARICOM member States established the
Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency, a
disaster-management programme designed to coordinate
disaster response and management at the regional level.
At this juncture, CARICOM would like to extend its
appreciation to the donors for their ongoing support and
to acknowledge the recent assignment by the European
Commission of €3.4 million to support the Agency’s new
direction, in which it will no longer only respond to
disasters when they occur, but also promote prevention
and preparation activities that reduce the risk posed by
disasters before they occur.
CARICOM is pleased to inform the Assembly that
the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency
(CDERA) is now being transformed into the Caribbean
Disaster Emergency Management Agency, with key
elements addressing human resource management,
information and communication technologies (ICT)

10

enhancement, and application in an integrated project
management platform at the coordinating unit level.
Disasters in the Caribbean are now more destructive
than ever, mainly due to more frequent and stronger
hurricanes precipitated by global climate change. The
situation is exacerbated by increasing urbanization. These
increasingly destructive disasters not only kill but also
wipe out years of investment and infrastructure, and their
rehabilitation costs are stretching already fragile regional
economies to the point where development programmes
have to be sacrificed.
Therefore, it should be noted that timely assistance,
such as that provided by the European Community
contributes tremendously by strengthening the Caribbean
regional response, which assists the region by enhancing
preparations in advance of disasters and thereby
improving prospects for speedy recovery following a
disaster. These types of cooperation serve to minimize the
human and economic impact caused by disaster.
It is most evident that the effects of disasters are
increasingly widespread. Developed and developing
countries are both feeling the brunt, thus highlighting the
urgent need for all nations and regions to work together.
Mr. Singh Dhindsa (India): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Governments of
Sweden and India.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the documentation presented under this item, including
his report (A/63/277). We also appreciate the briefing that
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes provided at an
earlier date.
India and Sweden recognize that the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance is one of the most
important responsibilities of the United Nations. The
impartial, voluntary and multilateral nature of United
Nations humanitarian assistance is highly valued by both
countries.
Sweden and India have noted that the demands for
humanitarian assistance are likely to trend upwards in the
near future. We take note of the fact that there has been an
increase in the number and impact of natural hazards. We
further take note of the complex emergency situations and
the humanitarian challenges these situations continue to
pose.
India and Sweden reiterate that humanitarian
principles and international humanitarian law provide the

08-59523

A/63/PV.43

basis for humanitarian assistance. The letter and spirit of
these principles need to be scrupulously respected.
Sweden and India reaffirm the idea that humanitarian
assistance must be provided in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality and impartiality.
National
Governments
have
a
primary
responsibility for disaster management although it is
sometimes difficult for States to tackle emergencies on
their own. Nations can and must cooperate amongst
themselves to find collective and cooperative solutions to
the challenges that disasters represent. The efforts of
Member States to come together to promote a more
responsive, prompt, fair and needs-based humanitarian
assistance system must be augmented and strengthened.
India and Sweden believe that the capabilities and
role of the United Nations in coordination and delivery of
international humanitarian assistance need to be
strengthened. This approach would mean an augmentation
of the operational coordination capacities of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
improved delivery of humanitarian services by relevant
United Nations funds and programmes, and a greater
accountability to stakeholders.
Disaster management has to be a holistic process.
India and Sweden believe that prevention is better than
cure. We must, therefore, give greater attention and
resources to disaster risk reduction and disaster
preparedness. Moreover, disaster risk reduction and
preparedness need to be mainstreamed into development
policies.
Sweden and India also believe that disaster
management must be an inclusive process. Communities,
civil society and the private sector all have important
roles to play. We must act in partnership to exploit and
augment synergies. Cooperation in strengthening local,
national and regional capacities in the areas of emergency
response, disaster risk reduction and disaster preparedness
will benefit all.
In a globalized world, each nation has capabilities,
resources, experiences and knowledge that can be used in
partnership with all nations and the international
community for their mutual benefit. Mechanisms that tap
these capacities and disseminate best practices and
knowledge must, therefore, must be given high priority by
the United Nations.
The world is going through an unprecedented
financial crisis. It is important in these times to highlight

08-59523

the ongoing necessity of maintaining and augmenting the
levels and predictability of funding for humanitarian
assistance. In this regard, Sweden and India believe that
the Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has been
a success. The fund has succeeded in mobilizing $1
billion during its two years of operation. The disbursal of
these funds has played a role in accelerating responses to
emergency situations and has had a positive impact on the
management of these situations. The institution and
operation of the Central Emergency Response Fund has
highlighted the collective and shared interests that all
Member States have in the humanitarian agenda.
Member States have a common interest in ensuring
effective delivery of international humanitarian
assistance. The consensus that exists with respect to these
common interests can be articulated and strengthened
through constructive and informed dialogue. This
approach will reinforce our common ability to face
disasters whether natural or man-made.
I will now make a national statement on behalf of
the Government of India.
India would like to align itself with the statement
made by Antigua and Barbuda on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
The humanitarian role of the United Nations has
assumed added importance in the recent past. In his report
on International Cooperation on Humanitarian Assistance
in the Field of Natural Disasters (A/63/277), the
Secretary-General has stated that there is a longer-term
trend of increasing frequency and intensity of recorded
disasters associated with natural hazards. Asia, including
India, has been affected by these hazards in the past year.
In addition to disasters associated with natural
hazards, the global humanitarian scenario has been
complicated and placed under greater stress by the
emergence of new challenges such as the unprecedented
increase in food prices. The rise in food prices will have a
negative effect on populations living near and under
poverty thresholds and will increase humanitarian distress
in large parts of the developing world. The nature,
contour and resourcing of the humanitarian response to
this development is a matter of interest and concern to
India and other developing countries. Under these
circumstances it would be logical to assume that the
demands on the United Nations in the field of
humanitarian assistance will continue to grow.

11

A/63/PV.43

Member States have the primary responsibility for
providing humanitarian assistance in response to all
emergencies. While there is no substitute for effective
national efforts, a national response alone can sometimes
be inadequate. The United Nations has a key part to play
in complementing and supplementing the efforts of
Member States.
There is also a need for more bilateral, regional and
international cooperation to deal with disasters and to
make the most effective use of our capabilities. Greater
cooperation is required not only in the emergency phase
of disaster response but also in relief and rehabilitation, in
disaster preparedness and in setting up and maintaining
early warning systems. These all are, and should be, parts
of effective disaster management strategies.
The Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF) has
completed two years of existence. India has noted that the
report of the Secretary-General acknowledges that the
Fund has largely achieved its objectives and has become,
in a short time, a valuable and impartial tool for
humanitarian action, inter alia, by helping to accelerate
response and by catalyzing field-level coordination.
The CERF today accounts for about 5 per cent of
annual global humanitarian assistance flows. As a
developing country with strong faith in the universality,
neutrality, impartiality and multilateral nature of United
Nations assistance, India would like to see this share
increase.
India is deeply concerned by the increasing
incidence of attacks on humanitarian personnel and
United Nations premises. India has always opposed
violence and condemns such attacks in the strongest
possible terms.
India would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that humanitarian assistance has to be given on
the basis of humanitarian principles and international
humanitarian law. On numerous occasions, including in
the Guiding Principles of resolution 46/182, the General
Assembly has stated that humanitarian assistance should
be provided with the consent of the affected country and
on the basis of an appeal by it. It also emphasizes that
humanitarian assistance must be provided in accordance
with the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality.

12

However, we have noted that there have been
efforts to expand this base and the scope for intervention.
While the existing normative and legal basis for
humanitarian assistance is adequate, India is open to new
ideas to strengthen the Organization’s operational and
coordination capabilities. We also believe that the spirit
and letter of intergovernmental processes must be adhered
to in such initiatives.
Disaster management in India aims to build a safe
and disaster-resilient India by developing a holistic,
proactive, multidisaster and technology-driven strategy. A
National Disaster Management Authority headed by the
Prime Minister has been instituted to achieve this
objective through a culture of prevention, mitigation and
preparedness so as to generate a prompt and efficient
response at the time of disasters.
India’s disaster management strategy is in
conformity with the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction, the Rio Declaration, the Millennium
Development Goals and the Hyogo Framework 20052015.
The pillars on which India’s disaster management
strategy are based consist of community-based disaster
management, capacity development, consolidation of past
initiatives and best practices, and cooperation with
agencies at national, regional and international levels.
The Government of India is committed to
promoting a culture of prevention and preparedness and
encouraging mitigation measures based on state-of-the-art
technology and environmental sustainability. It is also
committed to mainstreaming disaster management into
the development planning process and to creating an
institutional and legal framework, an enabling regulatory
environment and an effective compliance regime. It
believes that an efficient humanitarian response must give
special attention to those who are vulnerable and weak.
The Government places great emphasis on
developing contemporary forecasting and early warning
systems. It also believes in working together with the
media, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector in generating awareness and capacity development
in tackling humanitarian disasters.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

08-59523
