S/PV.7957

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7957th meeting

Friday, 2 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Gee
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15735 (E)
*1715735*

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of sympathy following the terrorist
attack in Kabul
The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf
of the members of the Security Council, I condemn
in the strongest terms the reprehensible terrorist
attack perpetrated in Kabul on innocent civilians of
Afghanistan and of many other nations. The members
of the Security Council extend their deepest sympathy
to the families of the victims who lost their lives,
and solidarity to the people and Government of
Afghanistan. Please stand for a moment of silence in
honour of the victims.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of June, I should like to take this opportunity,
on behalf of the Security Council, to pay tribute
to His Excellency Mr. Elbio Rosselli, Permanent
Representative of Uruguay, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of May. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Rosselli and his
delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Congratulatory remarks to the newly
elected members
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should also like
to take this opportunity to sincerely congratulate Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, the Netherlands,
Peru and Poland on their election as non-permanent
members of the Security Council. We look forward
with interest to their contribution to the work of the
Council starting in 2018.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
to participate in this meeting.
2/17

02/06/2017

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Aïchatou
Mindaoudou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the f loor to Ms. Mindaoudou.
Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the members of the Security Council for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Council, on behalf of
the Secretary-General, on the most recent report on the
situation in Côte d’Ivoire.
Today is a historic one in relations between Côte
d’Ivoire and the Security Council. It is historic because
it marks the removal of Côte d’Ivoire from the Council’s
agenda. It is also historic because Côte d’Ivoire was
elected as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for a two-year mandate, which will begin in
January 2018.
Let me warmly congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
on Côte d’Ivoire’s election to the Security Council.
Since I last briefed the Security Council in
February (see S/PV.7880), a new Government has
assumed power following legislative elections held
in December 2016. The Senate is being established.
What is remarkable is that for the first time in Côte
d’Ivoire’s political history, the three main political
parties — Rassemblement des républicains (RDR),
the Parti démocratique de Côte d’Ivoire and the Front
populaire ivoirien (FPI) — all took part in and fielded
candidates in the elections. It should be recalled that
the legislative elections of 2000 were boycotted by the
RDR and those of 2011 by the FPI. The latter boycott
led to an increased presence of the RDR in the National
Assembly, which gave an absolute majority to the ruling
coalition of Rassemblement des houphouëtistes pour
la démocratie et la paix. Although the FPI opposition
party won only four seats of deputies in the elections
in 2016, its leaders were clear on their intentions to
fully play their roles as deputies. Such commitment is
positive for democracy in Côte d’Ivoire.
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

In February, I told the Council that the security
situation was generally stable despite the recurring
movements of soldiers in January and February. Since
my last briefing to the Council, similar movements took
place on 12 and 14 May, when a faction of the Bouakébased armed forces, mostly former members of the
Forces nouvelles de Côte d’Ivoire, claimed payment
for its participation in the resolution of the 2010-2011
post-election crisis. Those disruptions have spread to
several parts of the country, causing the death of one
person and injuring more than 20. On 22 and 23 May,
demobilized ex-combatants of the Forces nouvelles,
previously considered to be allies to the army, erected
barricades and demonstrated in Bouaké and other parts
of the country, calling for financial compensation
from the Government. Three ex-combatants were
killed during the confrontation with the police. Those
two movements totally paralysed economic activities,
particularly in Bouaké. During the incidents of 12 and
14 May, a large cache of weapons was discovered,
thereby reviving, both internally and externally, a
certain psychosis of armed violence.
In February, I felt that the soldiers’ movements did
not threaten the institutions or stability of the country
and did not wish to resort to violence because the claims
put forth by the soldiers were merely financial. That
assessment remains unchanged. However, things have
changed somewhat since the incidents that occurred
in May. This time, the soldiers attacked civilians
and certain political symbols. The recurrence of
military movements confirms the residual challenges
that remain to be met before we can consolidate the
achievements of peacekeeping in Côte d’Ivoire. Those
challenges were identified and documented in the
special report of the Secretary-General of March 2016
(S/2016/297), which recommended the closure of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI),
and in the Secretary-General’s February report on
Côte d’Ivoire (S/2017/89).
It is urgent that the Government, with the support
of its partners, improve discipline within the armed
forces and implement the reforms provided for by the
2016-2020 Military Planning Law. It is also imperative
to ensure the full integration of ex-combatants into
society. These incidents highlight, on the one hand,
the threats posed by impunity within the armed forces
and, on the other, the imperative of ending impunity
for human rights violations committed during the post-

S/PV.7957

election crisis by the two parties in conf lict, as well as
the need for impartial justice.
However, the situation I have just described
should not make us lose sight of the achievements of
more than 14 years of peacekeeping made possible by
bilateral, regional and international support. In April
2004, when UNOCI was deployed, Côte d’Ivoire was a
country divided in two along a security zone policed by
forces of the United Nations and the French. Violations
of the ceasefire and serious violations of human rights
were recurrent. Since the end of the post-electoral
crisis in Côte d’Ivoire in 2011, significant progress has
been made in all sectors. The political environment
has improved, although much remains to be done,
particularly in the areas of ​​
national reconciliation
and social cohesion. The situations of human rights
and transitional justice have progressed, albeit in an
uneven and hesitant manner. Economic growth is
continuing and steps need to be taken to ensure the
equitable sharing of resources so that all sectors of
society benefit from the dividends of peace. The
security situation has greatly improved, but efforts
have still to be made to establish responsible security
forces that enjoy the trust of the population.
In just four weeks, on 30 June, UNOCI’s
closure will be official. This process has not been
without challenges when we consider the two-month
liquidation period granted by the Council. I am pleased
to inform the Council that, in spite of everything, we
are keeping to the 30 June deadline of closing the
mission. All uniformed personnel left Côte d’Ivoire in
February. The gradual reduction of the civilian staff
was completed in April, and today only a reduced
team of eight civilians remain in the Mission’s core
and liquidation teams. ONUCI’s FM radio station was
transferred to the Félix Houphouët Boigny Foundation
for Peace Research in Yamoussoukro. It is broadcasting
today as the Radio of Peace. Of the 63 UNOCI sites,
61 have been returned to their respective owners. Most
of the mission’s equipment has been removed from our
books and their final disposal or destruction is under
way. The liquidation process was conducted in strict
compliance with the environmental standards set by
the Secretariat.
Some members of the Council have asked me
what lessons I have learned from experience in Côte
d’Ivoire that might be useful in other contexts in which
peacekeeping missions are deployed. In that regard, I

17-157353/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

should like to highlight three essential lessons that I
consider important to share.
The first lesson I would like to address is the
most important. A peacekeeping operation can
achieve its objectives and withdraw from a country
only in a context in which the Government is a
determined partner deeply committed to assuming its
responsibilities to the people it serves. No peacekeeping
mission can substitute for national political will and
national efforts to resolve the problems that led to the
conf lict. There is no doubt that much remains to be
done in order to meet all the remaining challenges, but
Côte d’Ivoire has demonstrated its resolve to assume
the responsibilities necessary for the country to return
to its former position as the torchbearer of West Africa
for peace, stability and economic prosperity.
The second lesson relates to the leadership of the
Council. I would point to the risks that the Council was
able to take that led to the success of UNOCI, starting
with the strong political mandate bestowed upon my
predecessors and myself and supported by the trust
of the Security Council. In addition, the Council has
been very supportive of inter-mission cooperation,
allowing us to maximize the strategic and operational
interdependence of neighbouring peacekeeping
missions. The rapid reaction force established within
UNOCI, with the potential to intervene in Liberia in
support of mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, is certainly one of the most progressive
inter-agency cooperation initiatives in the history
of United Nations peacekeeping. Where necessary,
the Council has also been proactive in adjusting the
successive mandates of UNOCI, based on regular
assessments conducted by the Secretariat, in order to
prevent the mission from bogging down.
The third and final lesson that I draw from UNOCI’s
experience is that a United Nations peacekeeping
mission is much more likely to succeed in a context
where there is a coalition of international partners
working to achieve the same goal of peace, essentially
in a policy framework with enhanced and concerted
accountability measures. The foundation of UNOCI’s
success is based on many pillars: African Union
mediation, the Economic Community of West African
States deployment of peacekeeping troops that later
become peacekeepers, advocacy by women members
of the civil society organizations of the Mano River
Union, the parallel deployment of French forces and
the commitment of bilateral and multilateral partners.
4/17

02/06/2017

Allow me to express my appreciation for the
important role played by the Council in the return
of peace to Côte d’Ivoire, including through the
deployment of a peacekeeping mission. I salute the
memory of all those who made the ultimate sacrifice
in the service of UNOCI and express my gratitude
to all troop- and police-contributing countries. My
appreciation also goes to all UNOCI civilian and
uniformed personnel who have served our mission
with professionalism, dedication and a deep sense of
duty to fulfil our mandate. It has been a great honour
for me to have collaborated with those women and
men. I also thank the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes whose role in Côte d’Ivoire has been
and will continue to be essential.
I am also grateful to the regional, bilateral and
multilateral partners whose contribution has enabled
the United Nations to successfully close the chapter
on peacekeeping in Côte d’Ivoire. Their unf lagging
support is key to consolidating lasting peacekeeping
gains.
Last but not least, I would like to express my
deep gratitude and my great admiration for the
people and the Government of Côte d’Ivoire at all
levels — local, regional and national. In reality, they
were the determining factor for resolving the crisis
and the conf lict in their country. I am convinced that
the daily, personal and collective investment of each
Ivorian will make it possible to sustainably consolidate
our hard-won peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mindaoudou for her briefing.
I now give the f loor to those members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Today’s
meeting is exceptional and historic. Indeed, it is rare for
the Security Council to meet on the occasion of closing
a peacekeeping mission. Yet, we are here doing just
that for the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI), which will be phased out by 30 June, under
resolution 2284 (2016).
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing and especially
for her work at the head of UNOCI over the past four
years which, together with the work of her predecessor,
has enabled us to reach this point today. France is
very grateful.
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

This meeting is rendered even more historic as it
follows the brilliant election in the General Assembly,
this morning, of Côte d’Ivoire as a Security Council
member for the biennium 2018-2019. Through its
Minister for Foreign Affairs, I would like to warmly
congratulate Côte d’Ivoire on its election. Its experience
in peacekeeping will provide the Council a unique
perspective to help us more effectively tackle the
challenges of the world. We welcome the opportunity
to work alongside Côte d’Ivoire over the next two years
in our pursuit of international peace and security.
The upcoming departure of UNOCI is a turning
point for Côte d’Ivoire, as it is for peacekeeping. We
must take this opportunity to review the past, evaluate
the present and prepare for the future.
First, we must assess our accomplishments in
Côte d’Ivoire and draw lessons from them. In 28 days,
UNOCI will close after more than 13 years of existence.
At the height of the 2010-2011 crisis it consisted of
approximately 11,000 uniformed personnel. I pay a
special tribute to all UNOCI personnel — soldiers,
policemen and civilians — who, over the years, have
devoted themselves to the pursuit of peace and security
in Côte d’Ivoire. I honour the memory of the 150 men
and women who lost their lives in the course of that
mission. Their sacrifice will never be forgotten.
UNOCI stood by the country through a complex
trajectory, marked by the acute crisis from 2004 to
2011, but also accompanied by the hope of renewal and
the successful recovery starting in 2011. We must draw
useful peacekeeping lessons from such a resounding
success. Several factors have helped over the years.
First of all, the Council gave UNOCI a clear and f lexible
mandate which was adapted to on developments on
the ground. Difficulties were met with a strengthened
mandate and personnel increases. When the crisis
abated, the Council transitioned UNOCI to best enable
long-term stability. The Council also developed new
tools adapted to the needs on the ground, such as the
rapid reaction force.
Secondly, since its inception, UNOCI also
participated in the political process which, pitfalls
notwithstanding, provided it a clear road map, including
an electoral timetable. The unity of the Council also
provided UNOCI with the necessary support in order
for it to carry out its mandate.
Thirdly, UNOCI has always enjoyed the united
support of the international community. The United

S/PV.7957

Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the bilateral and
multilateral partners of Côte d’Ivoire came together in
tense times. France also did its part, primarily through
its ongoing support for UNOCI, under a Council
mandate, through the French forces it deployed to Côte
d’Ivoire throughout that period.
Finally, and importantly, UNOCI has enjoyed an
excellent relationship with the host country based on
trust and the pursuit of peace. It is an example to follow.
That relationship has been an essential prerequisite
to ensuring an effective transition.As a result, Côte
d’Ivoire has now fully taken its destiny into its own
hands. Today’s Côte d’Ivoire has made great progress;
it is no longer the deeply divided — politically and
territorially — country of 2004 or 2011. Democratic
life in the country has become normalized and
strengthened; economic growth is contributing to
its development; the security situation continues to
improve, including at the border; and the country is a
major player in its subregion in all areas. The people
and the Government of Côte d’Ivoire have demonstrated
their determination to continue that positive trend.
They are now fully responsible for that transition.
Côte d’Ivoire is now in a position to continue
moving forward. As the Council recalled in resolution
2284 (2016), this means we need to continue to
address the important challenges that remain, and as
the Special Representative has pointed out, the last
few months have highlighted in particular the need
to finalize the security sector reform and reintegrate
the ex-combatants. This is an imperative for ensuring
lasting stability in the country.
The Government of Côte d’Ivoire has clearly
expressed its determination to tackle these issues
and to complete professionalizing its security forces.
We welcome and support this commitment just as we
support the announcement of the strengthening of the
country’s participation in peacekeeping. This decision
represents a way of organizing what is to come. We
welcome its first illustration with the deployment
under way of an Ivorian contingent within the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
We also welcome the actions taken by the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire to strengthen social
cohesion, which need to continue. The fight against
impunity is also a constant imperative, particularly

17-157355/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

02/06/2017

with regard to the crimes committed during the
post-election crisis. Only fair and equitable justice,
which judges violations regardless of who are their
perpetrators, will be able to consolidate and sustain
the stabilization of the country. Progress in this
area, nationally as well as in cooperation with the
International Criminal Court, will be decisive for the
purpose of lasting reconciliation.

The Senegalese delegation would like to
congratulate Bolivia on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We also wish to
warmly congratulate the delegation of Côte d’Ivoire, as
well as the delegations of Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Poland and Peru on their outstanding
election this morning as non-permanent members of
the Security Council for the biennium 2018-2019.

The closure of UNOCI does not mean, however,
that the country will be left alone to face the challenges
that persist. As many other States do, Côte d’Ivoire
will continue to benefit from the support of the United
Nations through several channels. The agencies, funds
and programmes operating on its territory assembled
within the country team will continue to help with
the country’s recovery. Identifying the priority areas
within the action plan signed with the Government
in 2016 is particularly useful in this regard. We call
on international donors to support the country team
in this undertaking. The United Nations will also
continue to support Côte d’Ivoire as will its neighbours
through the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, whose mandate covers the entire subregion.
Côte d’Ivoire should also be able to count on the
constant commitment of its bilateral and multilateral
partners in all fields.

Through the Ivorian Minister for Foreign Affairs
here with us today and his delegation, I wish to
reiterate the warmest congratulations of Senegal to
Côte d’Ivoire on its brilliant election to the Security
Council. To Ms. Mindaoudou, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), the
Senegalese delegation offers its congratulations both
for her comprehensive briefing and, above all, for the
remarkable manner in which she fulfilled mission
in our sister country of Côte d’Ivoire and helped it
achieve stability.

Thanks to the strong links between our two
countries in all areas, France is committed to Côte
d’Ivoire. We will continue to support the country in
its economic and social development, as well as in
capacity-building, particularly in security and defence,
through bilateral cooperation. We will also continue
to support the deep and constant engagement of the
European Union with Côte d’Ivoire.
When the conditions are right, the best legacy a
peacekeeping operation can leave behind is to pass
the torch to the host country in order to anchor longterm stability. This is the meaning of our meeting
today on Côte d’Ivoire. We are very happy about this
for Côte d’Ivoire, for the Security Council and for the
United Nations.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I align
myself with the words of the President in condemning
the terrorist attacks in Kabul. In so doing, I wish to
reiterate the condolences of Senegal to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of
Afghanistan.
6/17

Ms. Mindaoudou’s briefing allows me to dispense
with revisiting the situation in Côte d’Ivoire, but like
other speakers who have preceded me I would like to
state that today, 2 June, is clearly and truly historic and
rich in symbols for our sister Republic of Côte d’Ivoire,
which this morning was elected a non-permanent
member of the Security Council and then comes to the
Council this afternoon for a final briefing on the end of
the United Nations Mission there. With its experience
as a host country of a United Nations mission, which
is, as Ms. Mindaoudou said, a success story in all
respects, Côte d’Ivoire is leaving the agenda of the
Security Council and coming to sit at the table of this
body to make a significant contribution to the work of
the Council for the next two years.
We believe that the political resolve of the senior
authorities in Côte d’Ivoire, which has so far prevailed,
will persevere and grow stronger in addressing the
remaining challenges, particularly in the security field.
In our view, the implementation and operationalization
of the law on military programming will be a decisive
step in this direction, as it will strengthen training
and discipline within the Ivorian army. With regard
to the threat posed by the spread of violent extremism
and terrorism in the subregion, the action of the
Ivorian authorities, working in close cooperation with
neighbouring countries, to strengthen the measures
taken against this increasing threat to subregion is
warmly welcomed.
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

We must be sure to consolidate and entrench the
gains made in the stabilizing Côte d’Ivoire. To that end,
alongside the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, the United
Nations country team, the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the United
Nations and all bilateral and multilateral partners must
remain watchful and continue supporting Côte d’Ivoire
in its efforts to make peace permanent. In this regard,
the delegation of Senegal welcomes the United Nations
country team’s effort to draft a $50-million joint
peacebuilding programme following the departure
of UNOCI.
I cannot conclude without paying well-deserved
tribute to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou. Obviously, the
commitment of my country has been constant, in
particular through the rapid intervention force and
the aviation unit that we deployed within UNOCI, and
through the ceasefire agreement of 17 October 2002
between the mutineers and the loyalists mediated
by Senegal.
In conclusion, I would like to invite the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, to continue
following the situation in Côte d’Ivoire as part of his
regional mandate.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mindaoudou for her comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Marcel
Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire, to the Council. It is a pleasure to have him in
the Chamber for this final briefing on the successful
completion of the 14-year mission of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
Please allow me to commend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mindaoudou and all UNOCI
staff, past and present, including those who lost their
lives, for their dedication to supporting a better future
for Côte d’Ivoire. The country has made great progress
in consolidating its economic and security gains. The
result of the Security Council election this morning
symbolizes and affirms these achievements.
The 14 years of activity of UNOCI offer a rich
storehouse of lessons on peacekeeping. While the
magnitude and complexity of issues may differ, the
Council should continue to apply lessons from Côte

S/PV.7957

d’Ivoire to its ongoing work on peacekeeping, especially
in Africa. In particular, UNOCI has demonstrated
that comprehensive and nationally owned security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration are key tools for successful peace
processes, as well as for preventing the recurrence
of conf licts.
We have also seen how unresolved disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration issues, including
incomplete socioeconomic reintegration of former
soldiers, can impact even a well-designed security sector
reform programme and improved security architecture.
We are confident that Côte d’Ivoire will continue to
enhance the professionalism and accountability of the
security sector under the coordination of its National
Security Council.
Côte d’Ivoire will not be alone in these tasks.
Together with other international partners and the
United Nations country team, Japan will continue
to support Côte d’Ivoire’s efforts in sustaining
peace, but this month marks a milestone in Côte
d’Ivoire’s development.
I would like to conclude by, once again,
congratulating UNOCI, as well as the people and
Government of Côte d’Ivoire, on their achievements.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou, for
her comprehensive briefing on the internal political
situation in the country and the conclusion of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
We welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Amon-Tano, and we
sincerely congratulate him on his country’s election
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
for 2018-2019. We wish his country every success in
its cooperation on the issues on the Council’s agenda.
The rich experience of Ivorians in post-conf lict
reconstruction is of particular interest in that regard
and I am sure they will share their experience with the
international community.
We note the success of Yamoussoukro in the
sphere of national reconciliation, State-building and
promoting political reforms in the country. We want to
underscore that the successful holding of a referendum
at the end of last year on the new Constitution and of
parliamentary elections confirmed the maturity of the

17-157357/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

political forces in the country and their ability settle
differences through peaceful means. Clearly, there is
trend towards stability following the 2010 and 2011
electoral crises. In this regard, we note the contribution
made by the Government, which took unprecedented
measures to organize a political dialogue with the
opposition. We hope that the authorities will continue
to make serious efforts to increase the representation
of women in governing bodies.
The Constitution’s provisions on land, citizenship
and national identity are promising and give us
hope for a final elimination of the root causes of the
conf lict. We are confident that Yamoussoukro will
soon overcome the challenges posed by outbreaks of
social tension. We take note of the agreements reached
between the country’s authorities and ex-combatants
who are integrated into the armed forces, which enabled
them to quell the protests. In this regard, we urge the
Ivorians to concentrate their efforts on addressing
priority tasks, such as security sector reform; the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants programme; and
the return of refugees from Liberia to the country. In
addition, the processes of national reconciliation and
of eliminating the dividing lines in society, including
those related to victor’s justice, must continue.
We must bear in mind that, in the West African
region, terrorist groups have strengthened and we have
been seeing occasional appearances of their emissaries
in the north of the country, on the border with Mali.
Côte d’Ivoire is also becoming a victim of terrorist
attacks. In this regard, we urge Yamoussoukro to
continue to place priority on the issues of security and
illegal arms trafficking.
We greatly value Côte d’Ivoire’s position on
regional stability. We welcome sending the Ivorian
military into the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We hope
that Côte d’Ivoire will also continue to be accountable
and approach logistical issues responsibly. We cannot
overstate its role there.
We note that the transfer of the remaining tasks
from UNOCI to the United Nations country teams has
been carried out in an orderly manner. We are happy
that the withdrawal of the mission is in accordance
with the time frame. In conclusion, we, once again,
encourage our Ivorian partners to fully cooperate with
the Council.
8/17

02/06/2017

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): As this is our first
public session in your presidency, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and wish you good luck. I would also
like to thank Uruguay for its very efficient and open
presidency last month.
I join others in thanking Special Representative
Mindaoudou for her briefing and for her tireless
efforts over the past years and for her commitment to
a sustained peace. I also want to welcome the Foreign
Minister of Côte d’Ivoire to the Council and we really
look forward to hearing from him shortly.
We meet today at a significant moment for the
Government and people of Côte d’Ivoire. By the end
of the month, the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) will close after 13 years of service.
In that time, Côte d’Ivoire has been transformed. A
child born when the first UNOCI peacekeeper set
foot in Côte d’Ivoire would have entered a world of
uncertainty and insecurity. Today, that child is living
in a country with real prospects not just for peace, but
also for opportunity and prosperity. I congratulate the
Special Representative and all her team for all they
have done to help make this a reality. UNOCI has
been an exemplary operation, one that has enjoyed
an excellent relationship with the Government and
with civil society and, importantly, one that it is now
leaving harmoniously and at the right moment.
As their mission nears its end, we must never
forget that such stability did not come without cost; 150
military and civilian United Nations personnel have
lost their lives in Côte d’Ivoire over the past 13 years.
The legacy of their sacrifice and of all their service
must be a sustained peace in Côte d’Ivoire. With that in
mind, I congratulate the Government for capitalizing
on the space that UNOCI has given them. The country
now has one of the fastest growing economies in the
world. We stand with it as it continues along this
positive pathway redoubling its efforts to ensure that
all Ivorians feel the benefits brought by peace through
social development.
Progress in Côte d’Ivoire is not limited to just
the economy. I also want to draw Council members
attention to the Secretary-General’s recently published
report on conf lict-related sexual violence (S/2017/249),
a topic that is of particular concern to the United
Kingdom. With this report came the welcome news that
the armed forces of Côte d’Ivoire have been delisted.
That means that Côte d’Ivoire is now able to contribute
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

to United Nations peacekeeping missions, and it has
recently sent a contingent to Mali. To move from a
nation benefitting from a peacekeeping mission to one
that now contributes to peacekeeping is yet another
marker of success.
There can be no let up. There are tests ahead for
Côte d’Ivoire. The 2015 presidential elections were
peaceful, but of course UNOCI was present. The
presidential elections in 2020 and a smooth democratic
transfer of power to a new president will be crucial
to building a peaceful and prosperous future for Côte
d’Ivoire. This needs continued efforts to build the
independence, credibility and authority of the electoral
commission over the next two years. The credibility
and legitimacy of the institutions of Government must
continue to strengthen.
As the recent unrest in the country illustrates, peace
can be fragile if underlying issues are not resolved. I
therefore encourage the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
to make the most of this opportunity that it and the
United Nations have worked so hard for.
In conclusion, the story of Côte d’Ivoire is a
positive one, with the end of a successful mission and
an optimistic future for the country and its people.
It is also a positive story for the United Nations and
specifically for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. UNOCI shows how clear mandates with
a clear exit strategy can create the space needed for
the political process to progress. It is a model that we
should seek to emulate elsewhere across the world.
I am delighted that the experience is something that
Côte d’Ivoire will be able to share on a daily basis with
the Council when it joins in 2018. I congratulate the
country on its election earlier today.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin my statement by wishing you,
Sir, and your team every success in your duties as
your country presides over the Security Council
during the month of June. I also sincerely thank
Council members for commending us on our recently
concluded presidency.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General,Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, for her
comprehensive briefing, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, for
being here today.

S/PV.7957

We take this opportunity to congratulate the
delegation of Côte d’Ivoire on its recent election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and
we wish the country every success during its mandate.
We also hope that the Security Council can benefit not
only from Côte d’Ivoire’s commitment to international
peace and security, but also from its experience in
successfully emerging from conf lict with the support
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation. Uruguay
would also like to congratulate the Government and the
people of Côte d’Ivoire on their achievements to date,
which are, without a doubt, worthy of recognition.
Just over a year ago, in this very Chamber, we ended
the Côte d’Ivoire sanctions regime (see S/PV.7681).
That step was made possible by the progress that had
paved the way for the country to embark on the path to
peace and stability. There is no doubt that the country
continues to face internal challenges, such as national
reconciliation, the reintegration of former combatants
and sustainable economic recovery, which must all be
addressed and overcome by Ivoirians themselves.
The role of international partners will be key to
assisting the country to address the root causes of
underlying challenges. Nonetheless, we can proudly
declare that Côte d’Ivoire is no longer a threat to
international peace and security and that the Security
Council has transferred all responsibility for achieving
sustained peace in the country to its Government. A
period of learning has begun, which will open up the
possibility for a promising future for all Ivorians. The
situation in Côte d’Ivoire would not have become a
success story without the commitment and political
will of its Government.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Mindaoudou, for her
briefing and welcome Foreign Minister Amon-Tanoh
to today’s meeting.
China congratulates Côte d’Ivoire on its election
as a non-permanent member of the Council for the
2018-2019 term and looks forward to intensifying
cooperation with Côte d’Ivoire in international
affairs with a view to making joint contributions to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In recent years, under the leadership of President
Ouattara, Côte d’Ivoire has enjoyed political stability
and sustained economic and social development, which
China commends.

17-157359/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

Last year, during China’s presidency of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7681), the Council adopted
resolution 2284 (2016), on the drawdown of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), and
resolution 2283 (2016), on the comprehensive lifting
of sanctions against Côte d’Ivoire (see S/PV.7681).
That fully ref lected the affirmation of the Council and
of the international community that there had been
considerable improvement in the situation in Côte
d’Ivoire. Since 2004, UNOCI has played an important
role in maintaining peace and stability in the country.
China commends the contribution of UNOCI and the
positive efforts of Special Representative Mindaoudou
since she assumed office. Following the closure of
UNOCI, China hopes that the international community
will continue to strengthen cooperation with Côte
d’Ivoire with a view to helping the country achieve
sustained peace, stability and development.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are an
important means of maintaining international peace
and security. UNOCI’s successful experience is worth
studying with a view to drawing lessons from it.
Based on developments in the situation on the ground,
China believes that the United Nations peacekeeping
operation should make timely adjustments to its scale
ahead of its final drawdown and closure. Meanwhile, it
is imperative to fully respect the will of the host country
and enhance coordination with countries in the region,
as well as regional and subregional organizations.
Nine out of the sixteen United Nations peacekeeping
missions are located in Africa. Peace and stability
in Africa matter greatly to international peace and
security. China has consistently supported Africa in
resolving African issues through African means, as
well as regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union, in playing an active role in
resolving local issues. China stands ready to work with
the international community to provide ownership
and capacity-building assistance to Africa so as to
make greater contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Mindaoudou, for her briefing.
We commend the progress made in preparing for
the closure of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI). I take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Mindaoudou for her efforts and to congratulate
10/17

02/06/2017

her, the Secretariat and the UNOCI staff, who have all
contributed to the mission’s success for many years.
I would also like to recognize Minister Amon-Tanoh
and congratulate him on his country’s election to the
Security Council for the 2018-2019 term, which is the
culmination of Côte d’Ivoire’s journey to stability over
the years. I should also like to congratulate the other
newly elected non-permanent members of the Security
Council, in particular the Netherlands, with which we
share a Security Council seat.
The stage we are at today is a precursor to the
closure of the mission in Côte d’Ivoire, which is an
important juncture in the country’s recent history and
that of United Nations peacekeeping operations in
general. For Côte d’Ivoire, it reaffirms the journey to
stability on which the country has embarked. Similarly,
we commend the determination of the United Nations
to remain committed to the country, through its
political presence and coordination efforts under the
regional office of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, because the outcome achieved by
UNOCI is a legacy to be preserved.
We have closely followed recent political
developments, which constitute a vital stage in the
history of Côte d’Ivoire and in the changes made to
its Constitution, once again highlighting the country’s
resolute commitment to democratic principles. Italy
will continue to support the country on that path at
the bilateral level, as well as in our work at the United
Nations and in the European Union, which remains one
of Côte d’Ivoire’s main partners.
The stability of Côte d’Ivoire first and foremost
meets the aspirations of the Ivoirian people, but it
is also a priority for the international community.
International and regional dynamics, especially in the
area of security, require considerable commitment, in
particular on the part of countries, such as Côte d’Ivoire,
that have historically played the role of regional
stabilizer. We would also wish to see Côte d’Ivoire play
an active role in fighting the scourges threatening peace
and security in the regional and Sahelian dimensions.
In that regard, the fact that Côte d’Ivoire is again a
troop-contributing country in Mali demonstrates the
country’s focus on the regional dynamic.
Moreover, the priorities on which the Ivorian
candidacy for Council membership is based — such
as the fight against terrorism, illegal trafficking,
illicit immigration and piracy, as well as promoting
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

S/PV.7957

and protecting human rights — are in our view an
important sign of that commitment. In that respect, I
offer Côte d’Ivoire the full support of Italy in order to
obtain these goals.

in Côte d’Ivoire and the national authorities return
to governing all of the country’s affairs. Optimism
prevails regarding a more stable and prosperous future
at all political, economic and security levels.

In recent months, we have on occasion wondered
about the tools available to us to make peacekeeping
operations more effective. The lesson to be drawn
from the case of Côte d’Ivoire is that the leadership and
unity of the Security Council, which the Council has
demonstrated at considerable cost, are prerequisites
to ensuring the success of peacekeeping operations,
together with the commitment of the host country to
do everything possible to pursue the goals of peace
and stability. I am convinced that the direct experience
that Côte d’Ivoire will be able to offer in terms of
understanding the pluses and minuses of United
Nations peacekeeping activities will add important
value to its membership of the Security Council.

UNOCI would not have been successful in
achieving its goals had it not been for the national
and popular political atmosphere, which facilitated a
diligent approach to shaping Côte d’Ivoire’s future.
In addition, regional and international stakeholders
unified their vision for Côte d’Ivoire, aware of their
role in supporting Côte d’Ivoire in ending the crisis.
They helped make it happen.

Today is Republic Day in Italy. I am happy that this
day, which is a day of celebration for us, is also one on
which Côte d’Ivoire has reached an important turning
point in its history.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to welcome His Excellency,
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire. I congratulate him
on the well-deserved election of his country as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council
for the period 2018-2019 earlier today, which is of
obvious significance.
Today, Côte d’Ivoire is turning the page and
moving past its crisis once and for all. Côte d’Ivoire,
a brotherly country, will, through its membership in
the Council, once again play a deserved role in the
international arena as a representative of the African
continent and a defender of its people’s interests. In
that regard, I would like to assure the Minister that
Egypt will continue to promote its ongoing cooperation
and coordination with Côte d’Ivoire and provide the
necessary support to the country as it fulfils its role.
Allow me also to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou,
for her valuable briefing and appreciated efforts, and
the civilian and military personnel of United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) for their hard
work. They have played a pivotal role in leading to
the current watershed moment. The Council celebrates
this turning point as the peacekeeping mission ends

The successful closure of UNOCI is only the
start of a new phase, anchored in peace and stability,
that will help Côte d’Ivoire to achieve sustainable
development. The successes in Côte d’Ivoire deserve
to be celebrated, but the remaining challenges
deserve our full attention. We are confident in the
ability of the Ivorian Government and people to make
further progress on their current path. However, the
international community must also continue to provide
necessary support.
In conclusion, the Council celebrates the closure
of a success story that was not easy. The mission faced
challenges, difficulties and failures. Had it not been
for the determination of stakeholders to overcome
such hurdles, we would not have reached this point
today. We believe it important to draw lessons from
UNOCI that will help us in dealing with similar crises.
We therefore call on the Secretariat to conduct a
comprehensive study of the role of the United Nations
and the international community in the settlement of
the Ivorian crisis. The study should include an objective
analysis of the mandate and role of the peacekeeping
operation, the contributions of political mediation, the
effects of sanctions regimes, and all factors related to
the international community’s perspective with respect
to the crisis.
Once again, I wish the people and the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire success.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me start by expressing
my appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, for her
briefing and for the successful work that she and her
team have carried out in order to ensure the successful
completion of the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).

17-1573511/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

I would also like to thank His Excellency,
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire. I take this opportunity
to extend our warmest congraulations to him on the
election of Côte d’Ivoire as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the period of 2018-2019. I
look forward to working closely with his country in
the Council.
The closure of UNOCI marks a significant
milestone, both for Côte d’Ivoire and for the United
Nations. Over the past 13 years, UNOCI has worked
to promote the rule of law, national reconciliation,
security sector reform, the protection of civilians and
human rights in Côte d’Ivoire, thereby contributing to
the restoration of peace and stability in the country. We
hope that the experience of UNOCI will provide useful
lessons for similar missions in the future. Without a
doubt, the progress made over the past 13 years would
not have been possible without the active participation
of the people and Government of Côte d’Ivoire. The
leadership and commitment of the Government to
undertake necessary reform should be commended.
We are confident that the efforts of the Government
aimed at fostering greater unity and national
reconciliation will continue. Without a doubt, the
need for greater unity and national reconciliation have
been made self-evident by recent developments. The
country certainly needs the continued support of the
international community as it strives to sustain peace
and consolidate the political and economic gains made
in recent years. Therefore, the sustained engagement
of the United Nations country team remains very
important. We are encouraged to note that the handing
over of commitment from UNOCI to the country
team took place in line with the plan established for
the transition.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the entire
ONOCI team, including the military and civilian
personnel, for their dedication and service.

02/06/2017

comprehensive briefing this afternoon. As this is
likely to be our last opportunity to take the f loor on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI),
we would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the valuable efforts and important work
of the mission over the past 13 years and to pay tribute
to the women and men who have served in that mission
over the years. I thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her leadership and personal
commitment during this important last and final phase.
Today is a day of transition for Côte d’Ivoire. We
are gathered here this afternoon to discuss the closing
of a peacekeeping mission, while only a few short hours
ago Côte d’Ivoire was elected to serve on the Security
Council. I congratulate Minister Marcel Amon-Tanoh
and his team here in New York on their election this
morning and we look forward to working with them
next year in the Council.
We welcome the continued progress of peace and
security in Côte d’Ivoire. The closing of UNOCI at the
end of the month represents an important milestone
and a new chapter in the history of the country. As the
country begins to chart its way forward, I would like
to make three points.
First of all, while we have many reasons to
celebrate, this is not the end of the road for Côte
d’Ivoire as it works to consolidate a stable and secure
society for all Ivorians. It is important that we pay
attention to the latest developments on the ground, in
particular the second incidence of mutiny by soldiers,
which occurred last month. Those developments
are serious and demand a serious response. They
underline the clear need for the Government to carry
out meaningful reform of the security sector, including
restructuring forces and enhancing cohesion,
discipline and accountability. A reformed security
sector will help build the population’s confidence in
the security institutions.

(spoke in English)

In addition, women’s participation is of paramount
importance to fostering sustainable and inclusive
peace. The final report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/89) illustrates the potential for the increased
participation of women in the political process, and we
urge the United Nations country team to contribute to
ensuring the participation of women and youth in the
transition process.

Let me begin by thanking the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Mindaoudou, for her

Secondly, as UNOCI closes its mission, there
is a need for continued international engagement.

Mr. Skau (Sweden) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, and your
team on assuming the presidency. We wish you great
success in your work. I also wish to thank our friends
from Uruguay for their exemplary work last month.

12/17

17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

It is important that Côte d’Ivoire’s partners provide
ongoing support to the Government’s efforts to sustain
peace and safeguard the investments already made
in a sustainable future. The African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States have
played a key role in achieving a successful outcome
to the Ivorian peace process. Going forward, regional
actors will continue to have an essential role to play.
Thirdly, regarding the transition from UNOCI
to the United Nations country team, we welcome the
robust transition plan developed by the United Nations
and agreed with the Government at the end of last year,
but we note that the closing of UNOCI means that the
United Nations presence in the country will face a
financial cliff, which jeopardizes the sustainability
of the gains achieved. We believe that the United
Nations can do even better in ensuring that transitions
in general are transformative and forward-looking
processes. More systematic and integrated work across
the United Nations system is needed sooner. We have
a joint responsibility to ensure that United Nations
country teams have that capability.
In conclusion, I would like to join the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
in
commending the Government and the people of Côte
d’Ivoire for their resilience and their efforts to restore
peace and stability to their country, with the support of
the international community. The closure of the UNOCI
mission underlines the remarkable journey the country
has made since 2004. The international community
must now continue to support the Government and the
people of Côte d’Ivoire as they work to build a peaceful,
equitable and prosperous country for all Ivorians.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I too want to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Aïchatou Mindaoudou for her comprehensive briefing.
Since this is the last briefing on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) in this Chamber,
I would like to take this opportunity to convey our
sincere appreciation to the mission’s leadership and
personnel for their contribution. Ukraine prides itself
on playing an active role in UNOCI.
On 30 June, the UNOCI mandate will end on a
high note, signifying the successful completion of the
United Nations peacekeeping phase in Côte d’Ivoire.
Many efforts and resources have been invested in the
stabilization of the country. As we can see today, they
have produced encouraging results. The prospects

S/PV.7957

for Cote d’Ivoire appear promising. Significant
progress has been achieved in restoring State authority
throughout the country, rebuilding the security sector
and promoting national cohesion and reconciliation.
Moreover, we see a country that has been entrusted
by the entire United Nations membership to be in the
Security Council not as a country under its agenda, but
rather as an elected member. I therefore want to take
this opportunity to congratulate Minister Amon-Tanoh
on the successful outcome of Cote d’Ivoire’s
campaign in the Security Council. Next month,
Côte d’Ivoire will also host a major international
event — the summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation — which is another sign of the trust and
respect of the international community.
Côte d’Ivoire is now at peace, but many chronic
problems still have to be addressed. That requires a
long-term action plan involving national actors, the
United Nations, the African Union and other relevant
stakeholders. The potential threats to national stability
should be no longer perceived solely in terms of hard
security, but rather in terms of socioeconomic impact.
The recent mutinies in the country therefore require the
country’s leadership to redouble its efforts to turn peace
into concrete dividends for all its citizens. Ukraine is
committed to further supporting Cote d’Ivoire along
that road — both in the Council and beyond.
Mr. Gee (United States): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
briefing. I also join others in welcoming the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire to the Security
Council and congratulating him on his country’s
election, today, as a non-permanent member. We also
congratulate the other new members elected today
and look forward to working with all new members
next year.
It is a momentous occasion when a peacekeeping
mission can close after having successfully completed
its work to stabilize and support a country emerging
from conf lict. We applaud the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, her staff and all the staff of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
who have contributed to the mission over its 13 years.
In just four weeks UNOCI will shut its door for
good, bringing to an end a mission that provided
critical support during the 2003 peace agreement and
the 2010 political crisis. UNOCI supported efforts to
protect civilians, promote good governance, human

17-1573513/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

rights, security sector reform and humanitarian
assistance. Côte d’Ivoire is a success story and a
model of how peacekeeping can benefit a country if its
Government is committed to overcoming conf lict and
restoring peace.
We look forward to seeing the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire maintain that positive momentum and
cement the peace and security that has taken root with
the support of the international community. Despite
significant progress on key reforms, recent events
have shown that challenges remain. The January and
May mutinies in the armed forces over pay grievances
resulted in the disruption of commerce, the closure of
schools and increased civilian insecurity. The mutinies
and accompanying protests also led to scores of injuries
and several fatalities in confrontations with authorities.
We urge the Government to work transparently,
inclusively and without delay to accelerate and deepen
efforts to reform the security sector, including by
shaping a clear structure and purpose for the military
based on the threats Côte d’Ivoire faces.
Finally, as we approach the end of UNOCI, we know
that smart planning between a mission in transition,
the Government, other international partners and a
United Nations country team has been essential during
the handover of mission tasks. In Côte d’Ivoire, a high
level of cooperation in planning for the future led to
the smooth transition happening today. We encourage
the United Nations to institutionalize lessons learned
and apply them to other missions in transition, such
as those in Liberia and Haiti. We also encourage other
countries hosting peacekeeping missions to recognize
the importance of strong cooperation between
the Government and the United Nations without
impediments to movement and access in performing
the missions’ mandated tasks.
Once again, we congratulate all who worked
together to bring peace and stability to Côte d’Ivoire
over these past years.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and wish you a successful term.
Our delegation also welcomes His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire to the
Chamber and congratulates his country on its election
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
We are looking forward to working with his delegation
and wish his country every success.
14/17

02/06/2017

My delegation would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mindaoudou
for her final update on the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). I join others in congratulating
her for her outstanding and courageous leadership in
fulfilling the mission’s mandate.
We welcome the successful termination of UNOCI
after 13 years of dedicated service for the cause of
peace. The success of UNOCI in bringing stability to the
country is the shared achievement of the Government
and the people of Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations, the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries.
The role of regional organizations — especially the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the International Organization of la
Francophonie — has also been significant in fulfilling
the mandate. Kazakhstan is proud to be part of that
process as a country that sent military observers to
Côte d’Ivoire.
We commend the Government of Côte d’Ivoire for
the remarkable progress we are seeing in the country,
which is a clear demonstration of its desire to fully
own the future course of its progress. UNOCI has
many lessons to teach future peacekeeping operations.
We acknowledge Côte d’Ivoire’s positive steps towards
transferring its national institutional framework
and response against transnational organized crime
threats, including terrorism. The gains achieved must
continue to overcome the remaining challenges by
fostering national dialogue and political reconciliation.
Focus should be given to social cohesion, weapons
management, defence, capacity-building, security
and law enforcement, fighting sexual violence and
protecting children.
To reinforce all these measures means having
implementation partners and meeting resource
requirements for supporting the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire in delivering on expectations. We therefore
call for international assistance and necessary support
for the Government and the United Nations country
team. We look forward to a productive and fruitful
cooperation with Côte d’Ivoire as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
First of all, I would like to thank the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Marcel
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

Amon-Tanoh, for his presence. It is indeed a privilege
for us to have him in the Security Council Chamber
this afternoon.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire and Head
of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI), Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, for the updated
information she has just presented as well as for her
excellent leadership. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate all her predecessors and
the civilian and military personnel of UNOCI for their
commitment to peace and stability in Côte d’Ivoire. We
are grateful for and acknowledge their work done over
the years as well as UNOCI’s contribution in terms of
lessons learned, which are an important contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We commend the countries, regional and
multilateral organizations, including the African
Union and the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations agencies and country teams, and
all those countries that contributed military and police
contingents that assisted day after day in bringing
peace to this kindred country. Without the cooperation
and work of these organizations, the objectives of
UNOCI would have been difficult to achieve. Proof of
this is the certification of the 2010 election results by
the African Union, at the request of Côte d’Ivoire, and
the peace agreements signed through that organization.
Bolivia hails the people and the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire and encourages their efforts towards national
dialogue, peacebuilding, political reconciliation,
disarmament and the reintegration of ex-combatants
into society. The international community must
continue its work of cooperation, paving the way for
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
in Côte d’Ivoire with full respect for its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
We commend the country for its economic growth,
which has been remarkable. We acknowledge the
efforts of the President, the Government and the people
of Côte d’Ivoire in succesfully consolidating a stable
political environment with three elections that have
taken place peacefully and for the progress they have
made in the process of reforming the security sector
and in rebuilding the military.
We are encouraged to learn that the stakeholders
believe that the peace process in Cote d’Ivoire is
irreversible. We see success in the peace process as

S/PV.7957

an opportunity for the Security Council to use the
example and experience of our Ivorian brothers and
sisters, whose witness and knowledge should enrich
us, in order to do everything we can to promote a just,
honourable and lasting peace for all.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the f loor to the Minister for Foreign
Relations of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): On behalf of the President of the Republic of
Côte d’Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
and the Ivorian Government, I wish every success to
the Bolivian presidency of the Security Council and
pay tribute to Uruguay for the effective way in which
it steered the deliberations of this important body
last month.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Council on this occasion
of historic importance to my country and the
Organization. Indeed, rare are the moments when the
success of a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
such as that which brings us together today around the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI),
has been celebrated in the Chamber.
This is an opportune time for me to pay tribute
to Secretaries-General Kofi Annan and Ban Ki-moon,
who through their actions made a major contribution
to resolving the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire. I would also
like to pay tribute to the current Secretary-General
and thank him for his support for my country in his
previous functions and for the special attention that he
has continued to pay to Côte d’Ivoire since his election.
Our thanks also go to all the Member States that served
on the Security Council during the crisis in my country
and to all those that have made their troops available
to UNOCI. In particular, I would like to pay tribute to
those soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for the
return of peace to Côte d’Ivoire.
Today’s celebration is of very special importance
for us as it coincides with my country’s election this
morning as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for the 2018-2019 term. This is a symbolic
moment, and we place great hopes on the lessons and
experience drawn by Côte d’Ivoire from the 13 years
of UNOCI’s presence in my country and which will,

17-1573515/17

S/PV.7957

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

in the course of our mandate in the Security Council,
provide an example for other countries to follow.
The meetings I have had with all the States Members
of the United Nations over the past few months, and
especially the past three weeks, have enabled us to
share their expectations. We are confirmed in our
decision to work within the Security Council in order
to come up with coherent collective responses to the
global challenges of our time through dialogue and
mutual respect. I thank everyone for the kind words
expressed to my country and for the welcome that
was extended to us on our candidacy and thus our
election to the Council. Allow me, in turn, to express
to the Council and all the other States Members of
our Organization the gratitude of the President, the
Government and the nation of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Time will certainly allow us to further clarify the
elements that have led to the success of UNOCI. For
the time being, we can rightly stress that the success
of UNOCI arises from the convergence of several
factors, including the political will and high sense of
responsibility of the President of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire, which have put the State and its resources
at the service of peace in its country. It is also due
to the exceptional synergy between UNOCI and
the Government and to the unity and resolve of the
Security Council and the international community,
which have facilitated the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions in all confidence. I would also
cite the strong human relations between the President
of the Republic and the various Secretaries-General
of the United Nations, the good relations established
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Government, and the high quality of the
Special Representatives appointed by the various
Secretaries-General to Côte d’Ivoire. In that regard, I
pay special and well-deserved tribute to Mrs Aïchatou
Mindaoudou for her outstanding contribution to peace
in my country and to the success of UNOCI.
UNOCI leaves behind a stable and peaceful
country endowed with strong and modern institutions,
and whose economic dynamism, despite the difficult
context of the cocoa market, allows the Government
to make significant progress every day in fighting
poverty and creating opportunities for its young people.
Nonetheless, we are aware of the challenges ahead in
the process of establishing stability and peace in our
country once and for all. These include completing
16/17

02/06/2017

the construction of a genuinely homogeneous and
republican national army. This process has been
somewhat unsettled of late by ill-tempered movements
of veterans claiming their bonuses. After the final
settlement of this issue by the Government and the
adoption of strong measures for the benefit of the
armed and security forces as a whole, ex-combatants
no longer have any objective reason to disturb the
tranquility of the Ivorians and the forward movement
of the country.
While they do not call into question the quality of
my country’s emergence from crisis or its important
achievements, these ill-tempered movements remind
us, as I said in February last year in this Chamber
(see S/PV.7880), of the need to accelerate the reform
of the security sector and the professionalization of
the national army in order to identify and give several
thousand soldiers a republican identity and ethos. Our
Government is working to that end through the full
implementation of the Military Planning Law, whose
adoption has been well received by professional soldiers.
The success of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire and its closure will not slow down the
pace of the Government’s reforms. On the contrary,
emphasis will be placed, inter alia, on consolidating the
rule of law, strengthening the framework for combating
impunity, and accelerating the appropriation of national
reconciliation and social cohesion by the Ivorian
people. Moreover, the President of the Republic is
pursuing his policy of extending his hand and listening
to the opposition, in the interests of the country.
As may well be imagined, the cooperation that
binds my country to the United Nations will survive
the closure of UNOCI and remain an important
vehicle for the international community’s support to
the Ivorian people. To that end, we hope that more
resources will be allocated to the country team so that
it can fulfil its mandate in better conditions. At the
same time, we call on our bilateral and multilateral
partners to maintain their commitment to our country
and to help us face the major challenges facing all
nations today. Our friends must therefore remain
more than ever mobilized alongside us in order to win
together our tireless battles against poverty and youth
unemployment, which are our Government’s priorities.
The success of UNOCI is the happy end to a
painful sequence in the history of my country. It
must not make us forget that thousands of Ivorians
17-15735

02/06/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

have lost their lives so that the values of peace, unity,
conviviality and democracy might triumph in our
country. These women and men, torn from the bosoms
of their families, and who will miss out on the work of
perfecting our nation, forbid us forever to allow new
tragedies to visit our country.

S/PV.7957

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Security
Council of the determination of the Ivorian people to
defend and preserve the peace so dearly won, with the
support of the friends of Côte d’Ivoire.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

17-1573517/17
