A /71/PV.95

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

95th plenary meeting

Monday, 28 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Bhattarai
(Nepal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/71/764/Add.8)
The Acting President: Before proceeding, in
keeping with the established practice, I would like
to draw the attention of the General Assembly to
document A/71/764/Add.8, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communication contained
in document A/71/764/Add.7, Libya has made the
payments necessary to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/71/764/Add.8?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 111
Notification by the Secretary-General under
Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/300)
The Acting President: As members are aware, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 12, paragraph

2, of the Charter of the United Nations and with the
consent of the Security Council, the Secretary-General
is mandated to notify the General Assembly of matters
relative to the maintenance of international peace
and security that are being dealt with by the Security
Council and of matters with which the Council has
ceased to deal. In that connection, the General Assembly
has before it a note by the Secretary-General issued as
document A/71/300.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of
that document?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 111?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 28
Report of the Security Council
Report of the Security Council (A/71/2)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the President of the Security Council, His Excellency
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, to introduce
the report of the Security Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt), President of the Security
Council: I would like to thank the President for
organizing today’s meeting. As President of the
Security Council for the month of August, it is my
honour to introduce the annual report of the Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-27002 (E)

*1727002*

A/71/PV.95

(A/71/2), which covers the period from 1 August 2015 to
31 December 2016.
I extend my thanks to the delegation of Japan,
which, as President of the Security Council in July
2016, prepared the introduction of the report. Members
of the Council also contributed to the preparation of
the report. I also extend my thanks to the Secretariat
for compiling the rest of the report, and to all those
involved in producing it.
The present report incorporates changes mandated
in the note by the President dated 10 December 2015
(S/2015/944). The decision took into account the views
of the Member States expressed during the debate on the
agenda item entitled “Report of the Security Council”
at the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly (see
A/70/PV.51) and in the thematic debates of the Security
Council on its working methods, as well as during the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform. Thereafter, the period of coverage for all future
reports shall be from 1 January to 31 December.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council, with the support of the United
Nations membership, has sought to actively discharge
its responsibilities, while urging the peaceful resolution
of conflicts and undertaking a series of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities all over the world.
During the period under review, which covered
17 months due to the transition to the new reporting
framework, the Council adopted 102 resolutions and
31 presidential statements, and issued 150 statements
to the press. The Council held 356 formal meetings, of
which 331 were public.
The situation in Africa remained a focus of the
Council. Frequent meetings were held on Burundi, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Sudan, and South Sudan. The situation
in the Middle East figured prominently on the Council’s
agenda as well. Meetings were held on the situation
in Libya, Syria, Iraq and Yemen, the Palestinian
question, the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force and Lebanon. The Council also regularly
monitored the situation in Afghanistan. The Council
periodically considered the situation in and around
Ukraine and continued to monitor the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
2/9

28/08/2017

The Council conducted five missions to Africa,
which included Burundi in January; Guinea-Bissau,
Mali and Senegal in March; Somalia and Kenya in
May; South Sudan in September; and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Angola in November 2015.
The Council also visited African Union headquarters
in Addis Ababa during its missions in January and
September 2015, and the League of Arab States in
Cairo in May 2015.
The Council established the United Nations Mission
in Colombia in January 2016 by resolution 2261 (2016).
In the same period, two missions — the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia — were reaching the final stages of
their deployment.
Thematic, general and cross-cutting issues remained
a priority for the Council, including non-proliferation,
threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, children and armed conflict, women and
peace and security, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding, security sector reform, sanctions,
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, peace and security in
Africa and the rule of law. The Council convened two
annual open debates on its working methods. After the
second debate, in July 2016 (see S/PV.7740), the Council
and interested delegations from the wider membership,
looked at the implementation of note S/2010/507 and
other relevant notes to identify successful practices as
well as possible shortcomings, and considered making
necessary adjustments. The Informal Working Group
on Documentation and other Procedural Questions
started deliberations on the specific ideas and proposals
made at the open debate, and is currently working to
finalize its work on reviewing and updating note 507.
The Council considered the work of the
International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and continued to monitor situations that it had
referred to the International Criminal Court concerning
the situation in Darfur and Libya.
Following six rounds of straw polls, the first of
which was held in July 2016, the Council adopted by
acclamation resolution 2311 (2016), which recommended
to the General Assembly that Mr. António Guterres be
appointed Secretary-General of the United Nations for
a term of office from 1 January 2017 to 31 December
2021. On 14 December, the Council adopted by
17-27002

28/08/2017

acclamation resolution 2324 (2016), paying tribute to
outgoing Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
I look forward to this morning’s discussion of the
report by Member States and will convey the views of
members of the General Assembly to my colleagues in
the Security Council.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): Chile welcomes the submission of the latest
report of the Security Council (A/71/2), as it contributes
to the needed transparency and accountability of the
Council to the Assembly regarding decisions and
measures adopted for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
We highlight section 3, part III, entitled, “Other
matters considered by the Security Council”, which
sets forth its recommendation for the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General and the new
process for doing so — with a summary of meetings,
consulations, resolutions and communications of
the Council in that regard. Although we would have
appreciated a more analytic approach in this area,
the report we have before us today is an important
public record for following-up on the selection and
appointment process and on the candidates presented,
thereby setting a precedent for future reports and, in that
way, contributing to the transparency of information
within the system as well as guaranteeing the standards
implemented and improvement of the system, as seen
in starting the process of the joint letter from the
respective Presidents of the Assembly and the Council
of 15 December 2015 (A/70/623) pursuant to the criteria
set forth in resolution 69/321.
With regard to the question of application of the
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2010/507, we note with interest the
reference to the note by the President of the Security
Council contained in document S/2016/619, on measures
to facilitate the preparation of newly elected members
and to improve the process of selection and preparation
of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, a matter that we
urge continue to be addressed when note 507 is updated.
The annual report should be a useful tool for
accountability with respect to the working methods of
the Council, and therefore a section of the report should
be dedicated to this subject, which should include
a record of the progress made in implementing the
notes by the President and other working methods, as
recommended by Member States and the Accountability

A/71/PV.95

Coherence and Transparency group, of which Chile is
member. As is the case with the report we are discussing
today, we hope that future Council reports will continue
to reflect the progress and challenges faced by the
Council with regard to its working methods, including
improved use of the instruments at its disposal to
ensure transparency and legitimacy in its work, such as
recapitulative meetings, which is an important formal
tool at the disposal of non-permanent members that, in
our judgment, is poorly utilized.
Finally, we urge that the Council’s decisions on
peacekeeping under resolution 70/262 be addressed
and reflected in greater detail in future reports of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation welcomes the convening of today’s
meeting to discuss the annual report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly for the period from
1 August 2015 to 31 December 2016 (A/71/2).
Cuba regrets that, as in previous years, the report
is merely a descriptive account of meetings, activities
and decisions of the Council, whereas the vast majority
of the States Members of the United Nations have
reiterated the need for an annual report on the work of
the Security Council that is exhaustive and analytical.
How much longer will we have to wait for this formal
and insubstantial procedure to become an exercise of
genuine accountability to the General Assembly that
allows all Member States to assess the causes and
implications of actions undertaken by the Security
Council? We reiterate that, in carrying out the functions
incumbent upon it as part of its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
under the Charter of the United Nations, the Security
Council acts in the name of all Member States. As
such, the Council must comply with the obligation
established in Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter to
submit special reports on its work for consideration by
the General Assembly.
Cuba reiterates its concern about the lack of
transparency and democracy in the Security Council.
While there has been an increase during the period
under review in the number of public meetings
and an unprecedented process of consultation and
exchanges with Member States during the selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General, the Council
continues to tend to work fundamentally in private

17-270023/9

A/71/PV.95

and to make decisions without taking into account the
concerns of non-permanent members.
Urgent changes in the working methods of the
Security Council that allow true participation by all its
members in its work and in the decision-making process
are required. That includes formalizing its rules of
procedure, which have remained provisional for over 70
years. Accordingly, Cuba once again proposes that the
closed-door consultations in the Security Council be the
exception; that its membership be extended in the two
categories — permanent and non-permanent — without
selective or discriminatory criteria, with the aim of
finding a remedy for the insufficient representation of
developing countries in the Council; and that there no
longer exist the obsolete and undemocratic right to veto.
Besides changes in the working methods and the
composition of the members of the Security Council,
the Council should adjust its functions to the mandate
established in the Charter and observe all General
Assembly resolutions, the main body for deliberation,
policymaking and representation in the United Nations.
The trend of the Security Council to consider issues
and assume functions that do not belong to it, thereby
usurping the role assigned to other organs, particularly
the General Assembly, must end. We stress the need for
an appropriate balance between the principal organs of
the United Nations, in accordance with the Charter.
No reform of the United Nations, including the
one currently being promoted, will be effective or
real without a thorough process of reform of the
Security Council. What is urgently needed is a truly
transparent, representative, democratic and efficient
Security Council.
Ms. Jáquez Huacuja (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Transparency and accountability in the relations
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, in accordance with the Assembly’s powers
set forth in Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations, are indispensable principles for the
Council’s communication with the other members of the
Organization. Strengthening the relationship between
the General Assembly and the Security Council is a key
and unequivocal need to address global challenges in
the maintenance of international peace and security in
an efficient and coordinated manner.
Although the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly in recent years has improved
substantially, there are areas where further progress
4/9

28/08/2017

is required. For example, the content of the report
should be less descriptive and should, on the contrary,
focus on encouraging a genuine exercise of reflection
by the General Assembly. It would be very useful to
have special reports submitted to the General Assembly
on a thematic basis on issues of international concern
affecting the maintenance of international peace
and security. Moreover, it would also be desirable for
the report to include a section on draft resolutions
or Council measures that were voted on and on
which no agreement was reached in order to promote
greater accountability in maintaining international
peacekeeping and security.
On that preceding point, Mexico, together with
France, has been actively promoting a voluntary
restriction of the use of the veto by the permanent
members of the Security Council in cases of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Both countries
have been working together for more than two years to
maintain momentum in the process, which we hope will
result in the establishment of a voluntary and collective
agreement among the five permanent members of the
Council to achieve this goal.
The veto is not a privilege, but a responsibility of
permanent members in maintaining international peace
and security. We acknowledge that the only viable
and realistic possibility for restricting its use lies in
its regulation through the identification of exceptions.
Therefore, we invite countries that have not yet done
so, including the permanent members of the Council, to
join in supporting this Franco-Mexican initiative.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council
addresses issues of interest to the international
community and to Mexico, through public and
open debates, not only as a way to contribute to
inclusion and interaction between the Council and
the rest of the membership, but also as a tool to
contribute to transparency, legitimacy and to promote
greater effectiveness.
In the case of peacekeeping operations, as a
troop-contributing country, Mexico is convinced that
the constant adaptation of operations to respond to
new challenges and paradigms related to maintaining
international peace and security remains the United
Nations most visible and emblematic political tool to
address these challenges.
A clear example in that regard is the conclusion
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
17-27002

28/08/2017

to make way for the new United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. That points to a favourable
development of the situation in that country and
demonstrates the important efforts being made jointly
by the United Nations and the Government of Haiti to
achieve stability and security in the country, which will
guarantee the basis for a sustainable and lasting peace
and ensure that Haiti effectively meets the Sustainable
Development Goals. Similarly, we note the coordination
between the Security Council and the Government
of Colombia and the support of the international
community for the peace process in that country, which
is an example of political will and collaboration that we
should all bear in mind.
Finally, Mexico welcomes the attention accorded by
the Security Council to the paradigm shift represented
by the concept of sustainable peace, the implementation
of which will redirect the work of the United Nations
in a coherent and cross-cutting way throughout
the Organization towards a more sophisticated and
peace-oriented approach by building capacities and
tools to address conflicts in every phase and prevent
conflicts by focusing on their causes. Mexico chairs
the Group of Friends of Sustaining Peace, which brings
together 36 countries from different regions that share
an interest in coordinating efforts to continue reflecting
on a cross-cutting and more long-term understanding
and implementation of the concept of sustainable peace
in the United Nations.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): We thank the members of
the Security Council and the Secretariat for producing
the annual report of the Security Council (A/71/2). I
also thank the President of the Security Council, the
Permanent Representative of Egypt, for presenting the
report earlier this morning.
The annual debate on the report of the Security
Council has become a ritual, and by describing this
discussion as a ritual it is not my intention to diminish
its importance. Rituals are indeed important in
organizations, especially in our Organization. From
Singapore’s point of view, this annual debate is an
opportunity for United Nations Members to comment
on the work of the Security Council. This annual
debate establishes the important point that there is a
link between the work of the General Assembly and the
Security Council and that the Security Council does not
work in isolation.

A/71/PV.95

I also wish to express my disappointment about
the fact that the decision to schedule this debate today
was made very late. Also, the report was finalized and
circulated very late. This gives Member States very little
time to prepare for a serious and substantive debate. I
said earlier that this debate has become a ritual, but we
have to make this a meaningful ritual. We should give
members enough time to study the documents so that
they can come prepared to contribute constructively. If
Member States are not given adequate time, this will
indeed become a meaningless ritual, and that surely is
not our intention, either in the General Assembly or in
the Security Council.
Let me now make some comments on the substance
of the report.
In our view, the report provides a good overview
of the activities of the Council for the period from
1 August 2015 to 31 December 2016. We welcome the
move to align the report with the calendar year. We
would like to make some suggestions to improve the
content of the report so that it can aid Council members,
as well as the wider membership and the international
community, in assessing the work of the Council and
its effectiveness in addressing threats to international
peace and security.
First, the annual report could be more analytical
and informative. Instead of simply and factually
listing the number of meetings held, the resolutions
and statements adopted and the number of missions
organized, we think that more effort should be made
towards a more analytical narrative. For example, how
much of the Council’s time during the reporting period
was spent on which subjects? How many products were
issued on which topics? Of each new resolution adopted,
to what extent were its provisions implemented?
It would also be useful to have a summary of the
results and outcomes achieved, if any at all, during the
reporting period. One way could be to compare the
situations at the beginning and the end of the reporting
period for each section of the report. What were the
key developments, for example? What impact did the
102 Council resolutions, the 31 presidential statements
and 150 press statements have? The Council’s mandate
costs the General Assembly between $7 and $8 billion
each year. What were the key substantive outcomes of
that expenditure on the Council’s decisions? Have its
operations brought about tangible improvements on the
ground? At least, what is our assessment of the progress

17-270025/9

A/71/PV.95

made in terms of improving the situation on the ground?
The General Assembly has a right to know, and the
international community has a right to know. We would
encourage greater thought to be given to indicators and
benchmarks for the Council’s performance in fulfilling
its responsibility for addressing threats to international
peace and security.
Secondly, the annual report should be more complete
and more comprehensive. Monthly assessment reports
should be completed and circulated by every Security
Council President as part of the process of finalizing
the annual report. Paragraph 8 of the report states that
those monthly assessments can be found online. We
note that for the reporting period, only five have been
uploaded, and reports from 12 members of the Council,
including four permanent members, are still missing.
Why is that? As we work to strive for more openness
and transparency in the work of the United Nations, we
find it surprising that some countries that have had the
privilege of serving on the Council — including some
whose terms have expired — have not yet published the
assessments of their presidencies.
Thirdly, on a broader level, we think that the annual
report could be improved by aligning it better with
the repertoire. The repertoire provides institutional
memory for the Council’s evolving practice. There
would certainly be greater utility in aligning the
calendars of those two documents and leveraging the
historical perspective that the repertoire can give the
annual report. It would give the membership a better
sense of how mandates have evolved, a grasp of how
the Council has responded to particular situations and
a way to assess the Council’s impact and effectiveness
over time.
To that end, we are pleased to note that the Council
is reviewing and updating presidential note S/2010/507
to include new proposals and ideas on how it can
improve its work. We look forward to seeing it adopted
and circulated as soon as possible. The issue of the
Council’s working methods, particularly the ongoing
efforts to improve transparency and effectiveness, is
an important one for many countries, especially small
States. We hope that the Council members will take
this task seriously and continue working to make the
Council more open, transparent, efficient and effective.
Lastly, we note from the annual report that not all
the Council’s subsidiary bodies have convened formal
meetings. In our view, they should all hold at least one
6/9

28/08/2017

formal meeting a year. The purpose of such meetings is
to give each subsidiary body a chance to report to the
wider United Nations membership on the outcome of its
work during the year. That in turn, we believe, would
enhance the transparency of the Council’s work.
The annual report of the Security Council, and
today’s plenary meeting, are important avenues
whereby the wider United Nations membership can
provide its input and views on the Council’s work. We
have submitted our suggestions with the aim of helping
to improve the transparency and openness of that work.
In turn, we hope that will help to promote greater
accountability and more effective action on the part of
the Security Council. We hope that Council members
listening to this debate will work to improve the content
and format of the annual report next year. Improving
its openness and transparency should be a common
endeavour that we should all strive for, and we should
all strive to make this annual ritual a meaningful and
substantive one.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to express my thanks for the presentation
of the report (A/71/2) on the past 17 months of the
work of the Security Council, which from now on
will become an actual annual report that I believe will
provide us with a more in-depth analysis of its content.
The report that the Egyptian presidency of the Council
presented to us today has begun to take account of the
recommendations of many Member States as well as
the conclusions reached in meetings and debates on
the Council’s working methods as they relate to the
content of the report, which is moving towards the
greater degree of transparency, accountability and
openness that we need in this presentation, one that is
so important to the General Assembly. However, in the
coming years, we hope that there will be more analysis
and less description, with elements that will give
insight into the Council’s fundamental task of seeking
and maintaining peace and security, as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations.
Where the report concerns my country, I would
like to express Colombia’s thanks for the Security
Council’s continuing support to our peace process
through the United Nations Mission in Colombia,
which is discussed in the report, and to the rest of the
process, which I am sure will be included in the next
Security Council report with regard to the progress of
the first and second special missions in 2017. Security
Council resolution 2307 (2016) and the special political
17-27002

28/08/2017

mission approved in July are concrete examples of the
results of the Council’s determined efforts for peace.
We hope that an analysis of this in the next annual
report will be helpful to other special political missions
and peacekeeping operations. Once again, we thank the
Security Council for today’s presentation and we hope
that in the next few years to seeing our needs, as Member
States, covered with greater transparency, analysis and
commitment to the purpose that we all share.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the report of the Security Council contained in
document A/71/2?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 28?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/71/L.83)
The Acting President: Before proceeding further,
I would like to make the following corrections to draft
resolution A/71/L.83 in order to revert to language that
was agreed on during the negotiations.
In the first line of operative paragraph 7, the
word “intergovernmental” should be added before the
words “High-level Conference”. Operative paragraph
8 (a) should be combined with operative paragraph 8
to form a single paragraph that will then read “Invites
other relevant stakeholders”, with the rest continuing.
Subsequently, paragraph 8 (b) will be renumbered
to read 8 (a). Also, the word “invites” will be added
before the words “non-governmental organizations”.
Furthermore, the word “intergovernmental” will be
added before the words “high-level conference”. The
paragraph will read:
“Invites non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council to register with the Secretariat in order

A/71/PV.95

to participate in the intergovernmental highlevel conference.”
Paragraph 9 will be renumbered to read 8 (b), and
the subsequent paragraphs will be renumbered. In the
new paragraph 8 (b), the word “proposed” will be added
to the second-to-last line so that it reads: “to submit the
proposed list to Member States”, and so forth.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/71/L.83, entitled “Second Highlevel United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation”, as orally corrected.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.83, as
orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/71/L.83, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 71/318).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Kimmel (United States of America): The
United States joined in the consensus adoption of
resolution 71/318, which establishes the modalities
for the Second High-level United Nations Conference
on South-South Cooperation. We would like to thank
Argentina for its generous offer to cover associated
costs for the planned 2019 Conference in Buenos Aires.
We would like to also take this opportunity,
however, to briefly explain our position on key issues,
as highlighted during the negotiation process, and in
line with reform efforts that the Secretary-General and
Member States are currently undertaking.
These key issues deal with a central reform
question: the discussion of how the United Nations
should best deploy its limited resources to meet the
critical and expanding needs of the world. We continue
to believe that our priority must be on improving
people’s lives. We, as Member States, must do better in
our efforts to curb spending on meetings, conferences
and unproductive exercises. Throughout the negotiation
process we expressed serious concerns about two items
in the resolution that we do not believe are the most
efficient use of our limited resources.

17-270027/9

A/71/PV.95

An intergovernmental negotiation for an agreed
outcome and the possibility of annual meetings on the
High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation
will both require spending United Nations and Member
State resources on negotiations that could otherwise
be diverted to people in need in developing countries.
We believe that these are valid concerns in light of the
Secretary-General’s reform initiative, the aim of which
is to promote efficiency, effectiveness and results in all
United Nations activities.
In addition we believe that the transparency and
accountability of the United Nations in promoting
South-South cooperation is very important. We
welcome efforts to make United Nations South-South
cooperation bureaucracies more efficient, effective,
transparent and accountable, as called for in last year’s
resolution 70/222.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Adonia Ayebare of Uganda, President of
the High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation,
for having skilfully laid out the complex consultations
on this important matter, as well as to the Bureau of
the High-Level Committee for their steadfast support
throughout. I also thank Member States for their
valuable contributions to reaching an agreement on
resolution 71/318.
The General Assembly has concluded this stage of
its consideration of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 106 (continued)
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/71/L.81)
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on draft resolution A/71/L.81, entitled
“Draft outcome document of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the appraisal of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.81?
Draft resolution A/71/L.81 was adopted (resolution
71/319).
8/9

28/08/2017

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): The European Union (EU)
and its member States welcome the adoption today
of resolution 71/319, transmitting the draft political
declaration on the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons for adoption at
the high-level meeting in September. The EU would first
like to commend the dedicated work of the Permanent
Representatives of Qatar and Belgium as co-facilitators
of the consultations that secured this positive result. The
draft political declaration constitutes a wide-ranging
basis for invigorated efforts to eliminate trafficking,
including by highlighting clear linkages with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, addressing
the demand that sustains it and ensuring support for
victims and respect for their human rights.
As the draft declaration underscores, action
is needed on many fronts, from implementing key
international instruments and developing national
strategies to the United Nations focusing on situations
of heightened vulnerability, including in conflict, and
ensuring its own procurement is free of trafficking.
Notwithstanding these positive elements, the
EU had hoped that the declaration would include
stronger references to recommendations made by the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking
in Persons. The EU believes that all relevant actors must
be mobilized to ensure a more effective implementation
of the Global Plan of Action, including Governments,
regional and international organizations, civil society,
national human rights institutions and the private
sector. In that regard we would have wished to see more
robust language on national human rights institutions
in the political declaration. Moreover, we do not
regard the final text relating to these institutions as a
compelling precedent.
The EU would also encourage all States members
of the United Nations to pay heed to the encouragement
included in the modalities resolution for the high-level
meeting to consider including in their delegations
representatives of national human rights institutions,
law enforcement, civil society, trafficking survivors
and the private sector.
17-27002

28/08/2017

In conclusion, I assure the Assembly that the EU
and its member States are determined to intensify our
contribution to global efforts to address the scourge
of trafficking, including through policy and funding
endeavours, and we look forward to a fruitful high-level
meeting in September and to bringing added impetus to
our collective efforts in this domain.
Mr. Wheeler (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. In our national capacity, I would like
to reinforce four points.
First, trafficking is a global problem that demands
a global response. In that regard, the United Kingdom
supports the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons and welcomes this political declaration. We
are especially pleased that the declaration articulates a
holistic response, makes linkages to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and includes a clear focus
on conflict. We are open to further discussion on how,
in practice, these measures are taken forward.
Secondly, we hope that Member States will
continue to engage with the experts. For example, the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group Against Trafficking
In Persons (ICAT) proposed that it be tasked to address
definitional issues. This practical recommendation
did not, unfortunately, make it into the final political
declaration. We hope that ideas such as these will be
revisited through upcoming processes.
Thirdly, the Plan of Action calls for improved
coordination. It is critical that we, as Member States,
continue to promote a more coherent response across all
three pillars of the United Nations. We look forward to

A/71/PV.95

being informed by the Secretary-General of his efforts.
We are open to ideas on how ICAT can be strengthened.
Fourthly, coherent action by the United Nations
is necessary but not sufficient. At the end of the day,
Member States themselves must take action on the
scourge of trafficking in persons. This in turn will be
dependent on political leadership. That is why my Prime
Minister will focus significant attention on human
trafficking, modern slavery and forced labour during
the high-level week of the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly. The United Kingdom hopes to
use the collective presence of world leaders to create a
sense of greater urgency on these issues. We hope that
this will generate momentum ahead of the high-level
meeting on the Global Plan of Action that will take
place the following week.
The Acting President: I would like to express
my sincere thanks to Ambassador Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani of Qatar and Ambassador Marc Pecsteen
de Buytswerve of Belgium, the co-facilitators of the
informal consultations, who demonstrated great ability
and patience in their conduct of the discussions and
complex negotiations on the draft outcome document.
I also thank Member States for their valuable
contributions to reaching an agreement on the draft
outcome document.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 106?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

17-270029/9
