S/PV.8949

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8949th meeting

Tuesday, 18 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Huitfeldt/Ms. Heimerback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Xhaçka
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Botchwey
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Ms. Zeya

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Protecting participation: addressing violence targeting women in peace and
security processes
Letter dated 10 January 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/22)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by a
compilation of annexes (S/2022/38) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

22-23296 (E)
*2223296*

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

18/01/2022

methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Protecting participation: addressing
violence targeting women in peace and
security processes

I wish to warmly welcome the ministers and other
high-level representatives. Their presence here today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.

Letter dated 10 January 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Norway
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/22)

I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Malta, Morocco, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal,
Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.

Ms. Bachelet: The Security Council has played a
vital role in the drive to ensure that peace is built by and
for women. Yet between 1992 and 2019, only 13 per cent
of negotiators, 6 per cent of mediators and 6 per cent of
signatories in major peace processes worldwide were
women. And that was before the pandemic struck and
before a wave of intensifying conflicts, undemocratic
political transitions and disastrous humanitarian
crises took hold in many societies, further reducing
women’s rights.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; Ms. Zarqa Yaftali, Executive Director
of the Women and Children Legal Research Foundation;
and Ms. Kaavya Asoka, Executive Director of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.

The situation that now faces women human rights
defenders and prospects for women’s full — not
tokenistic — participation in shaping and building
peace are vastly worse.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/22, which contains the text of a
letter dated 10 January 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Norway to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
2/33

That harms all of us. Women’s safe and meaningful
participation is necessary to ensure a fuller range of
action to bind society together and address not only the
root causes of conflict but also its full impact, including
gender-based violence and the use of sexual violence as
a weapon of war.
Implementing resolution 1325 (2000) requires
consistent policies for public recognition, effective
protection and vastly increased strategic, flexible,
sustainable and targeted financing for women’s civilsociety organizations, including women human rights
defenders, and it requires action to end the violence that
so frequently targets women and girls who seek to lead
movements for change.
In reality, barely 1 per cent of funding in fragile
or conflict-affected countries goes to women’s rights
organizations. The enabling environment that lies at
the heart of the women, peace and security agenda is
also largely absent.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

In 2020, my Office verified 35 killings of women
human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists
in seven conflict-affected countries where data could
be retrieved. That number, which is certainly an
undercount, surpassed the confirmed numbers of
killings in 2018 and 2019.
We have also documented patterns of attacks
against women working on gender equality, sexual and
reproductive health and rights, corruption, labour rights
and environmental and land issues. In every region, we
have seen women subjected to arrests and detention;
intimidation; sexual violence; and harassment via
smear campaigns. Intimidation and reprisals by State
and non-State actors against people who cooperate
with the United Nations also remain high, including in
countries on the Council’s agenda. Those human rights
violations significantly undermine global efforts to
prevent conflict and sustain peace because they deter
women from participation and leadership.
In Afghanistan, the de facto Cabinet and other key
forums, at the national and provincial levels, exclude
women. That heavily undermines their capacity to ensure
a durably peaceful future in which all have an equal
stake. Facing a humanitarian disaster of unprecedented
proportions, the country needs all its people to come
together. Instead, denial of the fundamental rights of
women and girls is massively damaging the economy
and the country as a whole.
In recent months, many Afghan women human
rights defenders, journalists, lawyers and judges
have been forced to flee or to go into hiding — often
after repeated threats. Many have lost all sources of
income. Afghan women have been excluded from
decision-making that affects their lives and families
and prevented from fully exercising their right to
participate in all spheres of civic and public life.
I urge the Security Council to ensure that
perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses
in Afghanistan — including against women and
girls — are held to account in order to enable conditions
for sustainable peace. I ask all States to use their
influence with the Taliban to encourage respect for
fundamental human rights.
I further call on States to create safe pathways and
resettlement programmes for Afghan women human
rights defenders and to immediately halt the deportation
of Afghan women who seek protection.

S/PV. 8949

It is also vital to maintain a strong human rights
presence and focus for all United Nations engagement in
Afghanistan, with strong advocacy and tangible support
for women human rights defenders and peacebuilders,
and for women’s human rights.
In the Sahel region, critical deficits in women’s
empowerment are clearly a factor in the complex
development, security and humanitarian crisis. Several
countries in the region are at the very bottom of the
United Nations Development Programme’s Gender
Inequality Index. Extremely violent armed-group
attacks also increase the threat of abductions, violence,
exploitation and abuse of women and girls, as well as
local closures of schools, particularly for girls.
I was therefore encouraged, during my recent
mission to the region, to hear senior members of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force
emphasizing the importance of the increased integration
of women into political, security and development
policies to address the crisis. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) will continue to support implementation of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force Compliance Framework to
address those issues, including obstacles to women’s
direct participation in the security forces. Ensuring
women’s presence in the armed forces will be helpful
on many levels, including that of fostering public trust.
In Myanmar, women human rights defenders have
long been a force for peace and inclusivity, including
at the forefront of resistance against military rule. But
many women’s civil-society groups have been forced
to shut down amid the violence that has gripped the
country since February last year. Women medical
workers, media workers, protesters, participants in
civil disobedience, activists on social media and those
providing food and shelter to people in need have been
targeted for assault and arbitrary detention. Women and
girls appear to number more than 2,100 of the estimated
10,533 people detained by the State Administration
Council and its affiliated armed elements between
February and November last year.
In contrast, Colombia’s 2016 Final Peace Agreement
was a global landmark in terms of women’s participation
and the inclusion of gender-specific measures. The
Truth Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace have also promoted women’s participation, and
the Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as

22-232963/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

18/01/2022

Missing has recognized women’s essential role in the
search for missing people.

protection in peace processes is also essential to a more
effective monitoring of results.

Nonetheless, the implementation of gender-specific
measures on issues such as land reform, political
participation and security guarantees — including
for women human rights defenders — and other
points of the agreement should be strengthened. I also
recommend greater efforts in Colombia to combat
continued conflict-related sexual violence and to
guarantee that the victims of such crimes are treated
with dignity and have access to adequate protection,
justice and reparation. That work will serve the cause
of justice and, therefore, peace.

In recent years, OHCHR has been strengthening
the gender perspective of United Nations investigative
bodies, providing training and guidance and
deploying dedicated gender and gender-based violence
experts. For example, the October 2021 report of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya documents
the disproportionate effect of the conflict — and the
proliferation of militias — on women, including the
emblematic killings of a woman political leader and a
woman journalist. It also highlights the repeated attempts
to silence prominent women through violence, including
through online incitement to violence, and the resulting
chilling impact on women’s engagement in civic space.
Those investigative efforts — including through the
deployment of dedicated capacities — require more
consistent and more effective financial resources.

At the heart of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions of the Council is the need for
strategies that create inclusive and safe participation
channels for women from all backgrounds, movements
and communities. Protection of their work, lives and
rights is central to that effort.
The international community must stand united
and push back against attempts to attack, silence and
criminalize women and their right to defend rights,
participate in decision-making and express dissenting
opinions. We also need to do more and better to provide
safe spaces for women human rights defenders to
interact with the Council and its subsidiary bodies,
without fear of retribution.
I am encouraged to see some States working to
mitigate reprisals against women peacebuilders who
engage with the Council, including tailored contingency
plans in coordination with United Nations peace
operations on the ground. I also applaud States that
provide support to women briefers who face retribution
as a result of their cooperation with the Council,
including technical, financial and advocacy assistance.
It would be valuable for the Security Council to
consider harmonizing approaches to ensure the safe
involvement of women in peace processes, as well
as their participation in the Council’s work. Going
forward, peace operation mandates could explicitly
include provisions for the protection of all civil-society
actors and United Nations interlocutors from threats
and reprisals, particularly women peacebuilders, as
is already the case for the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.
Strengthening the timely and disaggregated
collection of data on women’s participation and
4/33

Decisions on peace that do not reflect women’s
voices, realities and rights are not sustainable. There
must be clear advocacy for and significant investment
in women human rights defenders and peacebuilders:
removing obstacles such as the digital divide; expanding
financial support; and significantly increasing
accountability for attacks and intimidation. The work
of addressing discrimination, inequality, denials of
women’s civic space and gender-based violence should
also be viewed as a priority for building peace.
The President: I thank Ms. Bachelet for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Yaftali.
Ms. Yaftali: I would like to thank Norway for the
opportunity to address the Security Council today at
this critical moment for women in Afghanistan. I am
happy to be here once again, a year after I previously
addressed the Council (see S/2020/1084), although I am
sad and disappointed to share the pain, inhumanity and
violence that the women and the people of Afghanistan
are facing today.
One year ago, we thought that the peace talks
with the Taliban were being monitored by the world
and that, with the close collaboration with the United
States, the talks would lead to the formation of an
inclusive Government in which women and all other
groups would be able to participate meaningfully and
that the fundamental rights and freedoms of the people,
including women, would be protected.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8949

One year ago, on the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), I addressed the Council with
pride as I shared the achievements of Afghanistan’s
women over the past two decades. I told Council members
about the hundreds of thousands of educated women
who were Ministers, diplomats, judges, attorneys,
defence lawyer, athletes, artists, writers, journalists,
professors, business women, pilots and activists. I told
them how far we had come since the Taliban had last
been in power. I told them that Afghanistan society was
ready to see women lead the country into the future.

to the next news of the day. Meanwhile, Afghanistan’s
women wonder what has become of years and years
of promises.

However, I shared my fears then as well. I asked
the international community to protect our hard-won
gains involving women’s participation, which were the
result of international support and the product of the
innumerable, untold sacrifices of Afghanistan’s women
over 20 years. I told members that peace cannot come
at the cost of women’s rights and that we needed the
international community to uphold its responsibility to
safeguard our gains. I told them that I and my sisters in
other countries on the Security Council’s agenda would
view their policies on Afghanistan as the true test of
their commitment to upholding resolution 1325 (2000).

It is time that the Security Council break its silence
on the future of the 30 million citizens of Afghanistan,
of which more than 15 million are women, by stating
its clear expectations of the Taliban with regard to
the protection of women’s rights, including the right
of women’s human rights defenders to operate freely
without fear of reprisal, the right to education for all
women and girls and the right of all women to work and
political participation, without restriction throughout
the country. Any step to recognize the Taliban currently
is an endorsement of the oppression of the women
of Afghanistan.

The world did not listen. For me, the rhetoric of
the women and peace and security agenda collapsed on
15 August 2021. Today I am addressing the Council as
a refugee. Like so many other people of Afghanistan,
I lost my country overnight. We went from being a
democracy to a country under the control of an extremist
and totalitarian regime that the Security Council itself
has designated as a terrorist group.

The role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is more important than ever.
I urge Council members, as they consider renewing its
mandate in March, to ensure that UNAMA continues to
monitor the human rights situation, protect and promote
human rights and ensure that the people of Afghanistan
are supported in community-led efforts to facilitate and
coordinate humanitarian assistance, resolve conflict
and build peace.

Today women and girls are demonstrating in Kabul
and other regions and cities of Afghanistan to regain
the right to work and education in the country. They are
facing violence and serious threats from the Taliban for
doing so. Some women protesters have been imprisoned
or have disappeared. We do not know if they are dead or
alive. Thousands of women who worked with military
and security forces in Afghanistan now live in fear for
their lives.
Seven hundred media outlets have been closed, and
freedom of speech has been severely limited. Journalists
who cover those events and protests and broadcast the
truth are being arrested and taken away to unknown
places and, in some cases, killed. The oppression of
women and civilians by the Taliban is increasing daily.
There is no legal system. The mainstream media in the
West has lost interest in our situation and moved on

We are here today to discuss how to protect
women’s participation and the threats that women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders are facing
in all conflicts. Afghanistan is an example of what
can happen when the international community fails to
live up to its promises. I therefore urge the Council to
consider my recommendations.

There is also a need to ensure support for education
as part of humanitarian efforts and to ensure that
education also falls under the new UNAMA mandate.
In addition, there is an urgent need to appoint a United
Nations special rapporteur for Afghanistan so that she
can start her work soon, but it is important that she be
familiar with the context of Afghanistan and able to
maintain the principle of neutrality.
The Council must call for an inclusive, negotiated
peace process that enjoys the full, equal and meaningful
participation of diverse women from across the country
at all stages of planning, negotiation and implementation.
I conclude my statement with the words of the
women who are protesting every day in the streets
of Afghanistan.

22-232965/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

“There is no peace, and there is no participation
or protection for women in Afghanistan. But there
is violence against women every day there. We
are here. Please listen to us. We want the right to
education, work and political participation and the
right to be alive. Please break your silence.”
The President: I thank Ms. Yaftali for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Asoka.
Ms. Asoka: I thank members of the Security
Council for the opportunity to brief them today. I am
Kaavya Asoka, and I represent the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, a civil society coalition
of 18 international non-governmental organizations
that, for more than 20 years, have worked to promote
women’s rights and their full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace and security.
In preparation for today’s meeting, we spoke last
week with our civil society colleagues from Afghanistan,
Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq,
Libya, Myanmar, South Sudan, the Sudan, Syria and
Yemen — women who deliver critical services to their
communities, who broker ceasefires and participate in
peace processes and who have dedicated their lives to
the relentless pursuit of peace, justice and human rights.
Many of them have addressed Council members in this
Chamber, and many have paid the price for doing so. It
is their voices that members are hearing today, and they
are asking them for help.
There would be no women and peace and security
agenda without civil society, particularly the women
who are living and working through the daily realities
of war. Their views and active participation are central
to achieving our collective goal of peace and security,
but that participation comes at a cost that we should not
be asking anyone to pay.
We observed in our open letter to the Security
Council of October 2021 that to be a woman or a
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or intersex
(LGBTQI+) person in many parts of the world,
particularly in conflict, means having to choose
between fighting for your rights or fighting for your
life. That should not be the case anywhere. It should
not be the case in Afghanistan, where women leaders
and activists have worked for peace and equal rights
for decades and currently live in fear of being targeted
by the Taliban, even as they continue to bravely
demonstrate in the streets.
6/33

18/01/2022

It should not be the case in Myanmar, where women
and LGBTQI+ activists who led protests against the
coup d’état are being targeted by the military. They
are detained, tortured and sexually abused for standing
up for human rights and democracy. It should not be
the case in any of the other situations on the Security
Council’s agenda.
It should not be the case here in the Security
Council. Reprisals against individuals who brief in this
very Chamber are a symptom of global trends — the
closing of civic space, the erosion of human rights norms
and the increasingly misogynistic and militarized
environments in which they live and work today.
Our coalition has worked to ensure that conflictaffected communities are heard by policymakers. We
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2242 (2015), which
enabled more women in civil society to share their
expertise directly with the Council. Yet, as the number
of briefers has increased, so have the repercussions
for speaking up. That is a perfect illustration of the
threats facing all women who seek to engage actively
in peace and political processes — the topic of today’s
debate. The more women assert their rights, the greater
the backlash.
The women leaders with whom we work have faced
intimidation, threats and reprisals directly related to
their engagement with the Council. They have been
censored, threatened and harmed. They have been
told to be silent on issues integral to our work, such
as gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive
health and rights, because those were considered
incompatible with so-called cultural or religious
values. Their laptops have been confiscated, and their
phones and bank accounts hacked. They have been
arbitrarily detained by security forces following their
briefings. They have been accused of being spies for
foreign Governments. They have been subjected to
smear campaigns and defamation. They have faced
intimidation right before sitting in this chair.
We have had to relocate multiple women after they
briefed the Security Council, some of whom have yet to
return to their homes. In one recent case, an individual
was abducted the day after a Security Council briefing.
We feared that they had been tortured or were dead.
For months, we dropped all of our other work to focus
on that case until they were released. We asked several
Member States and United Nations agencies for help but
received little. It taught us a difficult lesson — nobody,
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

other than our own civil society colleagues, was willing
to help an individual who had faced reprisal for having
cooperated with the United Nations system. That
is unacceptable.
Our experience reflects a pattern. The number and
severity of reprisals and intimidation against anyone
engaging with the United Nations has exponentially
increased in recent years. Approximately a third of
the women we have supported in briefing the Security
Council since 2018 have faced intimidation or reprisals,
and approximately 67 per cent of those cases were
perpetrated by State actors. That is just the tip of the
iceberg. The United Nations has publicly documented
only a fraction of such cases directly associated with
the Security Council. Many have not been reported at
all, out of fear of further reprisals or a complete lack of
confidence that anything would happen as a result of
the reporting. The gap in information means that policy
responses fail to take into account the basic facts on
the ground that could well determine whether or not a
woman lives or dies.
Let us be clear — reprisals are designed to silence
women human rights defenders and stop them from
doing their work. Those risks are compounded for
marginalized groups, such as LGBTQI+ activists
and women with disabilities, and they affect not only
individuals, but families, communities and civic space.
Such repressive measures not only harm those who
choose to speak out anyway but will also deter other
advocates from doing their important work unless the
Council puts a stop to it now.
Last week we talked about what those women need
to continue their work in the face of those challenges.
They told us that they need funding to support urgent
needs, such as personal security, relocation, increased
security for their homes and offices and the payment
of legal fees. They also need responsive institutions
that they can contact directly in their hour of need. We
discussed the challenges of their activism, the toll their
work has taken on them and, most of all, their waning
faith in the international community’s willingness to act
on their concerns. Their clear message to the Council
is that, while such protection measures can keep them
safe temporarily, only genuine political support for
their work can ensure their long-term security.
If Council members are truly committed to ending
attacks against women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders, it is critical to address the root causes

S/PV. 8949

of conflict and gender inequality, not only their
consequences. The Security Council has already called
on Member States to enact measures to protect women
civil society and to create an enabling environment for
all those who defend human rights and advocate for
peace. Yet in this very Chamber, members have failed
to consider the price paid by the civil society briefers
they invite.
Silence is complicity. The Council cannot afford
inaction if it is to fulfil its obligations under the women
and peace and security agenda. We therefore call on all
Member States, the leadership of the United Nations
and Security Council members to stop the intimidation,
attacks and reprisals against all human rights defenders,
end impunity and ensure that all perpetrators are held
accountable when such acts occur.
The Council’s political support can keep an atrisk human rights defender alive. It is therefore
important to publicly support the work of human rights
defenders, swiftly condemn all attacks against them,
including in the Security Council, and use diplomatic
channels to raise these issues with States that have
committed reprisals.
The Council must call on Secretary-General
Guterres to ensure that all United Nations staff,
especially the leadership of the United Nations, publicly
champion the role of women human rights defenders
and make sure that the United Nations provides all the
necessary protection to those at risk and their families.
That means providing rapid, flexible and targeted
resources for women at risk and directly funding their
organizations. It means establishing clear protocols for
how the United Nations should respond to individual
cases. It also means ensuring that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has the capacity to proactively carry out its work on
reprisals so that the burden shifts from individuals who
face attacks to the system with the capacity to protect
them. All those protection measures must be developed
in partnership with individuals at risk, whose views and
needs must be at the heart of any response. All peace
operations must be fully resourced and empowered to
provide practical support to all defenders at risk.
Lastly, we need a safe and enabling environment
for civil society members. We must decriminalize their
lives and work and enact legislation that protects their
rights, in line with international human rights law.

22-232967/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

I would like to underline one final point. The risks
women face should in no way be used as an excuse to
exclude them. To do so would be to let those who wish
to silence them win. Instead, Member States and the
United Nations must prioritize and actively support the
participation and leadership of women in all aspects of
peace and security.
Today the Council has a choice. The members
of the Security Council can show us, and indeed the
international community, exactly where they stand.
They can choose to support us by taking action, or they
can continue to put our lives at risk by doing nothing.
We urge them to challenge those who believe it is not a
woman’s place to question authority, speak out against
abuse or defy power and patriarchy by responding that
a woman’s place is exactly where she decides it should
be — whether fighting for human rights, participating
in a peace process, protesting on the streets or sitting in
the Chamber with Council members.
The President: I thank Ms. Asoka for her briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Regional Integration of Ghana.
Ms. Botchwey (Ghana): I have the greatest pleasure
to convey Ghana’s appreciation to the delegation of
Norway for convening today’s all-important meeting.
We are equally grateful to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Her Excellency
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and Zarqa Yaftali and Kaavya
Asoka, the two civil society briefers, for their insightful
briefings. The briefings have laid bare the contemporary
threats faced by women peacebuilders, the factors that
impede their full, equal and meaningful participation
in peace processes and the means by which the Security
Council can rightly address violence targeted at them
It should always be our collective drive to ensure that
women take their rightful place in national, regional
and global peacebuilding efforts, in an atmosphere that
is devoid of fear and panic. It is Ghana’s sincere hope
that our debate today, as the first open debate for the
year 2022, will create the much-needed momentum
for the rest of the year and beyond when it comes to
protecting women in peace and security.
Let me also commend the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive 2021 annual report on women and
peace and security (S/2021/827). The report highlights
certain alarming realities endured by women in peace
processes, which require the most urgent attention of
the Security Council. Ghana notes with great concern
8/33

18/01/2022

the atrocities being committed against women who lend
their time, energy and expertise to peace processes,
with the objectives of safeguarding international peace
and security and making our world a better place.
It is therefore disheartening to observe the continued
and progressive increase in intimidation, threats and
reprisals against these women who are drivers of the
positive change we all desire. In many cases, threats
targeted at women peacebuilders are translated into
unspeakable violence, costing many of them their lives.
The Secretary-General’s 2021 annual report indicates
that, in 2020, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights verified 35 cases
of killings of women involved in peace and security,
including human rights activists, journalists and trade
unionists, in seven conflict-affected countries. Women
academics, Supreme Court judges, youth advocates
and civil society activists have been victims of severe
retaliatory violence. These facts point to the pressing
need for the United Nations and its States Members
to create a safe environment to enable women to
carry out their work independently, and without
undue interference, in accordance with the tenets of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 2467 (2019) and 2493 (2019).
Permit me to share with the Council a number
of initiatives being implemented by Ghana under
the women and peace and security agenda and the
protection of women in peace processes. Let me begin
by indicating that Ghana’s formal structures aimed at
augmenting the diverse roles of women in peace and
security is derived, inter alia, from resolution 1325
(2000). Ghana’s Ministry of Gender, Children and
Social Protection is the government agency responsible
for coordinating the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and other Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security.
In 2012, the Ministry of Gender developed Ghana’s
first national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), for
the period 2012-2014. Several activities were carried
out under the action plan, including sensitization
programmes and workshops for security agencies,
traditional authorities and civil society organizations,
among other institutions, which increased, to a large
extent, awareness of the crucial role of women in peace
and security across Ghana.
Upon the expiration of the first national action
plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and based on the gaps
identified in its implementation, the second edition
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

of the action plan was launched in March 2020 and is
expected to be operational until 2025. Efforts by diverse
stakeholders to support the implementation of the
second action plan include training gender activists in
peace and security issues, training women as mediators
and sensitizing women at the grass-roots level on their
roles in ensuring peaceful societies.
The Ghana Armed Forces, as well as other security
agencies, are also currently reviewing their regulations
with the objective of rolling out policies that are womenfriendly and that ensure that women who participate
in peace and security, including peacekeeping, are
adequately protected. The Ministry of Gender is being
supported by other stakeholders, including the Kofi
Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre and
the West African Network for Peacebuilding, to enable
the operationalization of the women and peace and
security agenda in Ghana.
Ghana is the ninth largest contributor of personnel
to United Nations missions, and, as of April 2020,
Ghanaian women constituted 14 per cent of military
and 25.6 per cent of police personnel deployed to United
Nations and African Union missions. The increasing
representation of Ghanaian women in peacekeeping
operations has increased Ghana’s protective abilities
through national legislation. We believe that the United
Nations will be able to make significant gains in the
protection of women peacebuilders if Member States
incorporate the global women and peace and security
agenda and relevant Council resolutions into national
action plans and programmes and implement them.
Ghana also wishes to make the following four
points on how States Members of the United Nations can
ensure the protection of women in peace processes and
how the Security Council can prevent and respond to
intimidation, violence and attacks against women. First
of all, the Council should urge the Secretary-General
to ensure the allocation of targeted, practical and rapid
resources to facilitate responses to threats against
women peacebuilders or avert potential dangers when
they occur. In this regard, the Council should ensure
that peace operations are adequately resourced to
address the challenges encountered by United Nations
entities and Member States in monitoring, reporting
and providing support to women peacebuilders.
Secondly, the Council should urge the SecretaryGeneral to use his good offices to build the capacity of
United Nations staff in conflict zones, with the objective

S/PV. 8949

of increasing their understanding of the work of women
in peace processes. This will ultimately empower
United Nations workers in conflict environments to
furnish victims or potential victims of reprisals with
the needed protection and support. In addition, United
Nations sanctions committees should be utilized as tools
to bring to justice those guilty of intimidation, threats
and reprisals against women in peacebuilding and to
serve as possible deterrents to potential aggressors. The
active participation of women on panels of experts is
therefore highly encouraged.
Lastly, the Security Council, Members States and
the United Nations at large must be unequivocal and
consistent in their defence of women briefers, and they
must continue to condemn all attacks against them.
That level of international support will send a strong
message to perpetrators of violent reprisals against
women briefers, making them fully aware that the
world is watching and that any violence against these
women will not be tolerated.
In conclusion, women are usually the group most
adversely affected by conflict but the most marginalized
in peace processes and the most punished for their
peacebuilding efforts. Women’s voices bring real
gender perspectives to peace discourses, which lead
to better policies and more equitable, gender-sensitive
and sustainable peace deals. Therefore, ensuring the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
peacebuilding should not be reduced to mere rhetoric
within the confines of the Security Council. We owe
it to women in peace and security all over the world to
convert the rhetoric into zealous and concrete action.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs of Albania.
Ms. Xhaçka (Albania): It is a great honour for me
to be the first Albanian Foreign Minister to address
the Security Council as a non-permanent member
of this esteemed body, but what makes this occasion
really special for me and for my country is the issue
that we are addressing today — women and peace and
security — which is an issue that is the top priority
of Albania’s agenda for the coming two years. I want
to thank my Norwegian colleague and the Norwegian
presidency for this opportunity. I also want to thank
High Commissioner Bachelet for her remarks. We
commend her personal commitment to the cause. I am
also very grateful to the briefers, whose perspectives

22-232969/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

from the field were particularly informative and
insightful, yet heartbreaking and a cry for action.
I have worked on this agenda for a while now
as a politician, but also as a human rights activist.
During all those years, one thought has been with me
constantly — how is it possible that women still have
to fight for something as basic as equality, for the same
rights as the other half of the population, men?
It is perplexing, in fact, that even in our day and age,
equal rights, representation, education and opportunity
cannot be taken for granted if one is a woman. Or, more
to the point of this debate, it is perplexing that the right
to participate in building and maintaining peace and
security cannot be taken for granted if one is a woman.
It is a sad truth of history, but it is a sad truth of our
day and age too that, while men do most of the actual
fighting, women often bear the brunt of it. I say that
not as some cliché-like slogan, but as a lesson that we
Albanians have learned from our very recent history.
We saw this in Kosovo, where women were left behind
to fend for their families and to pick up the pieces, where
women were raped, tortured and killed as deliberate
targets of a criminal campaign of ethnic cleansing.
We also see this in conflicts everywhere — from
Afghanistan to Yemen, from Myanmar to Ethiopia
to Syria, or in the repression against activists in
Belarus. As the briefers also emphasized, women
activists face threats and risks, including arbitrary
detentions, enforced disappearances and even targeted
killings — not just because of the usual risks inherent
in such activities in conflict zones, but also because of
the fact that they are women.
And yet I know, and we all know, that there is
resistance to women having a say in how peace is
achieved and how conflicts are resolved.
Thirty years ago, when my country began its
long and difficult road towards reconstruction from
decades of isolation and ruin under an extremely
radical communist regime, we make the same mistake.
We denied women a role in the reconstruction,
reconciliation and the process of laying the foundations
for our new Albania. We have paid for that mistake, but
we have also learned from it.
I am proud that gender equality is now a high priority
for the Albanian Government, not just in words and
policy but also in actions and concrete achievements.
Albania currently ranks among the top five gender10/33

18/01/2022

balanced Governments in the world, with 75 per cent of
ministerial posts held by women. A similar percentage
of senior and mid-level executive posts, as well as
some of the highest critical public positions, including
independent institutions, agencies and departments
in key State areas, are also held by women. We have
benefited, and the whole country has benefited.
That is why we decided to make women and peace
and security our top priority. It is in that spirit that we
joined Norway, the United Arab Emirates and the Niger
in the statement of shared commitments on women
and peace and security in order to make that issue a
top priority during our respective Security Council
presidencies. However, we know that participation and
protection go hand in hand. That is why I would also
like to focus on a few key points.
First, we must support and resource relevant United
Nations entities in order to enable them to provide all
the necessary protection and support to women human
rights defenders, peacebuilders and civil society
representatives at risk of harm, including those who
have briefed the Security Council or are otherwise
engaged with the United Nations system.
Secondly, we must create flexible funding
mechanisms to act fast and respond rapidly when women
leaders are faced with threats and reprisals. The launch
of the Funding Window for Women Human Rights
Defenders earlier today is a positive development, and
Albania will make a contribution to the fund.
Thirdly, we must improve funding of women-led
and women’s rights organizations and movements in
fragile or conflict-affected countries.
Fourthly, we must enhance accountability with
regard to women and peace and security by committing
to a zero-tolerance policy on reprisals against women
activists and human rights defenders.
The Council has a crucial and decisive role to play in
that regard. There can be no peace without women, and
it would be unforgivable to exclude half of humankind
from efforts aimed at international peace and security.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates thanks Norway for organizing
this important open debate on such a critical subject
and for presiding over this meeting. We also thank High
Commissioner Bachelet for her insightful briefing.
We listened carefully to the briefings from Ms. Zarqa
Yaftali and Ms. Kaavya Asoka.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

As the Foreign Minister of Albania just said, in
order to maximize our impact as a new Security Council
member, we have joined forces with the Niger, Norway
and Albania in our statement of shared commitments
on women and peace and security. We look forward
to partnering with them and the entire membership in
order to advance women and peace and security issues
in a concrete way during our Council term.
As we deliver our first statement on a women and
peace and security issue as an elected member of the
Security Council, let me share how we plan to champion
this agenda further. We will focus on a results-oriented
approach, with the objective of moving the women and
peace and security agenda out of its silos and into all
discussions relevant to peace and security. In the past
two decades, we have established a solid framework
to achieve gender equality; however, gaps in its
implementation remain. We will therefore prioritize
action on existing frameworks to effectively contribute
to advancing this agenda.
We want to promote a comprehensive approach
that recognizes the integrated nature of the agenda.
In addition to participation and protection, which we
will focus on today, we will also emphasize prevention,
economic relief and recovery. That is why we are
planning, during our presidency in March, to hold
a discussion on partnerships with the private sector
and how they can support women’s participation and
inclusion in peace and security, which is an area of the
agenda that remains underdeveloped.
Let me now turn to the key issue at hand. Women
peacebuilders, women human rights defenders and
civil society representatives all play crucial roles in
conflict and post-conflict settings. They bring gender
perspectives to the forefront and contribute to building
sustainable peace. We have seen, for instance, how
their tireless efforts during Colombia’s peace process
resulted in one of the most inclusive peace agreements
to date.
Yet time and again, these women face
discrimination, intimidation, marginalization and
violence. In particular, women advocating for their
rights and inclusion in conflict situations face sexual
and gender-based violence, including harassment and
rape. Those reprehensible acts not only destroy the
lives of individuals and communities, but also create
an environment that corrodes the social fabric and
undermines the prospects of peace and recovery.

S/PV. 8949

The United Arab Emirates would like to highlight
three recommendations for Member States and the
United Nations that could prevent and respond effectively
to reprisals in conflict and post-conflict settings:
First, Member States must take serious steps to
tackle structural gender inequality as a main root cause
of violence against women. Investing in education and
reforming harmful antiquated policies can address and
eliminate the reasons that drive stigmatization and
targeted attacks. As Ms. Yaftali so eloquently affirmed
earlier today, this is a very pressing need in places
like Afghanistan today, as we witness an escalation
in efforts to distort religion and culture in order to
attack the fundamental right of women and girls to
education. In the long-term, investing in equal access to
education can ensure sustained protection for women,
prevention of violence against them and commitment
to their critical role in rebuilding more resilient and
equitable communities.
Secondly, the United Nations itself needs to develop
effective tools to address violence against women,
including reprisals in contexts of armed conflict. That
could include more systematic deployment of gender
and women’s protection advisers to United Nations
peace operations, as well as increased data gathering
and analysis for effective support of the strategies
that actually work. For instance, at the end of a peace
operation, we should work with host countries to
ensure the continuity of key protection capabilities in
United Nations country teams, so that women and their
advocates are not abandoned at a critical time.
Thirdly, we urge the Security Council to remain
open to the input of civil society briefers, particularly
women. They provide unique and valuable insights to
the Council on emerging issues and developments in
situations on the agenda. Threats intended to deter civil
society participation in Council meetings therefore
constitute an attempt to obstruct the work of this organ.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates, alongside
Norway, the Niger and Albania, committed to remain
vigilant with Council briefers regarding reprisals, as
well as to a zero-tolerance approach towards reprisals,
as reflected in our shared women and peace and security
presidency commitments.
In addition to acknowledging women’s roles as
active agents for peace and security, we must also
recognize and act upon the many risks they face. That
is necessary for ensuring women’s full, equal and

22-2329611/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

meaningful participation across all sectors, which
we already know is central to international peace
and security.
The United Arab Emirates looks forward to
cooperating with all members, the United Nations
and civil society to explore avenues that best ensure
women’s safe participation in the Council and their
significant contributions in this field.
A women’s place is indeed exactly where she
decides it should be.
Ms. Zeya (United States of America): I thank you,
Foreign Minister Huitfeldt, for convening us to discuss
this critical issue. We also thank High Commissioner
Bachelet and the civil society briefers for their vital
perspectives. We welcome your efforts, Madam
President, to shine a light on the critical role that
women peacebuilders play and steps that we all must
take to empower and protect them.
Women are on the front lines of peacebuilding.
They bring a unique understanding of local and
regional dynamics to peace processes necessary for
sustainable engagements. Their advocacy, however,
also makes them targets for bad actors intending to
exacerbate conflict. We think of the Head of the Somali
Police Force’s Sexual and Gender-based Violence Unit,
who was physically assaulted by four police officers
because she was reviewing the sexual violence cases
registered at the central police station. Later a female
journalist following up on the assault was detained. We
strongly condemn those attacks and all similar threats
to women peacebuilders. The Security Council must do
much more to protect those women.
Threats to women peacebuilders are highly
gendered, using their identity, roles and social norms
against them, often through sexualized attacks.
Increasingly, those attacks take place online, including
through the spread of gendered disinformation and
targeted cyberharassment.
Echoing the calls by our Albanian and United
Arab Emirates colleagues, we call upon all
Governments and international organizations to join
the United States in maintaining and enforcing a
zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation, abuse
and harassment. We must commit together to support
institutions as they strengthen prevention efforts and
safeguard survivor-centred response mechanisms and
enforce accountability.
12/33

18/01/2022

It is essential that we continue to increase the
number of women peacekeepers and take measures
to support their security. Women peacekeepers have
unique access to communities. We must redouble
efforts to promote human rights and protect civilians
and enable women to become a meaningful part
of peace and political processes. Women serve as
powerful mentors for women and girls in post-conflict
settings and are essential enablers for building trust
and confidence with local communities while helping
improve access to, and support for, local populations.
Language around protection has traditionally relied
on a gendered narrative that portrays women as weak or
vulnerable. That characterization perpetuates injustice.
In fact, women peacebuilders are targeted because
they are highly effective and powerful actors. As deft
peacemakers who use dialogue to engage with different
parties to foster peace, they successfully negotiate
humanitarian access, counter violent extremist
ideologies and facilitate reconciliation and healing.
The question we must ask ourselves is: how do
we support and amplify those ongoing women-led
peace efforts, and how do we prevent malign actors
from sabotaging women peacebuilders? The United
States is advocating with partner Governments to
establish formal processes to ensure that women have
influence in decision-making. We are also advocating
for necessary technical support to amplify the existing
efforts of women leaders. For example, in Colombia, we
support the meaningful participation of women in local
stabilization and peacebuilding institutions, and we
advocate fuller implementation by the Government of
Colombia of commitments in the 2016 Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace to promote women’s rights.
We note with concern that 10 of the 16 members
of the Colombian Special Forum on Gender, which
monitors the implementation of the gender provisions
of the peace agreement, reported threats made directly
against them. One organization defending the rights of
indigenous women had to withdraw temporarily owing
to the severity of the threats. That is unacceptable.
The United States supports targeted foreign
assistance programmes that further the leadership
of local women in peacebuilding processes. At the
December 2021 Summit for Democracy, we announced
the Advancing Women’s and Girls’ Civic and Political
Leadership Initiative. Under this mantle, the United
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

States will support SHE WINS — Supporting
Her Empowerment: Women’s Inclusion for New
Security — through the provision of technical
assistance and small grants to local women-led
organizations. Activities will include women from
ethnic and religious minorities, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, intersex, plus persons, women, youth and
women with disabilities, as well as men and boys who
are champions for the promotion of equality and equity.
The United States remains fully committed to
advancing resolution 1325 (2000) as a matter of
international peace and security. Peace can never be
achieved if half the population, particularly those at
the forefront of peacebuilding, are routinely ignored
or abused.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): It is great to see
you, Madam President, with us in the Chamber today.
Ireland and Norway have a proud history of working
together to support human rights defenders. And I am
so pleased that our shared priority is finding expression
in this Chamber and at this table today.
I want to pay tribute to our briefers — High
Commissioner Bachelet, Kaavya Asoka and Zarqa
Yaftali. Their messages really inspire us. We hear what
they say.
We just also heard the testimony of a remarkable
Afghan woman. Foremost in my mind today, as we
address violence targeting women peacebuilders and
human rights defenders, are the women of Afghanistan.
The women peacebuilders and human rights defenders
of Afghanistan were sounding the alarm of imminent
catastrophe long before the world was willing to heed
them. Throughout the spring and early summer of
last year, Afghan women leaders warned of surging
violence and harassment against women and girls. In
May, when a girls’ school was attacked by the Taliban,
they warned us that this was not collateral damage, that
this was not incidental, that this violence was deliberate,
targeted and symbolic, aimed at frightening women and
girls away from participation in public life, and was a
precursor to a terrible onslaught. And so it has proved.
Today in Afghanistan, women human rights
defenders pay the price for our failure to heed their
warnings. Women whom the international community
once championed are hiding in their homes or have
been forced to flee.

S/PV. 8949

Women who have the courage to take to the streets to
demand their human rights risk intimidation, violence,
detention and worse. Some have never come home.
Afghanistan illustrates in the starkest way the
intimate link between women’s participation and their
protection. But let there be no doubt: those issues are
universal. The world over, politically active women are
targeted for threats and violence, online and offline.
Full, equal and meaningful participation is simply
not possible unless women can participate safely. That
also applies to the Security Council itself. During
Ireland’s Security Council presidency in September,
when we made a priority of giving a platform to women
civil-society briefers, we became acutely aware of the
grave risks that they face when seeking to engage with
the United Nations and its Member States. I want to
pay tribute to the 16 women who bravely accepted
our invitation and to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
others who helped to mitigate the risks to the greatest
extent possible.
However, some women declined to speak because
of the risk it posed. One briefer we invited faced serious
threats to her safety.
Simply put, it is not acceptable that women are
silenced by the threat of reprisal. Neither should we,
as Council members, collaborate in their silencing by
not inviting them to speak. As Kaavya said earlier,
we have a choice. The Council must reject any and all
reprisals against briefers and ensure that it provides a
safe platform in the Chamber.
We welcome Kaavya briefing us here in person
today. We need to ensure that civil society returns in
person to this horseshoe table. There is no substitute
for women, I say it again, being in the room and at the
table: that applies here and to every peace and political
process, wherever that may be.
I will conclude by highlighting not what we say as
Ireland but rather what we do to protect women’s right
to participate safely in peace and security processes.
We will continue to work with conviction to
push recommendations to the Council on protecting
women’s participation, no holds barred. We will work
to maximize the impact and political import of the
Council’s main instrument in that regard: the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security.

22-2329613/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

We will work to ensure that OHCHR activity on
reprisals is resourced and funded. As a member of that
core group, we will lead the Human Rights Council
resolution on reprisals. We will support and speak
out about the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders, Mary Lawlor. We
stand by organizations such as Frontline Defenders,
which protect defenders at risk.
We will do everything we can as a champion of civilsociety participation, including in-person participation,
at the Security Council and across the United Nations.
Women’s voices need to be heard in these rooms, and
we need to heed those women as we shape outcomes.
We will not turn away from our calls on the United
Nations itself to insist on the safe participation of
women in the peace processes it leads. Building on
the Arria Formula meeting we hosted with Mexico last
year, we will be vigilant and active on that matter.
Finally, Ireland’s embassies worldwide stand ready,
every day, to support human rights defenders at serious
risk, acknowledging the heightened risk for women, as
we did in the case of Afghanistan, when we prioritized
women human rights defenders for humanitarian visa
exemptions as they were needed. It is the least we
can do.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the fact, Madam President, that you are
presiding over this important meeting in your capacity
as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
I listened attentively to the statements made by
High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet and civilsociety representatives Ms. Yaftali and Ms. Asoka. I
note that I am the first male speaker to take the floor
at this meeting. I should like to emphasize that despite
that fact, China attaches high importance to the issue of
women and peace and security and, like other countries,
pays close attention to the protection of women’s rights.
We have been working actively and relentlessly towards
that goal.
Protecting women in armed conflict and promoting
their participation in political and peace processes is
an important part of the Security Council’s women and
peace and security agenda. To achieve those goals, the
Council must keep going in the right direction and stay
on the right course.
China wishes to emphasize the following.
14/33

18/01/2022

First, we must strengthen the protection of women
in conflict areas in every way possible, making no
exception. Women affected by armed conflict all
are entitled to security and protection, regardless of
whether or not they are part of the peace process. They
should be treated equally, without exception.
The vast majority of such women are ordinary
people. They are the Palestinian women living in
constant fear of house demolitions, violence and
attacks. They are the Afghan mothers looking for food
and warm clothing for their children in the context
of a humanitarian disaster aggravated by unilateral
sanctions. They are the girls of the Sahel refusing
to give up learning despite the spectre of terrorism
and kidnapping by extremist forces. They are the
most vulnerable group, one that deserves more than
anyone else attention and help from the international
community. Like everyone else, they have the right to
live a life free from violence.
To protect them requires collective efforts. Parties
to conflict should fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law and renounce all
violence against women, including sexual violence.
China supports the relevant United Nations entities
actively performing their duties in that regard.
The international community should intensify
relief efforts in line with the United Nations guiding
principles for humanitarian assistance and meet the
basic living needs of conflict-affected women.
Countries with historical responsibility for hotspot
issues are duty-bound to provide more financial and
in-kind support.
Secondly, we must address both the symptoms and
root causes of violence and conflict. The protection of
women cannot be carried out amid wars and conflict;
that cannot be achieved. In conflict situations, the risk
of violence, displacement, poverty and famine often rise
exponentially among women. We should be tough on
violence against women, yet nothing can provide more
basic protection for women than a holistic approach to
conflict prevention and resolution.
Peace and stability can be restored only through
dialogue and concertation between the parties
concerned. Civil society can play a constructive role
by advocating a culture of peace, being the voice of
the people, promoting exchanges and mutual trust, and
providing useful advice.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

As an important voice for peace, women
should be given equal opportunities to participate
in peace negotiations. All parties should remove
undue hindrances and ensure gender equality in
political processes. The Security Council bears the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security and must work harder to address
the root causes of conflicts, pursue political solutions
to hotspot issues and unremittingly seek the peaceful
settlement of disputes through dialogue, mediation and
consultations so that all women and girls can enjoy
peace and live in tranquility.
Thirdly, the Council must unwaveringly support
women’s empowerment and development. Milestone
resolution 1325 (2000) redefines the nexus between
women and peace. As Secretary-General Guterres said,
“This was the first time women were recognized
not only as victims of war but as people with their
own agency and expertise, who are valuable assets
to findings peaceful solutions to conflict.”
Supporting women’s empowerment, development,
initiatives, participation and power to change in the
area of peace and security can help ensure the steady
and far-reaching impact of the women and peace and
security agenda. We should strive to fill the development
gap faced by women in conflict areas, prioritize
development in the work of the United Nations and
seek quick outcomes for the women-related Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We should effectively protect women’s
economic and social rights and guarantee their right to
education, as knowledge can change lives.
We should help more women find employment,
emerge from poverty and achieve economic autonomy
to create the necessary conditions for their effective
participation in peace processes. We should help
women overcome the challenges related to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, improve accessibility
and the affordability of vaccines in conflict areas and
safeguard women’s right to life and health.
As the host country of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, China always advocates gender equality
and women’s empowerment, promotes women’s
development globally and supports the woman and
peace and security agenda with concrete actions. Over
the past three decades, more than 1,000 Chinese women
have served in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
while making important contributions to peace.

S/PV. 8949

In recent years, we have actively worked with other
countries, especially developing countries. We have
implemented 100 maternal and child health projects,
trained 130,000 female professionals and significantly
supported women’s empowerment in those developing
countries. China also partnered with UNESCO in
establishing the Prize for Girls’ and Women’s Education
to galvanize more people into taking action for that
worthy cause.
The Global Development Initiative, presented by
President Xi Jinping, seeks to build on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and global development,
which will provide strong momentum for achieving
equal rights for women and their advancement
throughout the world. As is often said in China, women
hold up half of the sky. We stand ready to work with
the international community to promote women’s
empowerment and development, support the role of
women in holding up half of the sky with regard to
international peace and security and build a beautiful
future together.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. On behalf
of the United Kingdom, I thank High Commissioner
Bachelet, Ms. Yaftali and Ms. Asoka for briefing the
Security Council on the realities faced by women
defending and building peace across the globe.
As we have heard today, women human rights
defenders and peacebuilders face violence and reprisals
for doing their work — building and sustaining
peace — which is central to the purpose of the Security
Council. Such attacks obstruct women’s meaningful
participation in peace processes. The Council can
operate effectively only when it receives honest
briefings about situations on the ground. Women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders who brief
the Council provide such insights, and we depend on
them. We have a duty to protect them and deal with
reprisals effectively. Without adequate protection,
violence will continue to serve as a means of silencing
women’s participation.
Only two years ago, the Council committed to
ensuring a safe enabling environment for women
peacebuilders and civil society in resolution 2493
(2019). I would like to focus today on three areas of
practical action: addressing women’s participation
in country contexts, ensuring a safe environment for

22-2329615/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

women human rights defender and providing resources
and practical support to women peacebuilders.
First, with regard to women’s participation in
country contexts, Ms. Yaftali spoke movingly about
the resilience of Afghan women and girls despite the
violence and discrimination that they face. Ensuring
that Afghan women can safely participate in public
life and shape their own futures is the best way to
protect the progress achieved on gender equality. The
empowerment of women and girls is fundamental to a
peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
Secondly, we must safeguard the participation
of women in decision-making processes. It is not
enough for women to participate in structures
and institutions — such participation must also
be meaningful. According to the research of the
International Civil Society Action Network, enabling
environments require the mainstreaming of protection
in our women and peace and security policies and
practices. Safe environments also depend on the
establishment and support of women’s mediator
networks, as well as the development of security sector
policies that respond to threats of reprisal.
Thirdly, we must act in our national capacities and
through the United Nations to provide resources and
political support for this agenda. The United Kingdom
is wholly committed to preventing and responding to
reprisals. Over the past two years, we have funded the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to develop guidance to prevent reprisals
against civil society briefers to the Council, strengthen
United Nations engagement with a coalition of Member
States to take action against reprisals and provide field
training for United Nations staff in assisting women
peacebuilders at risk of reprisals.
We have provided more than $300,000 to the Urgent
Action Fund for Women’s Human Rights to protect and
relocate women human rights defenders under threat
of reprisals. We will continue to work closely with
peacebuilders and ensure that protection is at the heart
of our new national action plan on women and peace
and security.
The message from this meeting is clear. We must
do everything within our means to protect women’s
participation in political and peace processes in
countries like Afghanistan and before the Council itself.
16/33

18/01/2022

Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity that Norway
has provided in this open debate for us to follow the
lead of those States that have insisted that the path
towards sustainable peace is possible only if women’s
voices are protected, heard and taken into account in all
international peace and security processes.
I also thank High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet,
Ms. Zarqa Yaftali and Ms. Kaavya Asoka for their
informative briefings.
The topic that brings us together today is of
particular interest to my country, Gabon, especially
as President Ali Bongo Ondimba has acknowledged
the fundamental role of women in forging our
Government’s projects.
We note that international advocacy for the inclusion
of women as key actors in peace and security processes
is gaining momentum. There are encouraging signs of
progress, especially with regard to gender parity within
the United Nations system and peacekeeping missions,
as mentioned in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on women and peace and security (S/2021/827).
However, we are deeply concerned about the fact that
women continue to pay a high price, in particular in
countries in conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/827)
outlines the continuing violence against women and the
violation of their rights, in particular in conflict-ridden
regions of the world, along with their marginalization
and exclusion from forums in which decisions on
their future are taken, including disarmament bodies.
It is a disturbing situation to which the international
community, in particular the Security Council, should
respond, especially with regard to the need to ensure
women’s full participation, not only in the public sphere
but also in the area of security.
Gabon has adopted a human-centred approach. Our
approach is holistic and inclusive and promotes women
leaders as change agents and peacebuilders who have
full control over their future, by enabling them, in
times of peace, to take their key and rightful place in
the socioeconomic and political landscape of Gabon.
They can then fully and naturally participate in the
various stages of mediation and political negotiations
when crises arise.
That vision is demonstrated by the notable presence
of women at the head of three of the four most important
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

institutions in Gabon — the Office of the Prime
Minister, the Senate and the Constitutional Court, as
well as at the head of several Government departments.
Furthermore, since its independence Gabon has
been a pioneer in Africa in the recruitment of women
into its armed forces, and several women have risen to
the rank of General. We have therefore ushered in a new
era that enables women to raise their country’s flag,
make history and inspire generations of young women
and girls.
More than ever before, we must uphold the standard
of inclusion and safeguard the participation of women,
while ensuring that their voices are heard. That should
bring about a radical breakthrough that ensures that the
role of women is taken into account and guarantees their
full participation in all stages of conflict prevention
and conflict resolution for greater lasting peace. Such
advocacy is based on the spirit of resolution 1325 (2000)
and reinforced by subsequent resolutions.
We call for continued efforts at the global, national
and local levels for the comprehensive, inclusive and
substantive implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and its related resolutions, including resolution 2493
(2019). We also call for enhanced integration of the
gender dimension in peace issues.
In a world that faces new security challenges that
have been exacerbated by an unprecedented health
crisis, our response must involve everyone, including
women. Make no mistake, history will judge each of us
by the way we treat those whom Gisèle Halimi referred
to as the other half of humankind, in particular by the
principles, positions and attitudes that we adopt here in
the Security Council.
It is time for the nations of the world to protect
the voice of all peacebuilders, who even in extreme
conditions and in regions affected by extreme violence
demonstrate superhuman courage and extraordinary
boldness and resilience. Those issues will be the focus
of our presidency of the Security Council in October.
The qualities demonstrated by women should inspire
collective action for a safer and more peaceful world, in
line with the expectations and legitimate aspirations of
the peoples of the world.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you, Madam President,
presiding over today’s meeting of the Security Council.

S/PV. 8949

We would like to thank the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, Ms. Zarqa Yaftali and Ms. Kaavya Asoka for
their briefings.
The issue of women and peace and security
has become an integral part of the overall process
of peaceful conflict resolution and post-conflict
peacebuilding. We believe that the benchmark that
provides a unique road map for advancing the role of
women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
post-conflict recovery, as well as for protecting women
in conflict, is resolution 1325 (2000).
The world currently faces many crises. However,
they are not all a threat to international peace and
security. Properly implementing and leveraging
resolution 1325 (2000) to ensure its effectiveness
requires stringent compliance with its mandate and
a consideration of women’s issues in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
with a special emphasis on the situations on the
Council’s agenda.
Russia welcomes the steady increase in the
participation of women in peace processes, including
in negotiations and peacekeeping. We welcome the
increase in the contribution of women in addressing key
issues of security, conflict resolution and post-conflict
recovery. Without a doubt, such engagement is of vital
importance as it helps to build trust and trust-based
relations with local populations, to prevent violations
against women and children, to ensure that violations
are investigated and to ensure sustained recovery and
rehabilitation of the victims of such violence.
We believe that more meaningful participation by
women in peacekeeping is possible if the right conditions
are put in place. In that regard, an important area on
which efforts should be focused is to ensure women’s
access to resources and technologies, including the
banking sector. There should also be a greater focus
on the specific development issues faced by women,
including poverty eradication and access for women to
education in conflict-affected countries.
The family is particularly important. We must
protect the institution of the family. At the same time,
the participation of women in all aspects and stages
of peacekeeping should not become an end in itself
or merely a quota to be met. It should be carried out
in a manner that reflects the unique context of each
situation. At the same time, we should prioritize the

22-2329617/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

professionalism of women, as well as their personal
interests and other challenges — for example, in the
area of peacekeeping.
Regrettably, despite the multitude of efforts under
way, women continue to fall victim to many different
forms of violence. We are deeply concerned about
instances of the maiming and murder of women,
including as a consequence of the indiscriminate or
excessive use of force. We deem it to be unacceptable
for those crimes to be swept under the rug, or for them
to be justified as inevitable and the results of so-called
collateral damage.
Such crimes must be investigated, and the
perpetrators must be held accountable. That should
not apply only to crimes against women peacebuilders.
We believe that the goal of every State is to ensure the
safety and security of every citizen, without special
emphasis on any particular category. It is clear that
violence against women is unacceptable, not only in the
area of peacekeeping but in all contexts. Such violence
is unacceptable against anyone, irrespective of gender,
race, language or belief.
It is our view that creating preferential processes
for the protection of certain categories of participants in
conflict resolution is not only counterproductive but also
dangerous, as it may foment additional social tensions,
set off new waves of conflict and exacerbate existing
conflicts. It is evident that creating safe conditions for
women’s participation in conflict resolution requires
that the safety and security of all participants in the
process be established. That is the only way to ensure
meaningful, robust and sustained peace.

18/01/2022

Women’s participation in public life and the
elimination of violence against them are prerequisites
for promoting lasting peace and security around the
world. To promote an inclusive society, India firmly
supports the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in political processes and decision-making.
India has today moved from a paradigm of women’s
development to women-led development.
We now have more than 1.3 million elected women
representatives at the grass-roots level who have taken
up leadership roles in their local communities. We
even have all-women panchayats, the grass-roots local
bodies elected at the village level. Twenty Indian states
have made provisions to reserve 50 per cent of total
seats in legislative bodies at the local level for women.
During India’s struggle for freedom, women were
at the forefront of practically every aspect of our effort.
This tradition continues to contemporary times as well.
In 2007, India made history by deploying the firstever all-female formed police unit for United Nations
peacekeeping. This unit served in Liberia for a decade
and through its work served as an example of how the
deployment of more women uniformed personnel could
help the United Nation in its efforts to combat sexual
exploitation and abuse.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our focus
on constructive cooperation with all States on issues
relating to the equal participation of men and women
in addressing security issues and conflict resolution in
key forums, in line with relevant mandates.

In order to strengthen women’s participation
in peace and political process, and to eliminate
discrimination and violence against women, my
delegation would like to highlight the following. First,
States Members of the United Nations should identify
and address barriers to the meaningful participation
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict
and in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and
programmes. This requires devising a legislative and
judicial framework, providing economic opportunities,
undertaking institution- and capacity-building,
ensuring accountability and checking impunity of
those perpetrating violence against women.

Mr. Tirumurti (India): We thank Norway for
convening today’s open debate on this important topic.
I would like, in particular, to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Anniken Huitfeldt, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Norway, among us. We thank the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, for her insights. I also thank the other
briefers, Ms. Zarqa Yaftali and Ms. Kaavya Asoka, for
their briefings.

Secondly, Member States must provide an
environment conducive to the participation and
inclusion of women in political processes and
decision-making. A political environment based on the
principles of democracy, pluralism and the rule of law
leads to furthering the role of women in nation-building
and development. In this context, we underline once
again the importance of inclusive and representative
governance in Afghanistan, with the meaningful

18/33

22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8949

participation of women, in accordance with resolution
2593 (2021), adopted on 30 August 2021.

require a sincere, committed, non-discriminatory and
collective effort through a whole-of-society approach.

Thirdly, in addition to political participation,
we must equally focus in a holistic manner on the
socioeconomic empowerment of women, including their
access to credit, finance and technology. For example,
a growing digital divide could have the potential to
alienate women from mainstream agendas. Keeping
this in mind, to minimize the gender divide, India has
not only undertaken numerous citizen-centric digital
initiatives but it has also focused these services towards
women. We have opened online bank accounts for over
440 million people, of whom more than 55 per cent
are women. During the coronavirus disease pandemic,
this initiative helped in direct-benefit transfer to nearly
200 million women.

In conclusion, I would like to paraphrase an eminent
Indian philosopher Swami Vivekananda and reiterate
that just as a bird cannot fly with one wing, durable
peace and development cannot be achieved without the
other half being equally invested.

Fourthly, terrorism and violent extremism continue
to be the biggest global threat to peace and security, and
invariably women suffer disproportionately. Violence
against women and girls perpetrated by terrorists
remains rampant. It deserves strong condemnation and
our special attention. It is important that the Council
focuses its attention on the impact and consequences of
terrorism on the rights of women.
Fifthly, women police officers and peacekeepers
play an indispensable role in furthering the women and
peace and security agenda. They are better able to gain
the trust of a large but marginalized section of society.
We therefore need more women in peacekeeping.
India welcomes the uniformed gender parity strategy
to increase the number of women peacekeepers. We
also support increasing the deployment of women
protection advisers for effective monitoring, analysis
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence in the field.
Sixthly, to address meaningfully and institutionally
the inequalities and violence faced by women and to
ensure their full participation in decision-making, the
United Nations should provide support to Member
States for institution- and capacity-building in postconflict situations. Focusing on women in the process
of peacebuilding is crucial.
Last but not least, news media, especially social
media, have emerged as a platform that is increasingly
being used by various actors, including terrorists,
to amplify discriminatory ideas and promote violent
radicalization. Women are often the victims of these
online criminal acts. To counter this phenomenon, we

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to High Commissioner
Michelle Bachelet for the wealth of information and
ideas she brought to the Security Council today, as well
as to civil society representatives, Ms. Zarqa Yaftali
and Ms. Kaavya Asoka, for bringing us a view of the
real world so valuable for today’s open debate.
The women and peace and security agenda
is a priority for Brazil’s eleventh mandate as an
elected member of the Security Council. At this new
opportunity to actively work towards its substantive
advancement, Brazil will spare no effort to provide a
safe and enabling environment for women to have full,
equal and meaningful participation in international
peace and security.
Today’s signature event is timely. One must not
ignore the signs of increasing violence towards women
human rights defenders, journalists, members of the
judiciary and security forces in all regions of the globe.
When evaluating progress in a particular country or
region or when designing mandates, members of the
Security Council must take the situation of women
seriously into account.
As Norway rightfully points out in the concept note
for this meeting (S/2022/22, annex) and as mentioned
in the latest report of the Secretary General on women
and peace and security (S/2021/827), the situation of
Afghan women and girls stands out as a source of
concern. If it was grave before the Taliban took power,
it is even worse now.
The Brazilian Government has launched a
humanitarian visa and residence-permit scheme for
Afghans and all those by affected by the crisis in
Afghanistan. Recently, through an initiative jointly
undertaken by the Government and civil society in
Brazil, we welcomed female Afghan judges and their
families to our country.
Nevertheless, measures of solidarity, relevant
as they are, are not sufficient. We must condemn all
actions that hinder the meaningful and purposeful

22-2329619/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

participation of women in peace processes and in
society in general. The Security Council must work
not only to bring women to peace negotiation tables but
also to find ways to protect those invited to the table
and those working on the ground from direct violence
and intimidation.
By protecting those women already trying to
make a difference to their communities, the Security
Council is also making it clear that without the
participation of the female population, there are no
prospects for lasting peace in any country, let alone
economic development. Normalizing the participation
of women in peace processes and upgrading their role,
including as briefers to the Security Council, is a very
concrete way to implement the women and peace and
security agenda. In that regard, we commend Ireland
for setting a new record of female briefers during its
presidency in September and hope it becomes common
practice to invite women affected by armed conflicts to
a seat at the table — both in their home countries and
here in this Chamber.
Brazil suggests another important concrete action
in the light of the targets set forth by the Uniformed
Gender Parity Strategy — a thorough evaluation of the
situation of female peacekeepers and peacebuilders as
part of any examination of a country or region under
its scrutiny. The idea is to set specific goals in order
to work towards an increase in the number of women
in field missions and to make sure that those women
are able to make a difference, in various roles and
functions, and to act as drivers of change.
Before concluding, I would like to quote Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women, at
October’s debate on women and peace and security:
“We cannot expect women to build peace if their lives
are constantly under threat.” (S/PV.8886, p. 5)
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the holding of this debate at the initiative
of Norway. We thank High Commissioner Bachelet
and the speakers from civil society for their briefings.
Through them, we highlight the indispensable role of
all women peacebuilders and defenders of rights.
This meeting is also timely, considering the
extremely serious threats looming at this very moment
over the women of Afghanistan. Our discussions
focused on violence, intimidation and reprisals against
women in peace processes. France is concerned by
the increase in such acts. We condemn all attempts to
20/33

18/01/2022

impede the participation of women in peace processes.
It is unacceptable that anyone should be targeted as
part of their commitment to peace. Such attacks are
contrary to all the values and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. They require us to act.
First of all, fear must change sides. The perpetrators
of such acts must be held accountable and brought
to justice.
Secondly, in accordance with the resolutions on
women and peace and security, States must create
safe conditions for women activists to carry out their
activities without undue interference. Prevention and
early-warning mechanisms must be put in place, with
the support of the United Nations, where relevant.
Thirdly, we call on the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue its
documentation efforts and to identify good practices
in this area. Strong support must be provided to all
civil society actors who may be subject to threats,
intimidation or reprisals.
Finally, we must continue our efforts to fully
implement all resolutions on women and peace
and security.
France is implementing an ambitious feminist
diplomacy. In June 2021, in partnership with Mexico,
UN-Women, civil society and young people, France
hosted the Generation Equality Forum in Paris. The
meeting launched a new dynamic, based on strong
commitments to the rights of women and girls. More
than $40 billion in funding was announced to support
a global plan to accelerate equality by 2026. France
also wants to set an example at home. My country
therefore published its third national action plan on
women and peace and security in June 2021. It also
joined the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action.
In the Security Council, as in all forums, France
will continue to ensure that civil society actors can
participate in all relevant discussions and that they can
speak without fearing for their safety. Rest assured that
France will continue its determined action in favour of
the full implementation of all resolutions on women
and peace and security and, in particular the provisions
relating to the fight against reprisals.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate and
coming all the way to New York at a time when travel
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

is not as easy as it used to be. I also want to thank you
for your presidency of the Security Council, which, so
far, has impressed us as thoughtful, generous and wellmanaged. I would like to thank the briefers for their
observations and the work they are undertaking to
advance this important agenda.

S/PV. 8949

places the silencing, intimidation and retaliation against
women as a core value and seeks to totally exclude them
from civic life.

Kenya places great value on the work of women
peacebuilders. That includes amplifying their
voices and bolstering their contributions in conflict
prevention and peacemaking, both in Kenya and in our
immediate region.

Resolution 2242 (2015) should not be a standalone resolution. Instead, its aims should be linked to
relevant actions under resolutions that are specifically
focused on countering terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. This is simply because multiple
extremist groups all seem to have a common disregard
for the participation, safety and security of women
and girls.

The safety of women participating in peace and
security processes is a fundamental key to the success
of the women and peace and security agenda. At
the grass-roots and national levels, there should be
sustained efforts to protect the safety of human rights
defenders, gender equality advocates and civil society
representatives, as outlined in resolution 2493 (2019).
We therefore welcome the focus of this open debate as
a crucial implementation step by all countries and by
the United Nations.

Examples of such a linkage include, but are not
limited to, resolutions 2354 (2017) and 2178 (2014)
and their touching on countering terrorism narratives
ensuring that they include narratives that are supportive
of the women and peace and security agenda. Resolution
2331 (2016) takes on transnational organized crime,
including human trafficking, kidnapping and sexual
violence and enslavement. It should be specifically
implemented with due regard to women and peace and
security and resolution 2242 (2015).

I will propose, briefly, four arguments that I hope
offer opportunities for practical implementation.

I want to commend the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism for its efforts so far to deploy a gender
unit. We also appreciate its ongoing mainstreaming
of gender in counter-terrorism and the prevention of
violent extremism. We think that work can be advanced
further by its cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to assess the extent
to which sanctions are related to the violence and
terrorist operations targeting women. They can propose
specific ways in which the Security Council and States
can deploy sanctions that better protect women and
girls from terrorists.

First, States must increase prosecutions for genderbased violence and its manifestation in sexual violence,
harassment, attacks, reprisals, online intimidation and
physical violence against women participating in the
peace agenda. The Security Council should also take
specific steps to increase the costs of intimidating,
threatening or harming women who have briefed the
Security Council.
Secondly, Kenya urges the international
community to support regional efforts that safeguard
the women and peace and security pillars of protection
and participation. In particular, we call on the Council
to note and support the outcomes of the African Union
Peace and Security Council ministerial-level meeting
held on 22 March under Kenya’s chairmanship, on the
theme “Women, Peace, Culture and Gender Inclusivity
in Africa”.
Thirdly, Kenya calls for the linking of the
women and peace and security agenda with counterradicalization mechanisms relevant to the sexual and
gender-based violence reflected in the actions and
ideologies of terrorists groups affiliated with Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. We should
all be aware that the cause and ideology of those groups

The Kenyan delegation notes that resolution 1960
(2010) seeks in particular the listing of perpetrators in
sanctions regimes and reports of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence. Resolution 2242
(2015) usefully includes terrorist groups and proposes
putting in place a stand-alone designation criterion for
acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence and
targeted sanctions in situations of armed conflict.
Despite the existence of such lists of persistent
perpetrators, parties and individuals, the majority of
which are non-State actors and several of which are
designated as terrorist groups and are credibly suspected
of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
or other forms of sexual violence, there has been little
remedial or accountability action for the perpetrators.

22-2329621/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

Impunity still prevails, and it is in the power of the
Security Council to do something about it.
More needs to be done on the implementation
and operationalization of such recommendations in
order to strengthen accountability for sexual and
gender-based violence, including through the work
of women’s protection advisers in the framework of
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.
The protection of women impels the Security
Council to do more to enable African forces that seek to
fight terrorism in the Sahel and other parts of Africa to
be more effective. Supporting United Nations-assessed
contributions to those security efforts would directly
help women and their security.
The final recommendation is really to note what
is most obvious — but perhaps for that reason is easily
left out — which is that the greatest protection for the
security and safety of women and girls is a competent,
inclusive Government. To get competent Government,
one needs reform and resources. We speak a lot about
reform at the United Nations but perhaps too little about
resources. A growing economy is necessary to raise
taxes, which in turn are necessary to provide the basic
services and security that are required, in addition to
providing the livelihoods that women need to secure
their own safety, security and autonomy.
Therefore, we believe that it is crucial that we
bring development back to the conversation in the
Security Council and at the United Nations as a whole,
because the basis of State action must be resourced
Governments. In that regard, even as we argue about
the transition to net zero and the transition to a green
economy, we need to note that those transitions cannot
be achieved at the expense of the desire and the need
for development of the countries in the global South,
particularly in Africa. We will keep repeating that the
most peace-positive action that we can undertake at the
United Nations is to enable a green transition that is
positive for African development and economic growth.
I want to conclude by reaffirming that Kenya
is a champion of the women and peace and security
agenda. We have a national action plan that we are
busy implementing to reflect our commitment to the
national, regional and global equality of women and
their safety and security.
22/33

18/01/2022

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We are pleased that you, Madam President,
are presiding over this debate on protecting women
against violence in peace and security processes, which
is of the utmost importance for Mexico.
We thank Ms. Michelle Bachelet for her briefing
and greatly appreciate the participation of Ms. Kaavya
Asoka, with whom we have been able to collaborate in
the past, as well as of Ms. Zarqa Yaftali.
Mexico reiterates its commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda. Our
commitment to, and activism on, the issue is in line with our
feminist foreign policy. We pay tribute to Almaas Elman,
a Somali activist murdered in Mogadishu at the end of
2019; Hanane Al-Barassi, a prominent Libyan lawyer
killed in 2020; the Afghan journalists killed in
Jalalabad in March 2021; and all women activists,
peacebuilders and courageous human rights defenders
who have been victims of threats, violence or
reprisals. Their absence reminds us that we have failed
to ensure safe environments for them to participate in
the public and political life of their countries.
Mexico calls on the Security Council to speak
out when it becomes aware of those situations, and
thereby send an unequivocal message of rejection. The
peacebuilders who come before the Security Council
to report on the situations in their countries should be
given special attention, as in doing so they risk their
lives and those of their families.
During our presidency in November 2021, all
briefers were women, and we are grateful to them
because they were essential for the successful
conclusion of our programme of work.
We recognize the work carried out by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in the area of the protection of women
briefers, and we call on it to coordinate with other
entities of the United Nations system on a better
structured protocol for the protection and monitoring
of individual cases that require it, as well as on keeping
the Security Council and the Informal Expert Group on
Women and Peace and Security updated so that we can
react in a timely fashion.
As co-Chair of the Informal Group, together with
Ireland, Mexico reiterates its call for all peace processes
to systematically include women from the beginning
of negotiations and at all decision-making levels.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8949

Threats, reprisals, hate speech, sexual violence or any
other form of violence directed at women activists,
peacebuilders and human rights defenders are
unacceptable. We must strive to eradicate them.

we are much more peaceful than men — but because
women carry unique perspectives and experiences in
their communities. When women participate, peace
lasts longer.

But we need more effective protection
mechanisms — and if possible preventive protection
mechanisms — and civil society, above all women,
should participate in their design and execution. The
objective must be none other than to achieve greater
protection against the many forms of discrimination,
whether based on race, age, place of origin,
belief, sexual orientation, migratory status, disability
or other distinctions.

However, far too often taking part means becoming
a target. Whenever women speak up, we risk more
than men, and women peacebuilders and human rights
defenders risk more than anyone. Where they should
receive recognition, they get threats and violence
instead. That means that we must find better ways to
strengthen our prevention and response measures in
order to protect and empower women and promote and
safeguard their right to participate. With that in mind,
Norway wishes to make three recommendations.

Impunity and the lack of accountability for
perpetrators are also unacceptable, as they propitiate
new cycles of violence. Every State must guarantee
access to justice and the provision of services
for victims — sexual and reproductive health
services, mental health services and other means of
psychosocial support.
In conclusion, we must ensure that all peace
operations mandated by the Council are equipped with
the material and human resources necessary to oversee
and provide such protection to everyone participating
in them. To that end, we will have to begin by regularly
and continuously listening to their experiences, requests
and recommendations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
I would like to start by thanking the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights for briefing
the Security Council today and providing the context
for this important debate. I thank Ms. Yaftali for her
powerful intervention. It is very important for the
Council to hear first-hand accounts such as hers. I also
thank Ms. Asoka for her coalition’s guidance on how
we can improve the situation for women peacebuilders
and human rights defenders, as well as the more than
50 civil society experts who convened to discuss the
issue of reprisals last week. Their recommendations
will be shared and will guide our work going forward. I
also thank all Council members and the broader United
Nations membership for engaging in this difficult topic.
While we may disagree on some areas, we all agree
that women have a fundamental right to participate in
peace and security. It is not because women by nature
carry some magical solution to end all wars or because

First, women’s participation must become the new
normal. Participation is the long-term game-changer.
When women can directly influence decisions about
peace and security, they shape protection measures that
work for them and their families and communities.
Secondly, we must provide the resources needed
to support women peacebuilders and human rights
defenders at all levels of society and ensure that relevant
United Nations entities are set up to do the same.
Thirdly, there must be zero tolerance for threats
and reprisals that target women in peace and security
processes, including by engaging with the Council.
However, women will continue to participate
despite the risks they face. We see that in Afghanistan,
South Sudan, Myanmar, Yemen, Mali and many
other places. If the worst happens, we must ensure
an adequate response. We should consider sanctions
and other deterrent measures, and we must demand
accountability. Earlier today, Norway participated
in the launch of a new funding mechanism that aims
to provide protection. That is a safety net, and it can
provide assistance when needed.
Too often women are told that security comes
first before their participation, resulting in neither
participation nor security. It is a false trade-off. If peace
and security really are the aim and protecting women is
the aim, participation is the only way to achieve those
aims. Therefore, we must protect participation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to

22-2329623/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close after
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to Norway for convening this important
debate on women and peace and security, with a
focus on creating a safe and enabling environment for
women. I thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the civil society representatives
for their briefings.
First of all, Japan shares the deep concerns about
attacks against women human rights defenders,
journalists and others, to which the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/827) on women and peace
and security alerts us. We are also deeply impressed
by the report’s analysis of the goal of reversing the
rise in global military spending and ensuring greater
investment in human security. As the report states
in paragraph 1, “[G]reater investment in the social
infrastructure and services that buttress human
security” is what we really need for conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. That is particularly
true in the context of women and peace and security.
United Nations agencies and local non-governmental
agencies can certainly play a key role in supporting
and protecting women in engaging in peace and
security processes. Japan has been actively supporting
the capacity-building of local women peacebuilders
through a number of UN-Women projects. In order to
cope with ongoing threats and violence against Afghan
women, including human rights defenders, Japan
decided to fund a new UN-Women project that supports
local civil society organizations that operate shelters
and community-based centres for survivors of violence.
In the long-term, however, there is no magic solution
to create a lasting safe and enabling environment
for women, but instead we must build effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions that are owned
by each country and can protect and empower people
and foster trust in society.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has brought to
the forefront online violence as a new form of threat
that targets women human rights defenders. Japan
supports the ongoing study by UN-Women in 21 Arab
countries, with a specific focus on online violence
24/33

18/01/2022

against women, including women activists and human
rights defenders. It aims to clarify the gaps in the legal
systems in order to prevent online violence and identify
challenges in reporting and accessing services. The
project will also facilitate the mapping of existing laws.
We hope that the findings of the project will contribute
to strengthening institutional capacity in the region to
cope with the new threat.
In conclusion, the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders requires long-term collective efforts.
Japan is committed to play its part in that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta thanks the delegation
of Norway for holding today’s open debate on the theme
“Protecting participation: addressing violence targeting
women in peace and security processes”. We welcome
the momentum created in the area of women and peace
and security over the past months and reiterate the
importance of ensuring that we all remain seized of the
women and peace and security agenda.
I also thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights for her insightful remarks, as
well as today’s briefers for sharing their experiences
and concerns. It is important for the international
community to recognize and support the work they
carry out.
Malta aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Women human rights defenders, peacebuilders,
advocates for gender equality, politicians, journalists
and other members of civil society play a crucial role
in advancing the common goals of peace, justice,
human rights and accountability. Regrettably, they are
under continuous attack for doing so. Let us be clear
that that is unacceptable and that such actions must be
condemned in the most unequivocal manner.
More than two years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 2493 (2019), but more decisive action is
needed to address violence, threats and harassment,
both online and offline. Our shared goal of women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation, in all their
diversity and in all stages of peace processes, cannot
be achieved if they fear for their lives and the lives of
their families. That shared goal must be at the centre of
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8949

all our efforts, since the participation and leadership of
women are essential for achieving sustainable peace.

major impediment to their participation in peace and
security processes.

The participation and protection pillars of the
women and peace and security agenda are closely related.
There cannot be participation without protection. The
prompt investigation of intimidation, threats, violence
and other abuses against women in peace and security
processes, including women human rights defenders,
should be undertaken if we are to narrow the gap in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. The State has the primary responsibility to
ensure an enabling and secure environment for all
women in peace processes, and the United Nations
must lead by example.

Women peacebuilders, political leaders, activists
and human rights defenders play a crucial role in
advancing peace, human rights and gender equality. We
condemn in the strongest terms all acts of intimidation,
threats and violence against women. Women deserve
our full support and a safe and enabling environment
to effectively engage in peace processes and carry out
their valuable work.

United Nations special missions on the ground have
a responsibility to support and protect them. No civil
society member should fear retaliation for engaging
with the United Nations. The Security Council has
a strong mandate to address those issues and has
repeatedly urged Member States to act to that end.
Existing frameworks must be allocated the necessary
resources to be fully implemented. Member States must
also be more vocal to consistently defend civil society
space and condemn attacks against it.
Today we reiterate our call to respect and protect
those at the centre of the women and peace and security
agenda and underscore the importance of inclusive
peace processes. Women have a crucial role to play in
shaping the future of the societies in which they live
and must be at the negotiating table. In doing so, we
will give long-term peace a significantly better chance,
for without women there is no peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Allow me to thank the
delegation of Norway for organizing today’s debate. I
thank all speakers for their briefings and testimonies.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and would like
to add the following statement in our national capacity.
It has been well established that only those peace
and political processes that are truly inclusive are likely
to bring about durable solutions and sustainable peace.
It is high time that we effectively remove the existing
barriers to the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in decision-making processes and prevent
violence against women, which continues to be a

Alarming levels of all forms of violence against
women, including political violence targeting women,
make our deliberations today particularly timely.
Slovenia reaffirms its full support for the women and
girls of Afghanistan. Their free and equal participation
and respect for their human rights are prerequisites
for building a peaceful, sustainable and resilient
Afghan society.
When intimidation and violence are directed at
women for exercising their right to participate in public
and political life, the Security Council should not
remain silent. It must act to protect the space and voices
of civil society and women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders and to condemn any violence and attacks
against them. Acts of reprisals against members of
civil society who cooperate with the United Nations
or against those who brief the Security Council should
not go unaddressed. Impunity for any violence, in
particular violence targeting women, must be prevented
and accountability ensured.
Slovenia places great importance on promoting the
women and peace and security agenda, in particular
women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
peace and security processes. We also regularly deploy
women uniformed personnel to peace operations and
missions, including in senior roles. Women hold leading
positions in the Slovenian armed forces in functional
areas and command tactical units, both at home and in
contingents abroad.
As part of Slovenia’s commitment to the women and
peace and security agenda, we established the Special
Centre for Education and Training for Participation in
Peacekeeping Operations and Missions. An important
part of the educational programme provided by the new
Centre focuses on the needs of local communities, in
particular the rights of women and girls. Furthermore,
in the context of implementing the women and peace
and security agenda, Slovenia funds several projects

22-2329625/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

addressing challenges related to gender-based
violence in the Western Balkans, the Middle East and
North Africa.
In conclusion, I would like to express Slovenia’s
full commitment to its collective efforts in preventing
attacks against women human rights defenders,
peacebuilders and civil society leaders, as well as
ensuring a safe and inclusive space in our quest for
durable international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I am very pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, which is an informal network of 65 Member
States representing all five regional groups of the
United Nations and the European Union.
The Group thanks the delegation of Norway for
convening today’s debate. I thank you very much,
Madam President, for highlighting the important
link between the protection of women peacebuilders
and human rights defenders and their participation in
advancing peace and security. We wish to emphasize
three points.
First, we condemn all threats, harassment, attacks
and reprisals against women peacebuilders, human
rights defenders and gender equality advocates. In line
with resolution 2493 (2019), we urge all Member States
to address those issues, both online and offline, as
well as all forms of sexual and gender-based violence
perpetrated against them. We also urge Member States
to hold accountable all perpetrators of such acts. We are
more than concerned about the fact that some women
have faced reprisals for briefing the Council. The
Security Council and the United Nations system must
develop effective measures to prevent and respond to
those reprisals.
Secondly, we call on all Member States to
create safe and enabling environments for women
peacebuilders, human rights defenders and gender
equality advocates. They must receive the support
they need to carry out their work safely, independently
and without undue interference. That support includes
promoting the human rights of women and girls,
building the capacity of national institutions to ensure
the protection of peacebuilders, developing local
early-warning mechanisms and supporting at-risk
individuals. It is essential that we work directly with
26/33

18/01/2022

those who are targeted to understand the threats they
face and work in partnership with them to identify
ways to effectively strengthen their protection and put
an end to those threats.
We support the Security Council’s incorporation
and application of sexual violence as a designation
criterion in United Nations sanctions regimes. We also
encourage the Council to ensure that peace operations
provide, monitor and report on gender-responsive
support to peacebuilders and human rights defenders
at risk.
Finally, we encourage the United Nations, its States
Members, international financial institutions and other
relevant stakeholders to provide rapid, flexible and real
funding for the protection of women peacebuilders,
human rights defenders and gender-equality advocates,
particularly those in need of emergency assistance,
including psychosocial support. Collectively, we can
and must do more to support all women on the front
lines of peace and security efforts.
(spoke in French)
Very briefly, on behalf of Canada, I would like to
add that the danger women face reflects the reality of
violence against women around the world, including
in Canada, for, in my country too, women who
dedicate their lives to democracy, peace and justice
are threatened and even attacked, both virtually and
physically. Aboriginal women, racialized women and
other women who already face many other forms of
discrimination are particularly targeted simply because
they are women and because they exercise their
human rights.
We must act together now and put in place the safe
conditions that the Council called for in resolution 2493
(2019). We cannot afford to remain passive in the face
of issues of women’s safety.
(spoke in English)
Let me close by saying this: women are telling us
very clearly around the world and in this Chamber and
in the General Assembly Hall what they need for their
support and what they need for their protection. We
must keep asking questions. But, above all, we must
now listen to what we are hearing, and we must act.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of New Zealand.
New Zealand thanks Norway for choosing to focus
on women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in peace and security processes as today’s theme.
We fully support Norway’s commitment to elevating
participation during its Council presidency and are
committed to advancing the shared goal across all
United Nations forums.
Despite the fact that resolution 1325 (2000) urges
all actors to increase the participation of women
and the incorporation of gender perspectives in all
United Nations peace and security efforts, the 2021
report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security (S/2021/827) highlights persistent and
troubling gaps in delivery on the resolution. This
includes the need to strengthen protection measures for
women peacebuilders, human rights defenders and civil
society representatives.
Today’s debate is an opportunity to collectively
take stock of how far we have come and what more
remains to be done. States Members of the United
Nations must be bold, and they must be consistent
in their condemnation of those who silence women
involved in peace processes or any other context and
hold perpetrators to account without exception.
New Zealand calls on all Member States to continue
to seek innovative and sustainable ways to create safe
and enabling environments for women and girls in all
of their diversity. Unambiguous, resourced, responsive
and operationally focused initiatives based on Member
States’ shared best practices should be implemented in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
In the context of today’s debate, based on lessons we
have learned, New Zealand recommends the following
initiatives for consideration to enhance the operational
effectiveness of peacekeepers.
First, we recommend the adoption of an initiative to
support gender analysis. From the outset of any process,
gender analysis is fundamental to understanding and
supporting decision makers within peacekeeping
operations and the host country. Understanding
gendered cultural dynamics helps to identify challenges
and potential solutions to the complex issues of
peacebuilding and peacemaking.
Secondly, New Zealand has seen first-hand
the immense value of promoting gender-sensitive

S/PV. 8949

peacekeeping personnel that understand the local
environment and the people they are deployed to serve.
This has rung true in our experience of peacemaking
efforts in the South Pacific, including the very recent
operations in the Solomon Islands.
Thirdly, the power of diverse teams not only
improves performance but also promotes inclusion and
equality, and this is a key hallmark of New Zealand’s
approach in peace and security and beyond. The Wahine
Toa leadership programme, designed to increase
women participation in the New Zealand Defence
Forces, including peacekeeping operations, provides a
proven model.
It is clear from listening to our two female civil
society briefers today that their voices and the diverse
voices of female civil society are indispensable to
advancing women’s involvement in peace processes,
No women peacebuilders should have their right to
participate curtailed in any way, in particular by the
threat of violence, intimidation or reprisals. Any
reprisals against civil society briefers for merely
briefing the Council, as others have mentioned this
morning already, are an affront to their basic human
rights to participate and to share their experience. We
need to leverage this expertise if we want to build peace
in all of the conflicts we are witnessing today.
New Zealand will serve on the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission in
2022 and continues to support the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, and with this we are committed
to advancing the Peacebuilding Commission’s gender
strategy to ensure that sustained gender-responsive
engagement is embedded in all aspects of United
Nations peacebuilding work. Inclusion is fundamental
to sustainable peace, and we will seek to ground our
engagement in gender-responsive peacebuilding,
bringing women’s diverse perspectives to the fore. This
is our steadfast commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog: I offer my congratulations to Norway
for presiding over the Security Council this month and
for making this issue a high priority of its presidency.
I speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the Republic
of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania; the

22-2329627/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate, Bosnian and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
We have a lot to say on this subject, and we will
distribute our full statement through other means. I
will now present an abbreviated version.
Supporting independent civil society organizations,
enabling civic space and protecting human rights
defenders and peacebuilders are key priorities of the
EU. We deplore that women peacebuilders mediators,
journalists, politicians, humanitarian workers, civil
society leaders and human rights defenders face
increasing and specific challenges that often hamper
their ability to act.
Worldwide, we have seen the disproportionate
impact of conflict on women and girls. We are deeply
concerned about the use of sexual and gender-based
violence as a weapon of war in Ethiopia, particularly in
the Tigray region, and the persistent threats of violence
facing women in such countries as Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic, Myanmar, South Sudan, and Yemen.
With regard to Afghanistan, the EU has strengthened
its support to Afghan women at risk, including through
a dedicated programme on human rights defenders.
The protection of the human rights of Afghan women
and girls must be an integral part of the political
priorities. We, the EU, have responded very generously
to the humanitarian appeals, and for good reasons, but
broader support will depend on Afghanistan’s respect
of international human rights frameworks and norms.
During the implementation of the EU Action Plan
on Women, Peace and Security and other programmes,
we identified six recommendations to strengthen
prevention and response to threats.
First, systematic gender mainstreaming based on
targeted analyses should be applied to all actions.
Secondly, visibility can be a powerful tool to
ensure protection if pursued in close consultation with
the women concerned.
Thirdly, special attention should be given to
those who face multiple and intersecting forms of
discrimination and violence, particularly young and
older women, women with disabilities, indigenous
28/33

18/01/2022

women and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex persons
Fourthly, we must do more to fight impunity. We
reiterate our support to the International Criminal
Court and call on the Security Council to incorporate
and apply sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict as a designation criterion in United Nations
sanction regimes.
Fifthly, political dialogues and diplomatic efforts
are important to promote prevention and accountability.
Sixthly, funds should be allocated to support
protection measures. In that regard, we congratulate
the initiative presented today. The EU’s Human Rights
Defenders Mechanism, for example, has an operational
budget of €15 million for three years, and any human
rights defender at risk can apply for protection.
The Security Council has a strong mandate to
tackle these issues. The existing frameworks must be
given the necessary attention and resources to be fully
implemented. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights and her Office have a key role to play in that
regard, as we heard today. We encourage increased
cooperation between the High Commissioner and the
Security Council on these matters.
Lastly, civil society must be part of the solution.
We congratulate you, Madam President, for inviting
today’s briefers, whose work is commendable. We urge
the members of the Council to continue to invite more
women human rights defenders and civil society leaders
to brief the Council, while taking all the necessary
precautions to ensure their safety. The innovative
women and peace and security trio presidency launched
by Ireland, Kenya and Mexico last year and the ongoing
presidency initiative by the Niger, Norway, Albania and
United Arab Emirates are positive steps in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We welcome Norway’s
initiative to convene this open debate and are grateful
to the briefers for their contributions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement just delivered
by the observer of the European Union (EU) and with
the one delivered by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security and would like to add the following remarks
in its national capacity.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

We fully share the urgent need to create an
environment that can enable women peacebuilders,
human rights defenders and civil society representatives
to carry out their work in complete safety. In order to
achieve that objective, we must do all we can to stop
the current trend of growing targeted violence against
women in peace processes. International cooperation
must be strengthened in order to support effective
prevention and response strategies.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in all aspects of human life requires uprooting
gender and sexual-based violence. At the same time,
women’s participation in the decision-making process is
one of the main tools for preventing violence by means
of increasing the recognition of women’s role within
national societies. The two dimensions are therefore
deeply interconnected and mutually reinforcing.
Peace negotiations and the implementation of peace
agreements need to be inclusive: all civil society voices
should be heard and given the opportunity to play their
role in building a sustainable future. In particular,
women’s participation increases considerably the
probability of durable peace agreements.
Italy has been supporting resolution 1325 (2000)
since its adoption, and the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda remains a priority of our
foreign policy. We are currently in the implementation
phase of our fourth national action plan on women and
peace and security, corresponding to the 2020-2024
period. At the same time, we continue to engage with
our EU partners in the implementation of the relevant
EU Action Plan for the 2019-2024 term.
Promoting women’s participation in mediation is
one of our main and long-standing objectives. In 2017,
Italy promoted the launch of the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network, which now brings together more
than 60 qualified women mediators from 21 countries
from the Mediterranean region.
We also remain committed to providing our
peacekeeping troops with targeted training on gender
issues and to promoting the presence of women in their
ranks, in line with resolution 2538 (2020). Italy supports
the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative and the
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation by United
Nations peacekeepers. We joined the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians in 2015, as well as the
voluntary compact, through which Member States
committed to take measures to prevent and fight sexual

S/PV. 8949

exploitation and abuse. We are also part of the Circle of
Leadership, launched by the Secretary-General in 2017
to prevent and react to sexual exploitation and abuse
within United Nations operations.
We remain seriously concerned about the use of
sexual violence and the persisting threat of violence
against women in several countries in conflict
situations. In Afghanistan in particular, we reaffirm
the need to ensure that respect for the human rights
of Afghan women and girls be an integral part of the
present and future of the country. That need was at the
centre of the ministerial event that Italy successfully
organized on the margins of the past General Assembly
high-level week, and it will continue to inform our
policy and action towards Afghanistan.
Lastly, we wish to reaffirm our full support for the
efforts of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
express the hope that increased cooperation between
the Human Rights Council and the Security Council
can decisively help to prevent targeted violence against
women and make sure that can women play a full role
in peace and security processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Norway for convening this meeting on such an
important issue, and also thank all the briefers for their
inspiring insights.
Violence, intimidation and threats that target
women peacebuilders and human rights defenders are
on the rise. Such actions, aimed at preventing women
from engaging politically and curbing their public
activity, have a detrimental impact on crisis prevention
and post-conflict recovery in general. This negative
phenomenon represents a serious threat to peace,
democracy and human rights.
In that regard, United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions play an important role. It is therefore
indispensable to mainstream women’s protection,
prevention and monitoring mandates in the daily
activities of the United Nations missions. Among
the key conditions for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace and security processes
are adequate and effective protection mechanisms.
Those instruments should be focused on addressing
the issue of the impunity of the perpetrators, as well
as on efforts to support the victims of such crimes

22-2329629/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

against women. We should also prioritize the expertise
of women peacebuilders and cooperation between
peacekeeping operation personnel and local women
leaders in order to develop targeted strategies that aim
to identify risks and potential threats.
Women leadership still needs recognition. Political
and financial measures need to be employed to further
promote the role of women and their impact on peace
and security processes. We need to use all available
forums to promote the full implementation of all
principles of the women and peace and security agenda.
In particularly difficult contexts where women’s right to
participate is poorly recognized and poorly protected,
we need to pressure the parties concerned to include
women at all stages of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding process and guarantee
their protection and security.
In United Nations-led mediation processes, the
participation of women should be a prerequisite. In
order to amplify women’s voices and leadership, we
need to build a secure, safe and enabling environment
and provide them with adequate technical, financial
and political support. The sustainability of gains
related to the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda remains a challenge, especially in
post-conflict and transition contexts.
Peacekeepers should consult systematically and
inclusively with civil society, including women-led
organizations, in order to identify transition priorities
and potential protection gaps. It is vital to ensure that,
when peacekeepers are drawn down, the United Nations
country team and other United Nations agencies be
provided with an adequate early-warning mechanism
and response capabilities regarding potential violence
against women.
Let me also stress that the protection of human
rights defenders is among the main priorities of Poland’s
current mandate on the Human Rights Council, as well
as one of the key issues addressed in the Polish national
action plan on women and peace and security. Support
for civil society organizations and human rights
defenders also constitutes one of the priorities of Polish
development cooperation.
Finally, I would like to underscore the importance of
making the goals of the women and peace and security
agenda a reality. This agenda, which stems from the
need to ensure more equality in reality, serves as a
framework for efforts, actions and activities aspiring
30/33

18/01/2022

to address the multidimensional challenges that women
and girls face while trying to build sustained peace.
Complex security circumstances require a plurality
of methods and approaches. In order to enhance the
protection of women and human rights defenders,
adequate legal and political support need to be
guaranteed. Long-term policies and procedures need to
be strengthened and coordination mechanisms need to
be developed. Furthermore, the roles and responsibilities
of the parties involved need to be clarified in order to
allow for an effective and constructive response to
threats against women peacebuilders. The recent surge
in violence that targets women who participate in peace
and security processes show that much more still needs
to be done in that area.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): It is good to be back in
this Chamber, especially for a topic as important as
women and peace and security. I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement by the
European Union.
Estonia strongly condemns the persistent threats
and attacks against women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders both online and offline.
Women peacebuilders are often among the few
people with the courage to speak up for change and for
peace. Yet often Governments and warring parties do
not have the courage to hear them out. Instead, women
are silenced through violence or threats of it. That
includes situations on the Security Council’s agenda
ranging from Afghanistan to Yemen and Haiti.
The targets of those threats include, somewhat
unbelievably, the women who address the Security
Council, whose only weapons are their words, which
are focused on reaching peace. We cannot afford
their silence, which would undermine the work of the
Council on peace and security. Afghanistan is a warning
example of the impact of the removal of women from
the political and peace process.
The Security Council, like the rest of the United
Nations, has been slow in addressing those risks, often
failing to reach agreement on whether such women
human rights defenders exist at all.
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

We need the commitment of all States to protect
the freedom of expression and association and the lives
of women human rights defenders and peacebuilders,
including by adopting measures to support them in line
with Council resolutions.
We need condemnation by the Security Council
of attacks directed at women human rights defenders,
including those addressing the Council, as well as the
continued adoption and use of sanctions in connection
with sexual- and gender-based violence.
We need to ensure real accountability to increase
the currently negligible cost of attacks on women
peacebuilders, including through national legal systems
and international justice mechanisms such as the
International Criminal Court, while offering protection
and support to those who bring complaints.
As we experienced during our membership of
the Security Council, we need broadly established
procedures, information exchange and guidelines at the
United Nations level, which need to be developed in
consultation with women human rights defenders.
We also need the strong voice of the United
Nations — at the highest levels — to raise specific
attacks and threats in statements and regular briefings.
For that, we need systematic reporting by United
Nations missions on threats against women engaged in
political and peace processes.
Finally, we need a renewed focus on resources. In that
regard, we welcome the launch of the funding window
under the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund and
the work done by UN-Women under the Compact on
Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): I would first like to
commend Norway for organizing this timely event, as
well as our briefers for their thorough interventions.
Greece fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the European Union and would like to
make some additional remarks.
Women’s representation and leadership in
peace processes can improve the prospects for the
durability of peace agreements and also facilitates
women’s participation in the subsequent transitional
political phases.

S/PV. 8949

Still, gender-equal participation is often impeded
by persisting obstacles, such as restrictive societal
norms and attitudes.
In addition, relatively lower levels of education
and multiple family and labour burdens, which women
in conflict-affected-areas often face, weaken their
beneficial role in promoting sustainable peace and
security. At the same time, conflict-related, genderbased and sexual violence directed against women
because of their engagement in peace and security
processes remains at an alarmingly high level.
Against that backdrop, there is an urgent need
to create a safe and enabling environment in which
women, especially local women peacebuilders, human
rights defenders and civil society representatives, may
carry out their work freely and without fear of any form
of violence or intimidation.
That goal entails primarily taking holistic and
coherent international policy action that is systematically
mainstreamed by a gender perspective. In that vein,
addressing impunity and ensuring the accountability
of perpetrators of conflict-related, gender-based and
sexual violence is crucial for the substantial protection
of women participating in peace and security processes.
An adequate international response should therefore
include a human security approach that focuses on the
specific challenges that women and girls experience
and that aims at people-centred, prevention-oriented
and gender-responsive solutions that are based on
national ownership.
My country fully supports the coherent
implementation of interlinked Security Council agendas
and also prioritizes gender-equal representation,
participation and leadership as a cross-cutting issue that
guides its national policy, both domestic and foreign.
In implementing the national action plan on women
and peace and security, Greece seeks to strengthen
meaningful cooperation with all relevant stakeholders
at all levels in order to advance the crucial role of
women in peace processes.
As a final note, please allow me to reiterate
Greece’s determination to prevent and combat any form
of gender-based violence as the only way to accelerate
the realization of substantive gender equality and build
peaceful, inclusive and gender-equal societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.

22-2329631/33

S/PV.8949

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland): I deliver these
remarks on behalf of the Human Rights and Conflict
Prevention Caucus, which is co-chaired by Germany
and Switzerland, and its members Albania, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Gabon,
Guatemala, Japan, Mauritius, Mexico, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sweden, the
United Kingdom and Uruguay.
We thank Norway for organizing this important
debate and the briefers for their precious contributions.
We commend Norway — together with Albania,
the Niger and the United Arab Emirates — for their
shared commitments on women and peace and security,
including a zero-tolerance approach to reprisals
against briefers.
The Caucus recognizes the essential and meaningful
contribution of women human rights defenders, women
peacebuilders and gender equality advocates to
defending and advancing peace and human rights across
the globe. They provide the United Nations system in
general and the Human Right Council and Security
Council in particular with crucial insights for informed
decision-making. Reprisals against them undermine
the Security Council’s work and the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
We strongly condemn all threats, intimidations,
violence and reprisals against any representatives of
civil society, including while engaging with the United
Nations. It is of the utmost importance to create a safe
and enabling environment — online and offline — for
women to lead and contribute in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, without fear of any kind of intimidation
or violence.
We propose the following areas of action.
First, we urge all Member States to prevent
and ensure adequate protection against any acts of
intimidation and reprisals and to strengthen their
response if they occur. We must engage in preventive
measures and awareness-raising, as well as ensure
accountability through robust investigations. We call
for the full implementation of all Security Council
resolutions on women and peace and security, as well as
all resolutions on human rights defenders and resolutions
addressing intimidation and reprisals against those who
cooperate with the United Nations. We encourage the
presentation by the Secretary-General of his annual
report on reprisals to the General Assembly from its
seventy-seventh session onward.
32/33

18/01/2022

Secondly, the wider United Nations system has
a duty to prevent and respond to alleged cases of
intimidation and reprisals against those who provide
information or seek to engage with it, and to ensure
accountability when such acts occur. Coordination and
collaboration among different bodies and mechanisms
are crucial. The United Nations, including the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and treaty bodies, should hold regular and
systematic exchanges with civil society on identifying
specific protection needs. We encourage the
Peacebuilding Commission to make use of its advisory,
bridging and convening roles in order to strengthen
system-wide responses and preventive measures to that
effect. We further commend the Secretary-General’s
focus on putting human rights and gender equality at
the core of the United Nations work, as most recently
expressed in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Thirdly, the Caucus calls upon the Security
Council to publicly condemn intimidation, threats and
reprisals against those who engage with it, in particular
women. Civil society must be able to carry out its work
independently and without interference. A resolute
position by the Council on the need to create safe and
enabling environments will send an important message:
reprisals are unacceptable and cannot be tolerated.
Such a clear stance will also help prevent the growing
self-censorship by actors who decide not to engage with
the United Nations out of fear.
Fourthly, the Caucus welcomes the work of the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights as the
focal point for reprisals within the United Nations
system and will support her in that endeavour. The
work of the focal point is underfunded, and we request
all Member States to support it.
As a cross-regional group of Member States, the
Caucus stands ready to work with all Member States,
civil society and the entire United Nations system
to protect the invaluable contribution of women to
peace and security processes and to prevent them
from becoming targets of all forms of violence
and intimidation.
In my national capacity, let me add that Switzerland
works for greater inclusion and protection for women
and civil society in all our peacebuilding efforts and
human rights policies. As this year’s co-Chair of the
Women and Peace and Security Focal Points Network,
22-23296

18/01/2022

Women and peace and security

we will stand for women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace and security processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): First of all, Madam
President, allow me to wish you, your delegation and
the members of the Security Council a Happy New
Year 2022, which we hope will be a better one. We also
thank you for this debate, as well as the briefers. We
appreciate their contributions to this debate.
The past couple of decades have witnessed
instability, violence, armed conflict and wars, which
continue to affect women and girls disproportionately.
From sexual violence to exploitation and abuse, women
carry physical and psychological trauma over the years.
As has been said here in the Chamber, resolution
1325 (2000) places women’s issues at the centre of the
global conflict prevention in the context of international
peace and security. While we have made considerable
progress, the world continues to remain a very dangerous
place for women and girls who find themselves caught
up in unending conflict and wars. Rwanda believes that
a greater effort is still needed to safeguard and protect
the countless women who continue to suffer the everlasting consequences.
We also believe that our collective resolve to
address those challenges should primarily focus on
the implementation of existing commitments and
frameworks, including addressing the root causes
of conflict to eliminate the breeding ground for
such crimes.
I wish to echo most of the speakers who spoke
before me on various issues and recommendations
to enhance the protection and promotion of women’s
rights around the word.
First, as States Members of the United Nations,
we must renew our commitment to promoting and
protecting women’s rights in many aspects. This debate’s
theme brings forward vital elements that have been a
component of discussions either here in the Council or
in other United Nations forums. However, recent reports
of the Secretary-General on this matter suggest that,
collectively, we are not making the progress envisaged.
As Members States and within our respective contexts,

S/PV. 8949

we need to reinforce our policies and legal framework
regarding the protection of women in all aspects by
translating commitments into concrete actions.
We have a guiding instrument at our disposal,
namely, resolution 1325 (2000), one of the pillars
of which is protection.
Resolution 1325 (2000)
addresses key issues that are critical to this debate:
the disproportionate impact of violent conflict and war
on women and girls and the crucial role that women
should — and already do — play in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. If respective Member States were
to strengthen their commitments in the implementation
of the resolution, the results would undoubtedly
be positive.
As Member States, it is critical to mobilize efforts to
prevent and respond to gender-based violence as a threat
to international peace and security. United Nations
and Member States should also capitalize on existing
international and regional cooperation frameworks
to promote the protection and rights of women
peacebuilders, while driving universal aspirations for
commitments and recommendations to be translated
into local, national and regional action plans.
I wish to conclude by re-emphasizing that the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in peace
and security processes helps to minimize the chances
of conflict and community confrontation. It provides a
larger sense of security to local populations, including
women and children. Therefore, the protection of
women should be part of the inclusive process of
developing a policy framework seeking to provide
equal rights and opportunities.
Lastly, Rwanda remains determined to carry
forward our ambitious domestic agenda for women’s
empowerment and gender mainstreaming, which my
Government has made a top priority. We will continue
to engage constructively with the international
community in that regard.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence of the
members of the Security Council, I intend to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

22-2329633/33
