S/PV.8129

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8129th meeting

Friday, 8 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42743 (E)
*1742743*

S/PV.8129

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

Minute of silence
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I should like to condemn in the
strongest terms the outrageous, deadly and totally
unacceptable attack on United Nations peacekeepers
that occurred last night in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We understand that at least 14 Tanzanian
peacekeepers were killed and that more than 50 others
were injured. The members of the Security Council
convey their deepest condolences to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of
Tanzania. Those brave peacekeepers were operating
under a mandate given by the Council in order to provide
a more secure future for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We commemorate their ultimate
sacrifice in the cause of peace.
I now invite the members of the Security Council
to observe a minute of silence in honour of those killed.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Mali and Mauritania to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item of its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/1022, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
2/11

08/12/2017

The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2391 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by saying how much our thoughts today
are with all of the Tanzanian Blue Helmets killed as
they carried out their duties in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as with all of the families
and friends of those who lost their lives while serving
the United Nations. On behalf of France, I would like
once again to express our most sincere condolences,
sympathy and deep sadness to the Government and the
people of Tanzania.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2391 (2017), which provides operational
and logistical support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) to the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Thanks to
this resolution, the security forces of the G-5 Sahel
countries operating in Mali as part of the Joint Force
will soon be able to enjoy the support of MINUSMA in
terms of supplies, medical evacuation and engineering
support. That support will play a crucial role in terms
of strengthening the effectiveness and scope of the Joint
Force’s operations, as it will be provided directly on the
ground as opposed by way of bilateral financing. It will
meet the interests of MINUSMA, which has everything
to gain from a Joint Force that is equipped to achieve
the goals it has set for itself. It will be fully financed
by international voluntary contributions and centred
around a mechanism under the European Union. It
will be set up according to modalities that ensure that
there is no negative impact on MINUSMA’s capacity to
implement its mandate and to provide security for its
staff — a crucial point for us.
It is important for the technical agreement between
the G-5, the United Nations and the European Union, on
which that support is to be based, be concluded as soon
as possible. I am delighted to commend all of those
Ambassadors who are here representing the G-5 Sahel
countries. They are both colleagues and friends.
17-42743

08/12/2017

Peace and security in Africa

The resolution that we have just adopted, however,
does not just focus on creating an operational link
between the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and MINUSMA.
In a kind of extension of resolution 2359 (2017), this
new resolution makes significant progress in five other
areas.
First, it once again clearly and strongly welcomes
the determination of the G-5 countries to pool their
efforts to combat the terrorist threat. Resolution 2391
(2017) recognizes the significant progress that has
been made in that area in just a few months, and urges
everybody to shoulder their responsibility so that the
Joint Force reaches full operational capacity as soon as
possible. That is decisive for the next step.
Secondly,
this
resolution
recognizes
the
authorization that the Joint Force enjoys based on the
mandate granted by the African Union. It encourages the
G-5 Sahel to continue its efforts integrate its initiatives
into its regional and international environment by
holding regular meetings of the support group.
Thirdly, it endorses the role played by the European
Union in coordinating international contributions at the
request of the G-5 Sahel States.
Fourthly, it notes that the G-5 Joint Force will be
a success only if there are accompanying development
efforts on the ground and respect for fundamental
human rights. It calls on the G-5 States to create an
appropriate environment to that end, and calls upon
all G-5 Sahel partners, first and foremost the United
Nations, to support its implementation.
Fifthly, the resolution strongly underscores that
there can be no lasting stability in the Sahel without
the full and effective implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It also clearly
reminds all Malian parties of their responsibilities
vis-à-vis the sanctions regime put in place pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017).
Resolution 2391 (2017) therefore represents a
genuine and important new phase in terms of the
Security Council’s support for the G-5 Sahel. It is indeed
a turning point, as we are together opening up a new
avenue for United Nations support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, which is a crucial aspect of its effectiveness
on the ground.
Just a few months ago, the idea that the Council
could reach agreement on supporting MINUSMA
by providing means to support the Joint Force was

S/PV. 8129

impossible to envisage. Today’s outcome has been
possible thanks to the fact that we have worked extremely
hard over recent weeks — on the basis of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/869), the Council’s
mission to the Sahel and the ministerial meeting held
in October — with a view to identifying the elements
of an eventual consensus based on an incremental and
cooperative approach. I would like to commend all our
teams, including my own, which worked doggedly and
with great determination over many weeks.
This resolution therefore is not only a success for the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force but also for the Security Council,
which has shown its ability to provide a substantive
response to one of the main threats to international
peace and security in the world today. It demonstrates
the consensus that now exists around this table on the
importance of the international community’s support to
African countries that are coming together to combat
terrorism. This is a cause in which France believes very
strongly, and one that we will continue to support very
energetically in New York and elsewhere.
Once again, I would like to thank all Security
Council delegations for their commitment. In particular,
I would like to thank my colleague and American friend
Ambassador Nikki Hailey, with whom we had a frank
and, I believe, constructive dialogue throughout the
entire negotiation process.
This resolution favourably positions us together so
as to move ahead on the important path that remains
before us. The technical agreement mechanism, which
became necessary because of constraints imposed on the
Council today, is not the one that we initially favoured.
However, it nevertheless constitutes a solid foundation
for making further progress based on the SecretaryGeneral’s future semi-annual reports, provided that
the G-5 Sahel States continue to take the necessary
steps to move towards the full operationalization of the
Joint Force and take advantage of the support already
provided to them so as to record their first successes
on the ground. More than ever, France believes that
the United Nations has a central role to play with
regard to international support for the Joint Force,
first and foremost owing to our firm commitment to
multilateralism and the centrality of the United Nations
in that regard, as well as for the sake of effectiveness,
because we believe that the United Nations provides us
with an existing functional framework to coordinate
our work in the most rational way possible.

17-427433/11

S/PV.8129

Peace and security in Africa

The security threat facing the Sahel concerns us
all owing to its implications for international peace
and security. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is the right
response to that threat. It is therefore essential that the
G-5 Sahel and the international community be able to
take advantage of that opportunity together. Within the
Council, our responsibility is to provide the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force support commensurate with the stakes
involved. We have taken an important step in that
direction today, and we must continue to move forward
during this demanding phase united and resolutely, with
the same ambitious spirit of consensus that enabled us
to achieve today’s outcome together.
Members can count on France’s commitment in
that regard. My country will remain ready at all levels
to support the G-5 Sahel, and, next week, we will host
a high-level meeting aimed at moving forward the
operationalization of the Force and the implementation
of its support.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would like
to begin today by expressing our heartfelt condolences
to the families of the 14 Tanzanian peacekeepers who
were killed and the more than 40 wounded in last night’s
attack in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are horrified by that cowardly attack on
those who were sent to protect the most vulnerable.
Terrorism and violent extremism exact a tremendous
human toll every day. There is not a member nation
of the Security Council that has not been affected. In
the Sahel, violent extremists — often in league with
transnational organized criminal networks — attack
civilians and peacekeepers with deadly impact that is
felt throughout and beyond the region. The setting up
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) by member States committed to security
in the region shows real responsiveness to that threat.
Continued African leadership is vital in that long-term
effort, and the United States will continue to look
for ways to promote economic resilience and civilian
security through support for the Joint Force and other
G-5 Sahel initiatives.
By adopting resolution 2391 (2017), the Security
Council is also expressing its support for the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force by encouraging a technical agreement
between the United Nations and the G-5 Sahel. That
will provide some immediate logistical support on
a reimbursable basis. We wish to thank members of
the Council for their cooperation, especially France,
4/11

08/12/2017

with whom we have worked closely during these past
months. The creativity and innovation in the text of
the resolution shows what is possible in the spirit of
cooperation on shared objectives. The international
community’s support for the people of the G-5 Sahel
member States and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is
undeniable and growing. The G-5 Sahel has numerous
partners in its effort to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. The United States has pledged $60 million,
thereby joining the European Union, France, Saudi
Arabia and others in supporting the G-5 Sahel.
We believe that such examples of expansive
international support show the best path forward for
future assistance to the G-5 Sahel’s initiative. We
feel that the Council’s encouragement of a technical
agreement is the full extent of any support role that
the United Nations should play outside of continued
coordination and technical assistance on a voluntary
basis. We must also not lose sight of the need to
ensure that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has the troops
and capabilities that it needs to succeed. The current
capacity of the Mission in terms of its manpower and
operational capabilities is not acceptable. It hampers
the Mission’s ability to deliver on its own mandate, and
it will hamper its ability to provide support for the Joint
Force within the terms envisioned by resolution 2391
(2017).
In the longer-term, the G-5 Sahel must do a better
job in facilitating humanitarian and development
operations to help counter violent extremism and
re-establish State control. To be effective, the G-5 Sahel
must respect human rights, hold its forces accountable
and consult with local communities, while being
responsive to their concerns. As the Joint Force works
to ensure civilian security in the execution of its duties,
there will be a growing list of G-5 Sahel partners to
help the Force work towards self-sufficiency.
We look forward to continuing our discussions
on improving the peacekeeping Mission in Mali.
We also welcome the opportunity to work with the
Malian parties to make progress on implementing the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, and
address other remaining challenges in the country.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I join other delegations in expressing our
deepest condolences to the people and the Government
of the brotherly nation of Tanzania following the loss
17-42743

08/12/2017

Peace and security in Africa

of peacekeepers’ lives, who were carrying out their
duty in maintaining peace and security in the brotherly
country of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Today the Security Council adopted resolution
2391 (2017), the second of its kind, on the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which
demonstrates the importance that the Council accords
to the issue, given the very clear links between security
and stability in the Sahel and their effects on peace
and stability in neighbouring regions. In that regard, I
would like to emphasize the following.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force, which began as
a voluntary and ambitious initiative launched by
countries of the region with the support of the African
Union, and was welcomed by the Security Council,
constitutes the best long-term option. It also plays a
complementary role alongside the French forces of
Operation Barkhane and those of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), aimed at re-establishing stability
and combating transnational crime and terrorism.
Secondly, the role of the Joint Force is not limited to
the borders of its member States. We must understand
that this is one of the most challenging fronts within
the context of the global effort to counter terrorism
today, which is a phenomenon that knows no borders or
obstacles. Groups of thugs are active in the Sahel, Libya,
the Lake Chad basin and other regions throughout
the world. Those groups work towards establishing a
continuum among themselves. It is therefore crucial
that the international community support the work and
sacrifices of the Joint Force at the military level within
the framework of a series of measures and programmes
so as to address the deep-rooted causes of the crisis in
the region. In that regard, we reiterate our support for
revitalizing the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel.
Thirdly, Egypt joined the consensus adoption of
resolution 2391 (2017) as part of our unconditional
support for the countries of the region and their
interests. Nevertheless, we would like to express our
disappointment with regard to the Council’s failure
to address expectations relating to the manner, scope
and means of providing that support through the
mechanism so as to meet the genuine needs of the Force
with clear deadlines, thereby enabling it to begin its
deployment effectively.

S/PV. 8129

Fourthly, it is important that the Secretariat take
all the necessary measures, in cooperation with
MINUSMA, to provide the means required for the Joint
Force to be able to discharge its mandate and to ensure
the security of its staff, as well as so that MINUSMA can
employ its resources to provide the necessary support
to the Joint Force under the terms of the resolution.
Finally, Egypt believes that, in future, the Security
Council should periodically review the support provided
to the Joint Force, given the moral, political and legal
responsibility of the Security Council by virtue of the
Charter of the United Nations, by taking the necessary
steps to maintain international peace and security, to
review what has been done and to move forward by
giving messages of moral support. It is also necessary
to review the requirements in the future in order to
provide additional implementation mechanisms, in
particular sustainable and predictable funding so that
the Force can act as planned.
In conclusion, Egypt reaffirms that it will spare
no effort to support the brotherly nations in the region,
both within the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and bilaterally.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
condemning the horrific attack on peacekeepers
and host-country troops in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo yesterday and by offering my sincere
condolences to Tanzania and to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is truly shocking that peacekeepers are
targeted in that way. Our thoughts are with the families
and the friends of the victims and with the injured, to
whom we wish a speedy recovery.
We are here today to discuss the humanitarian and
security crises in Mali and the Sahel region, which
continue to be of deep concern to us and have been
discussed by the Security Council many times in the
past. Conflict continues to blight the lives of citizens
in Mali and the Sahel, and terrorist organizations,
including those benefiting from transnational organized
cirme, persist in their threats to peace and security in
the region.
In June, in resolution 2359 (2017), we welcomed
the deployment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) throughout the territories of
its contributing countries. We applaud the rapid and
effective progress that has been made to make that
Force a reality, which members saw for themselves
on the ground earlier this year, while recognizing the

17-427435/11

S/PV.8129

Peace and security in Africa

important role that international support can play in
strengthening the Force to its full capacity.
In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
is doing dangerous and important work and faces
pressing challenges. But where conflict and terrorism
seek to divide us, it is right that we all work together
and support each other where we can. That is why we
voted in favour of resolution 2391 (2017). It sets out a
clear framework for the support of the international
community to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, through
MINUSMA, and a clear mechanism for international
donations to support that important work. We welcome
the pledges already made by international donors, as
well as the role of the European Union in ensuring the
effective distribution of that support. We are looking
at where we can best lend our support as a matter
of priority.
We urge the G-5 Sahel States to seize the
opportunity presented by those offers of support
in order to get the Joint Force up to full capacity as
quickly as possible. We also strongly encourage those
States to take advantage of the technical expertise
available to them, which would positively contribute
to their work on implementing a robust human rights
compliance framework.
We commend the Secretariat, under the leadership
of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, for its
efforts to bring coherence and an overarching strategy
to the overlapping work of the various development
agencies on the ground. Any progress in security will
be sustained only if backed by the delivery of services
to populations.

08/12/2017

The Russian delegation voted in favour of resolution
2391 (2017), on the provision of technical and material
support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel because of the importance of the international
community providing assistance to that regional
alliance. The Joint Force, approved under resolution
2359 (2017), provides an appropriate response to the
challenges in the Sahel region in line with the principle
that African problems requires African soluitions.
We are convinced that that is the only way to achieve
lasting peace in Africa.
We believe that it is important to assist the Joint
Force, since it will not only face counter-terrorism
challenges but also seek to eradicate cross-border
criminal groups that fuel terrorism. We welcome the
rapid deployment of the Joint Force on the ground and
the fact that the first operation has taken place. We
encourage the strengthened cooperation among the
participants in the Joint Force on the future deployment
of troops in line with the agreed planning. We would
once again underscore that only the truly coordinated
efforts of all members of the regional Sahel group,
without exception, can lead to effective results.
In conclusion, we would like to point out that,
in this era of globalization, terrorism has become
global in nature. That threat can be eradicated only by
presenting the broadest possible front, for which Russia
has long been calling. We will continue to provide
concrete assistance to the people of the Sahel through
our bilateral channels.

Finally, we call on all our Malian friends and
partners to redouble their efforts to implement the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which
is an imperative step in the pursuit of lasting peace and
security in the Sahel.

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me also begin by
expressing our outrage at last night’s attack on United
Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We offer our deepest condolences to the
familiies of the victims and to the Government and the
people of Tanzania. That deliberate attack constitutes
a war crime and should be condemned in the strongest
terms. Perpetrators must be brought to justice. Indeed,
it is a sad day for the United Nations family and for
United Nations peacekeeping.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We endorse the words of sympathy and
condolence that have been expressed over the deaths
of the Tanzanian peacekeepers in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We express our condolences to
all the relatives and friends of the people of Tanzania
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo who died
and wish the injured a speedy recovery.

Sweden voted in favour of resolution 2391 (2017)
because the endeavours for peace, development and
security in the region by the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel deserve our full support. In order
to achieve sustainable peace and stability in the Sahel,
our primary focus must remain on addressing the root
causes of instability. Any security initiative in and for
the region must therefore be part of a holistic approach

6/11

17-42743

08/12/2017

Peace and security in Africa

that in particular encompasses governance and
development aspects. As such, the Joint Force needs
to be framed within, and accountable to, a broader
political framework. Coordination with the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and other
regional initiatives and partners, such as the African
Union, will be important.
Today’s resolution further states that United
Nations support to the Joint Force through the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) must not affect the
Mission’s capacity to implement its mandate and its
strategic priorities. In that regard, we look forward to
the follow-up reporting, as stipulated by the resolution.
The interlinkage between security, human
rights and development has been demonstrated on
many occasions. Today’s resolution calls for the
establishment of a robust human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework and calls on
the United Nations, as well as partners, to support its
implementation. That is paramount if the Joint Force is
to be successful in its fight against terrorism, as is strict
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy.
Sweden is ready to contribute to the establishment of
the compliance framework, in addition to our existing
support to the Force through the European Union (EU).
We believe that the Security Council’s repeated
calls for regional ownership, our expectations for the
Force and our demand for accountability should be
matched with adequate resources and support. In this
regard, it is also our hope that the EU-coordinated
mechanism envisaged for channelling voluntary
contributions to the Joint Force and ensuring full
financial reimbursements to MINUSMA, in close
coordination with other donors, will guarantee reliable
and consistent funding streams. We look forward to
continued discussions on this matter.
Let me conclude by reiterating that the full inclusive
and effective implementation of the Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including by ensuring
the participation of women, must remain a priority. The
peace agreement is our best chance at preventing further
spread of instability and building sustained peace.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I join my
colleagues in expressing the sincere condolences of
the Italian Government to the victims’ families and the
concerned Government over the loss of 14 Tanzanian
Blue Helmets in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV. 8129

Italy welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2391 (2017). At the outset, I wish to thank the
French delegation for its tireless efforts which enabled
the Council to achieve this significant outcome.
Throughout this year in this Chamber, Italy has
stressed on numerous occasions that the Sahel is a
region facing serious challenges to its development and
security, such as terrorism, illegal trafficking of human
beings and other forms of trafficking and transnational
organized crime. This is a complex situation, which
the Council itself witnessed during its recent visit in
October and which was highlighted in the open debate
of 30 October held during the French presidency (see
S/PV.8080). During our presidency in November, in
keeping with the French presidency, we evoked the
connection between the challenges in the Sahel and the
instability in the Mediterranean region. In doing so,
we hope to have contributed to the debate on the Sahel
region — a debate which, with this resolution, has been
enhanced by another important step.
There are four issues that Italy has always identified
as priorities to ensure that the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) contributes to peace and
stability in the Sahel. First, there must be coordination
and cooperation between the G-5 Sahel Force and
the initiatives already under way in the region, such
as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the missions of the
European Union. Secondly, a clear political strategy,
such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, is essential to addressing the multifaceted
problems of the region. Thirdly, all operations carried
out by the G-5 Force or in support of it must take
place within an effective framework of respect for
human rights. Finally, the United Nations must support
African peace operations at the political and financial
levels. These four elements are in this text and form the
basis of our support for the resolution. They are four
elements that the Council has the obligation to continue
developing in the coming months.
With this resolution, we recognize once again
the efforts of the G-5 countries and encourage the
international community to support their commitment.
Italy will continue to do so bilaterally and multilaterally
as part of our work at the United Nations, in coordination
with the African Union and within the European Union.
In this respect, we recognize the role that the resolution
assigns to the European Union, and we are ready to do
our part to ensure that the discussions we will have

17-427437/11

S/PV.8129

Peace and security in Africa

in Brussels with other Member States on the ways to
implement that role take the aspirations of the countries
of the region and the G-5 countries into account.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China offers its sympathy and deep condolences to the
bereaved families and the Governments of Tanazania
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo over the
heavy casualities suffered by the personnel of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an attack
against it.
The current security situation in the Sahel region is
severe. The countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) have decided to establish a Joint Force
to address regional security challenges on their own.
This reflects the self-reliance, unity and cooperation
of African countries and is an important contribution
to peace and security in Africa and the world at
large. At the same time, the Sahel G-5 Force is facing
such difficulties as insufficient financial resources,
technology and equipment, and needs the international
community’s support.
Resolution 2391 (2017), which was just adopted by
the Council, will facilitate the support of the United
Nations and the international community to the Force.
China therefore voted in favour of the resolution.
China calls on the Security Council to fully respect
and enable African ownership in seeking African
solutions to African problem, to support the efforts
of Sahel countries in maintaining regional peace and
security, and to encourage the United Nations and
the international community to provide the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force with the necessary support, including
financial resources.
China is ready to join the international community
in playing a constructive role towards achieving peace,
stability and development in the Sahel and on the
African continent.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express our solidarity
with the people and the Government of Tanzania and
condemn in the strongest terms the attack that caused
the deaths of so many Tanzanian peacekeepers of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
wounding of even more. Our thoughts are with the
families of those who lost loved ones. We wish a speedy
recovery to the 53 who were injured.
8/11

08/12/2017

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2391 (2017) in support of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We thank France, as the
penholder, for facilitating the negotiation on the draft
resolution, as well as for its unwavering commitment
in support of the Force. No doubt, the support of the
Council, and indeed the rest of the international
community, is vital to the ongoing fight being waged
by G-5 Sahel countries against terrorism and other
transnational organized crimes. The deployment of
the 5,000-strong force will be highly instrumental
in neutralizing armed terrorist groups and criminal
networks operating in the region. It will also support
the operational objectives of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which is the epicentre of the peace and security
challenge in the region.
Even though the resolution does not necessarily
live up to the expectations we had, we nonetheless
appreciate the spirit of compromise demonstrated by
Member States, particularly the United States, with
a view to achieving the necessary consensus, but we
sincerely hope that upon appropriate evaluation of the
performance of the Force, the Security Council will be
able to provide enhanced support in due course.
The adoption of the resolution also could not be
more timely and relevant in the light of the upcoming
international pledging conference in support of the G-5
States to be held in Brussels next week. We hope that
the conference will enable international and regional
partners to make commitments in support of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I join other
colleagues in expressing our condolences and sympathy
to the authorities and the people of the United Republic
of Tanzania for the tragic deaths of the 14 Tanzanian
Blue Helmets who were killed while carrying out their
duties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Senegal welcomes the Council’s unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2391 (2017) on the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force. We would like
to thank France, which showed perseverance, openness
and skill as the penholder. The resolution undoubtedly
represents another significant source of support for the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, whose establishment the Security
Council already welcomed in resolution 2359 (2017).
For it must be said again and again that the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force has courageously taken it upon itself the
17-42743

08/12/2017

Peace and security in Africa

task of resolutely tackling a regional manifestation of
the global problem of terrorism and violent extremism.
We have seen that the G-5 Sahel’s commitment has
facilitated other initiatives on behalf of and together
with the Sahel. The financing mechanism proposed
in resolution 2391 (2017) is a decisive step in the right
direction. Through our colleagues the Permanent
Representatives of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad, who are here today, I would like
to humbly offer Senegal’s gratitude for the courageous
commitment of the Governments of the brotherly
countries that are the G-5 Sahel’s neighbours in helping
to tackle the numerous scourges afflicting the Sahel
region, such as terrorism, transnational organized crime
and trafficking in all its forms, including in human
beings — a commitment they decided to go ahead with
irrespective of the human, material and financial costs.
The Joint Force’s first operation, Hawbi,
conducted in the central sector, was a demonstration
of the G-5 Sahel’s determination and of the new
level of effectiveness that the Force has reached in
its operationalization. The international community
should therefore help the Force to reach full capacity on
both the political and morale fronts, particularly since
it is working and coordinating closely with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. The countries of the Sahel-Saharan
region are linked by a common destiny to those of
the G-5 Sahel, with which they share extensive land
and sea borders. Senegal would like to thank all who
have already shown their support. We call for our
bilateral and multilateral partners to show further
active generosity and solidarity through the mechanism
provided for in resolution 2391 (2017), and especially
by showing major and generous support at the donor
conferences to beheld in Paris and Brussels next week.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Japan welcomes the Council’s unanimous adoption
today of resolution 2391 (2017). I pay tribute to France’s
efforts in bringing our partners together to work for
the restoration of peace and stability in Mali and the
Sahel region. Japan supported the resolution because
we recognize that Mali needs support if it is to speedily
deliver on the remaining key provisions of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It is a critical time
for the country, and resolution 2391 (2017) recognizes
that. It provides innovative arrangements for United
Nations support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five

S/PV. 8129

for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) through the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali by using a European Union-coordinated financing
mechanism. The success of the efforts of the G-5
Sahel, including those made through this arrangement,
requires the support of international communities.
We would like to call on our international partners to
mobilize efforts that support the G-5 Sahel States in
implementing the new resolution.
I would like to conclude by saying that Japan
underlines the importance of addressing the drivers of
violent extremism in the Sahel. The consequences and
impact of the activities of the terrorist organizations
present there, including those that benefit from
transnational organized crime in Mali and the Sahel,
cannot be solved by security-focused intervention
alone. We strongly believe that it is becoming evermore crucial to ensure that the response to the violent
extremism in the Sahel is a comprehensive one. The
growing insecurity in central Mali and its border areas
requires more than simply containing the violence.
We must build a resilient society and institutions that
ensure human security. Japan will continue to work
closely with the G-5 Sahel States, the United Nations
and our international partners in order to make progress
towards achieving security and stability in Mali and
the Sahel.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by adding the voice of the countries of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to the Council’s
condemnation today of the cowardly and barbaric
attack on the Blue Helmets serving the cause of peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We offer our
heartfelt condolences to the brotherly Governments of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania
and wish the wounded a speedy recovery.
On behalf of the Ambassadors of the member
States of the G-5 Sahel who are here today, I would first
like to express our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
giving us the opportunity to participate in this meeting
devoted to the Council’s second adoption, in less than
six months, of a resolution (resolution 2391 (2017)) on
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, and which I should recall is
endorsed by the African Union. The member States of
the G-5 Sahel would also like to congratulate you, Sir,

17-427439/11

S/PV.8129

Peace and security in Africa

on your beautiful country of Japan’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
also take this opportunity to commend the remarkable
work done by our dear friend Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi and his delegation during Italy’s presidency last
month. Before going any further, I would also like to
take this opportunity to extend our sincere thanks to
the non-permanent members of the Council whose term
ends at the end of this month. They should be proud
of the enormous contributions that their countries have
made to international peace and security.
I would once again like to convey to Council
members the thanks of Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
President of the Republic of Mali and President-in-Office
of the G-5 Sahel, on behalf of his peers from Burkina
Faso, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad, for the important
unanimous decision the Council has just made. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2391 (2017), which
is firmly in keeping with the good momentum in the
gradual strengthening of international support for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, though it is true that we
would have liked to have seen a much more robust
mandate, and one that was established under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
much more extensive United Nations support for the
Force in terms of logistics, means of communication,
equipment and infrastructure. We would also liked to
have seen increased support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali for all the deployment sectors of the Joint Force
in the east, west and centre of the country, as well as to
have received predictable and sustainable funding for
the Joint Force, including through the United Nations.
However, we have not lost hope. We are very
grateful to every member of the Council for the progress
that has already been achieved and we have signed on to
this positive dynamic, in the hope that our expectations
will be gradually met within the framework of the
review and periodic assessment clauses provided for
in resolution 2391 (2017). Here I would like to thank
the French delegation, under the leadership of our dear
friend Ambassador François Delattre, for initiating
and leading the negotiations on the resolution that the
Council has just adopted.
On behalf of our leaders and our people, I would
also like to express our infinite gratitude to the partner
countries and international partner organizations that
have already pledged contributions to the Joint Force.
I refer in particular to Saudi Arabia, the United States
10/11

08/12/2017

of America, the European Union, France, Germany
and Denmark. I also appeal to our other bilateral and
multilateral partners to mobilize to assist in the effective
and rapid operationalization of the Joint Force.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Ba (Mauritania) (spoke in French): On behalf
of Mauritania, allow me in turn to offer our deep
condolences to the families of the Blue Helmets killed
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and to all those
who defend the values of peacekeeping. This is also
an opportune moment for my country to extend our
thanks to the highest authorities of the United Nations
for their compassion and solidarity following the death
of a Mauritanian soldier deployed to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. We also thank France for
its expression of solidarity and compassion.
It is with great pleasure that I address the Council
today. On behalf of my country, and particularly on
behalf of the President of the Republic, I thank members
for the very special interest that the United Nations
has shown in the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), comprised of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania,
the Niger and Chad. There is no proof more eloquent
of that interest — in addition to resolution 2359
(2017) — than the October visit conducted by Security
Council members to the G-5 Sahel region, including
Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso, to assess first hand
the nature of the terrorist threat and the feasibility of
the Priority Investment Programme in order to support
both the operationalization of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel and development issues in that region, where
the terrorist threat persists. We salute the efforts of
the co-leaders of the mission, namely, France, Italy
and Ethiopia.
I reaffirm the deep gratitude of my country to the
United Nations for its commitment to peace, security
and development in the Sahel region. My country also
seizes this opportunity to recognize the efforts of our
bilateral and multilateral partners in support of the
G-5 Sahel, including France, a friendly country whose
long-standing, significant and exceptional efforts in
favour of peace and stability in the region we have
always appreciated. Nor can we forget the efforts of the
European Union, the African Union, the United States
of America and the alliance of Saudi Arabia, Denmark
17-42743

08/12/2017

Peace and security in Africa

and Germany, which are also committed to actively
supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Allow me to reiterate that, today more than ever
before, my country is wholeheartedly committed to the
spirit and founding principle of the G-5 Sahel. Since
February 2014, we have been committed to meeting the
peace, security and development challenges in the Sahel
region and elsewhere, as evidenced by our participation
in the peacekeeping operations of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.
As Council members are aware, from the very
outset Mauritania has both understand and appreciated
the magnitude of the challenges posed by the terrorist
threat in the region. That is why since 2008, we have
made the fight against violent extremism, terrorism
and the cross-border trafficking of drugs and persons
a priority through a multidimensional national strategy
to effectively combat such crimes. To that end, and in
the light of the commitment of the highest authorities

S/PV. 8129

of my country, including the President of the Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz,
Mauritania is firmly committed to the principles of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force and recalls the importance and
critical nature, today more than ever, of the following
three points for a more effective, efficient and effective
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
The first is the international legality of the Force
based on the express authorization of the Security
Council and the mandate it has provided under Chapter
VII. Second is the need to secure the adequate and
sustainable funding identified by our Heads of State to
the tune of €423 million at the start and €115 million
per year thereafter. The third is the need to launch
offensives throughout the Sahelo-Saharan band.
In conclusion, on behalf of my country I once
again thank Council members for their interest, as
demonstrated by their consensus in making the G-5
Sahel Joint Force a reality.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

17-4274311/11
