VII.

Resolu1lolll adopted OD the repodl of the Fourth Committee

by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 27 Sc:Ptember 1974,48 is illegal and contributes to the mamtenance of the illegal occupation regime;
19. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued exploitation and plundering of the natural r~sources of Namibia in complete disregard of the legitimate interests of the Namibian people;
20. Calls once again upon all States to discontinue
all economic, financial or trade relations with South
Africa concerning Namibia and to refrain from entering
into economic, financial or other relations with South
Africa, acting on behalf of or concerning Namibia,
which may lend support to its continued illegal occupation of that Territory;
21. Strongly condemns the racist minority regime of
South Africa which, in violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention
of its specific obligations under Article 25 of the
Charter, continues to collaborate with the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, and calls upon
the Security Council to implement the provisions of
the present resolution by imposing economic sanctions
against South Africa, including an oil embargo and the
withdrawal of investments from that country;
22. Invites all Governments and organizations
within the United Nations system, having regard to the
relevant provisions of the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, contained in General Assembly resolution 3201 (S-VO
of 1 May 1974, and of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, contained in Assembly resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, to ensure in particular that the permanent sovereignty of the colonial
Territories over their natural resources is fully respected
and safeguarded;
23. Calls upon the administering Powers to abolish
every discriminatory and unjust wage system prevailing
in the Territories under their administration and to apply
in each Territory a uniform system of wages to all the
inhabitants without any discrimination;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake,
through the Department of Public Information of the
Secretariat, a sustained and broad campaign with a view
to informing world public opinion of the facts concerning the pillaging of natural resources in colonial
Territories and the exploitation of their indigenous
populations by foreign monopolies and the support
they render to the colonialist and racist regimes;
25. Endorses the proposal of the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirtythird ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to 20
July 1979, to convene jointly with the United Nations
an international conference in 1980 to mobilize world
public opinion in support of the effective application
of economic and other sanctions against South Africa;' 9
26. Appeals to all international non-governmental
organizations to continue their campaign to mobilize
international public opinion for the enforcement of economic and other sanctions against the Pretoria and
Salisbury regimes;
27. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with Regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial

,a Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 24A (A/9624/Add.1), para. 84. The
Decree has been issued in final form in Namibia Gazette No. 1.
•e See A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res. 734 (XXXIII).

209

Countries and Peoples to continue to examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at
its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

34/42. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Coun•
tries and Peoples by the specialized agencies
and the lntematlonal Institutions associated
with the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and
the programme of action for the full implementation
of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970, as well as all other relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and
the Security Counc~l on this subject, including in particular Assembly resolution 33/41 of 13 December
1978,
Having examined the reports submitted on the item
by the Secretary-General, 00 the Economic and Social
Council61 and the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples/ 2 as well as the related report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, 53
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the
Final Declaration of the Sixth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Havana from 3 to 9 September 1979/4
Aware that the struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe
and Namibia for self-determination and independence
is in its final and most crucial stage and that it is therefore incumbent upon the entire international community
to intensify concerted action in support of the peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia and their national liberation
movements for the attainment of this goal,
Deeply conscious of the critical need of the peoples
of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of other colonial Territories for concrete assistance from the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with
the United Nations in their struggle for liberation from
colonial rule and in their efforts to achieve and consolidate their national independence,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to take all the necessary measures, within their
respective spheres of competence, to ensure the full
and speedy implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
A/34/208 and Add.1-3; see also A/AC.109/L.1313.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/34/3/Rev.1), chap. XX\1111.
H lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chap. VII.
68 lbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/34/24 and Corr. I), vol. I,
part two, chaps. 11 and V; and vol. IV, annexes VI, XII, XIVXVI, XIX and XXI.
u See A/34/542, annex.
60
61

210

General Assembly-Tblrty-fourtb Selllon

Peoples and other relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, particularly those relating to the provision of
moral and material assistance, on a priority basis, to
the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national
liberation movements,
Deeply concerned that, although there has been progress in the extension of assistance to refugees from the
colonial Territories in Africa, the actions taken hitherto
by the organizations concerned in providing assistance
to the peoples of the Territories through their national
liberation movements still remain inadequate to meet
the urgent needs of those peoples,
Expressing its confident hope that closer contacts and
consultations between the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system and the
Organization of African Unity and the national libera, tion movements of the colonial Territories will help to
overcome procedural and other difficulties which have
impeded or delayed the implementation of some assistance programmes,
Expressing its appreciation to the General Secretariat
of the Organization of African Unity for the continued
co-operation and assistance extended by it to the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system in connexion with the implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the intensified efforts of the
United Nations Development Programme in the extension of assistance to the national liberation movements
concerned,
Noting also the support given by the organizations of
the United Nations system to the formation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia called for in General
Assembly resolution 32/9 A of 4 November 1977,
Mindful of the necessity to keep under continuous
review the activities of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in the implementation of the various decisions of the United
Nations relating to decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the item;52
2. Reaffirms that the recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations organs of the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial
peoples to achieve freedom and independence entails, as
a corollary, the extension by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system
of all the necessary moral and material assistance to
the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national
liberation movements;
3. Expresses its appreciation to certain specialized
agencies and organizations of the United Nations system which have continued to co-operate in varying degrees with the United Nations in the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Expresses its concern that the assistance extended thus far by the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system to the
colonial peoples, particularly those of Zimbabwe and
Namibia, and to their national liberation movements is
far from adequate in relation to the actual needs of the
peoples concerned;

5. Regrets that the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have not yet taken the necessary
measures towards the full and speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, deplores in particular the fact
that those agencies continue to maintain co-operation
with the colonialist racist minority regime of South Africa and urges the executive heads of those agencies
to draw the particular attention of their governing bodies
to the present resolution with a view to formulating
specific programmes beneficial to the peoples of the colonial Territories, particularly Zimbabwe and Namibia;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system to render
or continue to render, as a matter of urgency, all possible moral and material assistance to the colonial peoples in Africa struggling for liberation from colonial rule;
1. Requests once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to
continue to provide all moral and material assistance
to the newly independent and emerging States;
8. Recommends· that the organizations concerned
should initiate or broaden contacts with the colonial
peoples in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, review their procedures with respect to the formulation and preparation of assistance programmes and
projects and introduce greater flexibility in those procedures so as to be able to extend the necessary assistance without delay to help the colonial peoples and
their national liberation movements in their struggle to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
9. Urges those specialized agencies and organizations of the United Nations system which have not already done so to include in the agenda of the regular
meetings of their governing bodies a separate item on
the progress made by those organizations in the implementation of the Declaration and the other relevant
resolutions of the United Nations;
10. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, to take all necessary measures to withhold any financial, economic, technical or other assistance from the Government of South
Africa and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia, to
discontinue all support to them until they restore to
the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence and to
refrain from taking any action which might imply recognition of, or support for, the legitimacy of the domination of the Territories by those regimes;
11. Notes with satisfaction the arrangements made
by several specialized agencies and organizations of the
United Nations system which enable representatives of
the national liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity to participate fully as
observers in the proceedings relating to matters concerning their respective countries, and calls upon those
agencies and organizations which have not yet done
so to follow this example and to make the necessary
arrangements without delay;
12. Recommends that all Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system of which
they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other relevant reso-

VD.

RIIOlutlom adopted on die repora of the Fourth Committee

lotions of the United Nations and, in that connexion,
should accord priority to the question of providing
assistance on an emergency basis to the peoples of the
colonial Territories and to their national liberation
movements;
13. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system, having regard to the recommendations contained
in paragraph 8 above, to formulate with the active cooperation of the Organization of African Unity and to
su~mit,. as a matter of priority, to their governing and
legislative organs concrete proposals for the full implementation of the relevant decisions of the United
Nations, in particular specific programmes of assistance
to the peoples of the colonial Territories and their national liberation movements;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system in working out appro-

211

priate measures for implementing the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and to prepare for submission to the relevant bodies, with the assistance of
those agencies and other organizations, a report on the
action taken since the circulation of his previous report
in implementation of the relevant resolutions, including
the present resolution;
15. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system in
implementing the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine this question and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75 th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
