S/PV.7592

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7592nd meeting

Monday, 21 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gimolieca
Mr. Mahamat Zene
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) (S/2015/962)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-44430 (E)
*1544430*

S/PV.7592

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
(S/2015/962)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and Mr. António Guterres, former United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like
to express our heartfelt gratitude to Mr. Guterres. He
presided over the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) during a very
difficult period and made heroic efforts on behalf of
people who often cannot speak for themselves but have
had in him a tremendous spokesperson. This is his last
briefing in that capacity to the Council. We will not
be sorry not to hear more bad news from him, but no
one has been more creative and agile in mobilizing
resources around the world to care for these people, and
we could not be more grateful for how much he has
put into his tenure at UNHCR, body and soul. We want
to wish him every success in the future and hope he
will stay involved in caring for the people who have
benefited so much from his leadership.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/962, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191
(2014).
I now give the floor to Ms. Kang.
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang: On behalf of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien, I would like
to thank the Security Council for this opportunity to
brief it on the latest developments in Syria.

2/6

21/12/2015

Month after month, since the adoption of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014), in February and July
2014, respectively, the Council has been briefed on
the suffering of the Syrian people. We have repeatedly
described in detail the countless and blatant violations
of the basic tenets of international humanitarian and
human rights law. For nearly five years, we have
watched as Syria has sunk deeper and deeper into
violence and brutality, and yet no words can do justice
to the despair and devastation that millions of Syrians
experience every day.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator, Stephen
O’Brien, visited Syria from 12 to 14 December to find
ways to improve the ongoing response efforts. I myself
recently visited the cross-border hubs in Jordan and
Turkey. During his mission, Mr. O’Brien visited the
Al-Waer neighbourhood of Homs city, where a cessation
of hostilities was reached. That agreement has allowed
the humanitarian community to deliver assistance to all
60,000 people in Al-Waer, whom the United Nations had
not been able to reach since January. That is a welcome
development that demonstrates what can be done when
an agreement is reached between the parties. We are
encouraged by that, but reiterate that humanitarian
access should be unhindered and sustained at all times,
and not be made conditional on negotiated agreements.
The case of Al-Waer highlights the severe needs of
many of the 4.5 million people living in hard-to-reach
areas, of whom nearly 400,000 are besieged. From
September to November, because of imposed access
restrictions and insecurity, the United Nations and its
partners reached only 32 per cent of the hard-to-reach
locations. Similarly, during the same period, parties
to the conflict continued to heavily restrict access to
besieged areas. As a result, only some 1 per cent of
the besieged population received food assistance, and
less than 1 per cent health assistance. That is simply
unacceptable. I once again call upon the Syrian
authorities to approve the 47 pending inter-agency
convoy requests and to allow convoys previously agreed
in principle to proceed. I also call on non-State armed
groups, as well as listed terrorist groups, to allow the
deliveries they are preventing from proceeding.
Cross-border operations authorized by the
Council have had a significant impact on improving
humanitarian access, bringing life-saving assistance
to millions of people in desperate need. As of
30 November, that included food assistance for over
2.4 million people, medical supplies for 4.1 million

15-44430

21/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7592

treatments and non-food items for 1.6 million people.
We are very grateful for the cooperation and support of
the Jordanian and Turkish authorities who have made
that possible.

the conflict. The hospital lacked all basic supplies.
Without any blood bags, transfusions were made
directly from a donor to a patient, placing patients at
a considerable risk of contracting infectious diseases.

However, we are deeply concerned at the escalation
of fighting on the ground and airstrikes, reportedly
by Syrian and allied forces, in the northern part of
the country and their impact on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Several hospitals, markets and bakeries
have been hit, and scores of civilian deaths and injuries
are reported almost on a daily basis. The doctors who
work to save them have become a target, and they
fear that the Red Cross and Red Crescent emblems
are no longer the shield of protection that they must
be. The violence has also disrupted the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

Over the past month, violence continued to escalate
and intensify across Syria. Indiscriminate attacks by
all parties to the conflict resulted in the loss of life,
the destruction of infrastructure and the denial of
access to basic service of thousands of people. On
13 December, eight students and four staff were killed
when an elementary school was reportedly hit in Duma,
in eastern Ghouta. A month earlier, on 12 November,
eight civilians, including six children, were reportedly
injured when a mortar struck a school in the Bab Touma
neighbourhood of Damascus.

Just yesterday, six airstrikes hit a busy marketplace,
several public buildings and residential areas in the
Idlib city centre. Rescue workers reported that 43
people had been confirmed dead, and approximately
30 more bodies are yet to be identified. According
to preliminary reports, at least five aid workers were
killed in the attack while performing their duties in
ldlib. One White Helmet staff was killed while driving
an ambulance carrying injured people to a nearby
medical facility. That loss of innocent lives and wanton
indiscriminate destruction of populated areas is an
outrage, and those responsible must be held accountable.
One non-governmental organization (NGO) suspended
all activities as of today, as its water, sanitation and
hygiene programme manager was killed during the
airstrikes on Idlib city. Since late September, at least
five international NGOs have suspended operations.
Since the start of this crisis, Physicians for Human
Rights have documented 336 attacks on at least 240
medical facilities, and the death of 697 medical personnel.
Such attacks are flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law and an affront to the core of our
shared humanity, which must be guarded — caring for
the wounded and the sick. I plead with the parties to
the conflict to ensure the protection of health facilities,
workers and patients under international humanitarian
law. Similarly the removal of surgical supplies and
trauma kits from convoys by the Syrian Government
must end.
In Al-Waer, the Emergency Relief Coordinator
visited one of the hundreds of hospitals in Syria that
have been either damaged or entirely destroyed during

We again remind all parties to the conflict on
their responsibility to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. In particular, as the Syrian skies become
more crowded, we urge all forces carrying out airstrikes
to comply with this basic principle, which is enshrined
in international humanitarian law.
Contamination due to explosive remnants of war is
also a major challenge in many parts of the country,
and there is a critical need clearing explosive hazards
in Syria. That is an immediate, life-saving priority, and
the humanitarian partners courageously undertaking
that work need our urgent support.
Civilian displacement, which is a defining
characteristic of the crisis in Syria, continued at a
relentless pace over the past month. More than 121,000
people had to flee their homes in nine governorates,
many of them for the second or the third time. Over
half of the total population in Syria has been displaced
since the beginning of this crisis, with some 6.5 million
people displaced internally. Nearly 4.3 million people
have fled the country, with neighbouring countries in
the region bearing an enormous burden.
Under extremely challenging circumstances,
humanitarian partners continue to reach millions of
people every month with life-saving assistance. But
much more is needed. The humanitarian community
recently finalized a humanitarian response plan for
2016, asking for nearly $3.2 billion to provide life-saving
assistance to the 13.5 million people in need inside the
country. The plan sets out a joint framework for the
response efforts based on prioritized needs across the
different sectors. As 2015 draws to an end, the response
inside the country is only 42 per cent funded. I call on

15-444303/6

S/PV.7592

The situation in the Middle East

all partners to contribute generously to those plans, in
preparation for the upcoming conference on the theme
“Supporting Syria and the Region, London 2016”. Only
with the help of partners can we assist those in need
inside the country and in the neighbouring countries.
In a rehabilitation centre at the Turkish border, I
saw the deep trauma in the eyes of Syrian girls and boys
who had lost arms and legs in violent attacks. One young
man had only one arm left. I also saw the commitment
and courage of the doctors and nurses who were
earnestly trying to help them back to life, physically
and mentally. Together, they were emblematic of their
country and people — broken in so many ways but still
desperately and defiantly struggling to hold on to life.
As we enter a new year, we must do our utmost
to bring hope back to Syrians, who have suffered so
much. The conflict must be brought to an end through
a comprehensive political solution that addresses its
underlying causes. We pin our hopes on the efforts
of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG), and
are encouraged by resolution 2254 (2015), which the
Security Council adopted on 18 December.
May I reiterate the call made by the SecretaryGeneral to the ISSG while welcoming that Council
resolution to apply the necessary pressure on the
Syrian parties to immediately implement the following
confidence-building measures: to stop the use of
indiscriminate weapons against civilians, including
barrel bombs; to allow unconditional and unimpeded
access for aid convoys; to halt attacks on medical and
educational facilitie, and lift all restrictions on medical
and surgical supplies from humanitarian convoys; and
to release all detainees.
It is our earnest hope that the Council, in support of
the ISSG, has started to pave the way to peace in Syria.
The President: I thank Ms. Kang for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres: I thank you very much, Madam
President, for your kind words. Indeed, I have had the
enormous privilege in the United Nations to serve the
most vulnerable of the vulnerable people in the world.
Nearly 1 million people have arrived by boat in
Europe this year, more than 50 per cent of them Syrians.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) just published a survey of over
1,200 of them, and the findings confirmed something

4/6

21/12/2015

we have long suspected. Syria is experiencing a massive
brain drain; 86 per cent of those we interviewed
have a secondary education. Almost half have gone
to university. One can only imagine the disastrous
consequences of such an exodus on the future postconflict reconstruction of Syria.
The enormous suffering and displacement inside
the country continue and the Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator just spoke about the humanitarian situation
generating them. But the fact that two-thirds of the
Syrians we interviewed in Greece had left the country
in 2015 — with 37 per cent coming directly from Syria
after just a few days in transit — shows how unbearable
things have become. That is why it is so urgent to
achieve the ceasefire foreseen in the Vienna talks and
in the recently adopted resolution 2254 (2015).
It is also obvious that Syrian refugees in the
region are descending deeper and deeper into poverty.
A recent joint study by UNHCR and the World Bank
found that nine in ten Syrians in Jordan and Lebanon
live below the respective national poverty lines.
Not having been allowed to work legally, refugees
are increasingly vulnerable, dependent on scarce
humanitarian assistance and forced to go into debt to
feed their families. That has a particularly devastating
impact on children; they drop out of school, go to work
or get married early. Only half of all refugee children
are in school. We are also worried that increasing
numbers of people have no documentation, which puts
them even more at risk, as many new refugee arrivals
are not registering due to obstacles and safety concerns.
In addition, thousands of children being born to Syrian
parents in exile face a potential risk of statelessness.
They are not stateless, but they face that risk for lack of
registration.
The refugee crisis has had an enormous impact on
host countries and communities, affecting all aspects of
daily life, from housing and unemployment to general
price levels and public sanitation. The economies of
Lebanon and Jordan have lost billions and billions
of dollars as a result of the Syria conflict. We know
Syrians will go on trying to reach Europe until there
is a fundamental change in the factors that are pushing
them to leave.
There must be more international support to
refugees and their hosts, and humanitarian assistance
has to match the level of the needs. Even with the recent
surge in funding triggered by the refugee influx into

15-44430

21/12/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Europe, our Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan (3RP)
was only 52 per cent funded, with dire consequences
for many families. Massive investments are required
in support of Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey to prevent
refugees from slipping further into destitution and to
help Governments cope with the increased pressure on
health and education, water, electricity and other public
infrastructure.
Of course such longer-term strategies need a
stronger link between development and humanitarian
efforts than is currently the case. The 3RP was a
first step in this direction, but what is really needed
is a change in bilateral and multilateral development
cooperation policies and rules that would enable
middle-income countries such as Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey to benefit from several development instruments
from which they are currently excluded. I hope that the
upcoming London conference will mobilize support
not only for the vast humanitarian needs in the region,
but also for longer-term approaches that combine
self-reliance for refugees with effective international
solidarity and responsibility-sharing with the host
countries and communities.
We need a new deal between the international
community — Europe in particular — and Syria’s
neighbours. It is clear that without education for their
children, access to the labour market and protection
against poverty, more and more Syrians will see
themselves left with only one option — moving
on. After having seen their homes destroyed, their
neighbours killed and their loved ones disappear; after
having fled multiple times within Syria, faced poverty
and lacked basic services in exile, they try to get to
Europe to rebuild their future. It breaks my heart to
see these families, who have already suffered so much,
forced to put their lives into the hands of criminal
smugglers and traffickers who exploit them, rob them of
their last savings, violate their most basic human rights,
and often outright leave them to drown in overcrowded,
unseaworthy boats.
That is why I strongly support the idea of a vast
programme for resettlement and other forms of admission
to European countries and further afield — one that
is large enough to help put an end to the tragedies of
the Aegean Sea and the chaotic movement through the
Balkans. Because if things continue as they are right
now, I fear not only for the lives of refugees, but for
the future of European asylum, as restrictive measures

S/PV.7592

are already spreading like a virus that also threatens to
contaminate other parts of the world.
Ultimately, the fact that so many of the Syrians
arriving in Europe are now coming straight from Syria
demonstrates that the violence and human rights abuses
inside the country are only getting worse and that the
true solution for this humanitarian tragedy must be
found inside Syria.
As High Commissioner for Refugees, it is clear that
my focus is on the people who have had to flee this war.
But in this last meeting, allow me to say a few words as
a citizen of the world because we face much more than a
refugee emergency. The Syria-Iraq crisis — because that
is what it has become — also has an enormous impact
on regional stability and global peace and security.
While the restoration of the caliphate may have been
an aspiration for several groups since its abolishment
by Atatürk, we now have, for the first time, a terrorist
organization that has the political objective of building
a State and that effectively controls a large territory
from which it can plan strikes anywhere in the world.
This is a radical change even when compared to the
worst of the international terrorism we have seen so far.
The link to regional, European and global security
is clear. Tens of thousands of young foreign fighters
from around the world are in Syria or Iraq today. We
know that many of them will travel back home, and we
know the risks that entails. But as legitimate as these
concerns are, we must not forget that despite the rhetoric
we are hearing these days, refugees are the first victims
of such terror, not its source. They cannot be blamed
for a threat which they are risking their lives to escape.
Yes, of course, there is a possibility that terrorists
could try to infiltrate refugee movements, but that
possibility exists for all communities and homegrown
radicalism is, by far, the biggest threat, as all the
recent incidents have shown. Those who reject Syrian
refugees, especially if they are Muslim, are the best
allies of the propaganda and recruitment efforts of the
extremist groups. The war has to end, and quickly. The
longer it drags on, the more difficult it will be to keep
paying for its consequences.
The European Union just decided to give €3 billion
to Turkey for a plan of action to limit the onward
movements of refugees — €3 billion to the country
with the strongest economy in the region. The total cost
exceeds that by far and will continue to rise, as will the
price of the future reconstruction of Syria. But more

15-444305/6

S/PV.7592

The situation in the Middle East

importantly, if the conflict does not end quickly, it may
be the end of Syria as we know it — and the same is
true for Iraq. We are all aware of the complexities of the
situation which the end of the First World War created
in the Middle East — in the words of David Fromkin,
that was “a peace to end all peace”.
But we must not allow today’s sectarian divide to
escalate to the level of the wars of religion that flattened
large parts of Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Let us not forget that religious wars are
always, essentially, political wars. Peace cannot wait.

6/6

21/12/2015

The world needs a surge in diplomacy for peace, and I
strongly hope that Vienna will be a key step for peace
to be re-established as the number one priority on the
international agenda.
The President: I thank the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for his statement and for his tremendous
years of service. We are grateful to him.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

15-44430
